We re reporting Registered office and corporate headquarters AstraZeneca PLC 15 Stanhope Gate London W1K 1LN
AstraZeneca RandD Sdertlje SE151 85 Sdertlje
Tel 46 0Fax 46 0Investor relations contacts UK and Sweden As above or email investoremail
Investor Relations AstraZeneca LP 1800 Concord Pike PO Box 15438
DE 198505438
Tel telFax telRegistrar and transfer office Lloyds TSB Registrars The Causeway
West Sussex BN99 6DA
Tel in the UKtel Tel outside the UK 44 0tel Swedish securities registration centre VPC AB PO Box 7822 SE103 97 Stockholm
Tel 46 08 402 9000 US depositary JPMorgan Chase Bank PO Box 43013
RI 029403013
Tel toll free in the UStel Tel telAnnual Report and Form 20F 2002 site AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F telOuter Covers 250 pm Page 1 Contents Key Achievements 01 Financial Highlights 02 Chairman s Statement 04
Chief Executive s Review 05
Board of Directors 06 Operational Review Strategy 08 Key Product Summary 09 Global Market Overview 10 Gastrointestinal 11 Cardiovascular 12 Oncology 13 Infection 14 Respiratory and Inflammation 15 Central Nervous System 16 Pain Control 17 Geographic Review 18 Research and Development 21 Development Pipeline 22 Commercialisation and Portfolio Management 24 Supply and Manufacturing 25 Other Businesses 26 Main Facilities 26 Intellectual Property 27 Industry Regulation 27 Corporate Responsibility 29
Financial Review 30
Directors Report 44
Directors Remuneration Report 49
Financial Statements Contents 55 Financial Statements and Notes Relating to the Financial Statements 56 Principal Subsidiaries Joint Ventures and Associates 112 Additional Information for US Investors 113 Group Financial Record  UK GAAP 123 Group Financial Record  US GAAP 125 Shareholder Information 126 Risk Factors 134 AstraZeneca Code of Conduct 137 Additional Information 139 Cross Reference to Form 20F 140 Trade marks Trade marks of the AstraZeneca group of companies appear throughout this document in italics.
AstraZeneca the AstraZeneca logotype and the AstraZeneca symbol are all trade marks of the AstraZeneca group of companies.
Use of terms In this Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 unless the context otherwise requires AstraZeneca the Group the Company we us and our refer to AstraZeneca PLC and its consolidated entities.
Cautionary statement regarding forward looking statements In order to utilise the safe harbour provisions of the US Private Securities Litigation Reform Act 1995 we are providing the following cautionary statement This Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 contains certain forwardlooking statements about AstraZeneca.
Although we believe our expectations are based on reasonable assumptions any forwardlooking statements may be influenced by factors that could cause actual outcomes and results to be materially different from those predicted.
We identify the forwardlooking statements by using the words anticipates believes expects intends and similar expressions in such statements.
These forwardlooking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties.
Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in forwardlooking statements certain of which are beyond our control include among other things the loss or expiration of patents marketing exclusivity or trade marks exchange rate fluctuations the risk that RandD will not yield new products that achieve commercial success the impact of competition price controls and price reductions taxation risks the risk of substantial product liability claims the impact of any failure by third parties to supply materials or services the risk of delay to new product launches the difficulties of obtaining and maintaining governmental approvals for products and the risk of environmental liabilities.
Statements of competitive position Except as otherwise stated market information in this Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 regarding the position of our business or products relative to its or their competition is based upon published statistical data for the 12 months ended 30 September 2002 or the month of November 2002 obtained from IMS Health a leading supplier of statistical data to the pharmaceutical industry.
Except as otherwise stated this market share and industry data from IMS Health has been derived by comparing our sales revenue to competitors and total market sales revenues for that period.
Statements of growth rates Except as otherwise stated growth rates in this Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 are given at constant exchange rates CER.
AstraZeneca website Information on our website site does not form part of this document.
AstraZeneca PLC 2003 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Inner Covers 251 pm Page 1 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Key Achievements Key Achievements of 17.8 billion up 9%.
Operating profit before exceptional items of 4.4 billion up 5%.
Earnings per share before exceptional items of 1.84 up 7%.
Sales excluding LosecPrilosec grew by 23%.
Nexium sales reached close to 2 billion.
Share of total prescriptions in the US exceeded 20% in December.
Nexium is now the number two PPI in new prescription market share in the US.
Seroquel sales exceeded 1 billion up 67%. of Seroquel in the treatment of acute mania associated with bipolar disorder .
Arimidex approved in the US UK and other markets for additional use in early breast cancer .
Sales up 75%.
Sales of Iressa reached 67 million for the year following launch in Q3 in Japan its first market.
Over 23500 patients treated since launch reflecting high level of unmet need.
First launch for Faslodex in the US and continued launches for Casodex 150mg monotherapy for early prostate cancer .
First approval for Crestor and first regulatory submission for Exanta both in
RandD investment of over 3 billion.
On average one quality candidate drug now entering preclinical development each month.
Supply and manufacturing effectiveness enhanced with significant lead time reductions on several key products supported by improved process reliability .
Corporate responsibility management standards issued strengthening the platform for ensuring consistent and appropriate behaviour worldwide.
2001 cash discounts reclassified from cost of sales to sales 2001 restated for implementation of FRS19  Deferred T ax 02 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Highlights
Financial Highlights
Continuing Operations before Exceptional Items % growth 2002 2001 CER
Operating profit m 4356 4156 5 Earnings per share Group earnings per share statutory FRS3 Dividend for 2002 pence SEK Payment date First interim dividend 0.23 14.7 2.21 7 October 2002 Second interim dividend 0.47 28.5 3.99 7 April 2003 T otal dividend 0.70 43.2 6.20 2001 cash discounts reclassified from cost of sales to sales 2001 restated for implementation of FRS19  Deferred T ax Sales of major products 500m LosecPrilosec 18%
106tel71tel410 Seroquel 67% Seloken 27% Zestril 18% Pulmicort 5% Zoladex 12% Casodex 15% Atacand 36% Nolvadex 21%
Sales by geographic area m US 10% Europe 5% 523telJapan 21% ROW 13%
1818 1818 RandD investment Investment as % of sales 17.2 3069 16.6 2687 16.8 2620 00 Earnings per Ordinary Share
Earnings per share before exceptional items Group earnings per share statutory FRS3
Key
Profit before exceptional items and tax Profit before tax AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Highlights
Sales by therapeutic area m Gastrointestinal 7% Cardiovascular 1% Oncology 12% Respiratory and Inflammation 16% Central Nervous System 53% Pain Control Infection and Other Pharma 5% Others 16%
2001 cash discounts reclassified from cost of sales to sales 2001 restated for implementation of FRS19 Deferred Tax as recently launched growth rates not meaningful Note all growth rates at constant exchange rates CER
15583 00 04 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Chairman s Statement
Chairman s Statement
The AstraZeneca Board sets the Companys strategy and policies and monitors progress towards meeting our various objectives. functioning of the Board itself.
AstraZeneca has always taken corporate governance very seriously and this positions us well in today s demanding environment.
The new US SarbanesOxley legislation and other similar initiatives are requiring changes to corporate governance processes in a number of areas which will further reinforce good practice.
AstraZeneca has a good reputation and track record and we are committed to maintaining this supported by our Code of Conduct internal auditing to ensure groupwide compliance and clear and transparent financial reporting.
In addition the Board has nominated Sir Peter Bonfield as the senior NonExecutive Director contact for investors wishing to raise any potential corporate governance issues.
During the year  we made good progress in further developing our overall corporate responsibility CR programme.
This included publication and wide communication of our CR Policy and Management Standards.
This work is led by a crossfunctional cross territorial CR Committee which reports to Dame Bridget Ogilvie the NonExecutive Director with responsibility for overseeing CR within AstraZeneca.
I am pleased to report that our continued progress in 2002 was recognised by our inclusion for the second year running in the Dow Jones World Sustainability Index with an improved rating over 2001 and for the first time in their European Index.
AstraZeneca has contributed fully to national and international proposals for improving access to medicines in developing countries.
These proposed policies strive to ensure that 2002 was a year of both opportunity and challenge for AstraZeneca and the pharmaceutical industry in general.
The demand for modern medicines continues to grow driven by demographic changes expanded geographic markets and new technologies.
T o some extent these positive drivers are being offset by pressure on prices escalating RandD and marketing costs increased regulatory demands and uncertain financial markets.
After a successful merger it has been important for AstraZeneca to continue productivity improvements throughout the Company in RandD production sales and administration.
This continuous process of increasing productivity will safeguard a competitive position in coming years. investments in certain developing countries.
A stronger market position in these fast growing countries will support AstraZenecas long term growth ambition.
Finally  and most importantly  the Company has maintained a high innovation rate with a resulting strong product portfolio on the market today and in the pipeline.
The year has seen much progress.
Sales increased 9% and earnings per share before exceptional items increased 7%.
The ordinary dividend to shareholders recommended by the Board was maintained in dollar terms with a second interim dividend of 0.47 28.5 pence SEK 3.99 per Ordinary Share to be paid in April 2003 bringing the total dividend for the year to 0.70 43.2 pence SEK 6.20.
The share repurchase programme continues in 2003.
Despite these achievements in today s difficult financial markets the share price performance has been disappointing for both shareholders and the Company .
AstraZeneca relative share performance 31 December 1999  31 December 2002
Major international pharmaceutical companies Abbott Labs AHP  Aventis BMS Eli Lilly GSK JNJ Merck Novartis Pfizer Pharmacia Roche SanofiSynthelabo Schering and ScheringPlough Source Thomson Financial Datastream 9telDec 99 Jul 00 Feb 01 Sep 01 Apr 02 Dec 02 the long term needs of patients in both developed and developing countries can be met by research based companies such as ours.
More details about our CR policies commitment and performance are available in the separate 2002 Corporate Responsibility Summary Report.
During the year  Lars Ramqvist retired from his role as NonExecutive Director of AstraZeneca and we welcomed John Buchanan as a new NonExecutive Director.
In June Claes Wilhelmsson retired as an Executive Director of AstraZeneca and ke Stavling stepped down as an Executive Director at the end of January 2003.
Claes and ke played important roles in the formation and integration of AstraZeneca and undertook key responsibilities for RandD and Business Development respectively .
My
Board colleagues and I thank them and Lars warmly for their contribution to the Company .
I would also like to thank my colleagues on the Board for their excellent contribution.
Everyone at AstraZeneca was delighted to learn of the knighthood bestowed on our Chief Executive T om McKillop in the Queens 2002 Birthday Honours for services to the pharmaceutical industry .
I would also like to pay tribute to AstraZeneca employees worldwide who contributed to our success through their creativity  commitment and hard work.
In 2003 we will continue to implement our product portfolio transformation strategy and initiatives to improve our overall efficiency and thereby address the growing competitive pressures.
It will be another challenging year but one we face with confidence.
Percy Barnevik Chairman T ransformation was the major theme for 2002 which will continue throughout 2003.
AstraZeneca has an excellent set of new product opportunities to add to the important range of high growth products launched in recent years.
Success with these is essential to replace our more mature brands which are experiencing generic competition following patent expiry .
In addition to transformation of our product portfolio there is a need across the whole pharmaceutical industry to improve productivity in today s tougher environment.
This means transforming our approach to many aspects of our business as we seek better efficiency and effectiveness.
Overall
I am very pleased with our performance in 2002 but it is no surprise that in a year of so much change we have experienced some setbacks as well as successes.
Our recently launched high potential products made good progress.
Nexium now launched in over 75 countries achieved sales of almost 2 billion which contributed to an all time high of 6.7 billion for sales of our gastrointestinal products.
In the extremely important US market new prescriptions for Nexium overtook those for LosecPrilosec and sales grew steadily throughout the year .
We were successful in the US court cases in demonstrating the validity of our formulation patents for LosecPrilosec but were disappointed that the judge found that one generic company did not infringe our patents.
We are appealing this judgement but meanwhile the company concerned chose to launch a generic omeprazole product in December 2002.
Symbicort also progressed well recording sales of 299 million.
Our key products also continued to make good progress.
Sales of Seroquel reached over 1 billion annually for the first time in 2002 and it was the only major antipsychotic to increase market share in the US.
Atacand achieved a global market share excluding Japan of 10%.
Arimidex was approved for the new indication for treatment of early breast cancer AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Chief Executive s Review
Chief Executive s Review
In Japan the launch of Zomig Rapimelt generated encouraging additional sales as did the launch of Zomig Nasal Spray in the UK Sweden Germany and Austria.
Casodex sales benefited from continued launches for the new 150 mg monotherapy for early prostate cancer  now approved in over 40 markets though we were disappointed by the FDA decision not to recommend US approval.
Sales growth excluding LosecPrilosec was 23%.
This growth more than offset the rapid decline in Zestril sales in the US following patent expiry .
Three new medicines received their first approvals during the year .
Our new breast cancer therapy  Faslodex was launched in the US.
Iressa our novel approach to treating nonsmall cell lung cancer NSCLC was launched in Japan where the rapid uptake sales of 67 million and an estimated 23500 patients treated since launch reflects the high unmet need in NSCLC and the benefit that Iressa offers.
Reports on the incidence of interstitial lung disease in seriously ill lung cancer patients receiving Iressa in Japan whilst not proven to be linked to the treatment led the Japanese Ministry of Health Labour and Welfare to introduce strict precautions in its use and specialist supervision of patients.
Crestor for treating high cholesterol levels was approved in the Netherlands and then entered the EU Mutual Recognition Procedure.
In the US the FDA asked for further information from our ongoing clinical studies on Crestor and for more time to complete the Priority Review of Iressa.
Whilst disappointed by the additional time needed for the approval of Crestor and Iressa in the US I am hopeful that both products will be launched there during 2003.
In November  we held a successful business review for investors and financial analysts which focused in particular on our strengths in the Oncology and Cardiovascular therapy areas and the opportunities that exist in our product portfolio in the early stages of clinical research as well as the improved productivity of our drug discovery programmes.
Over the last three years we have increased our delivery of candidate drugs CDs by 20% and on average one quality CD now enters pre clinical development each month.
We have a range of exciting prospects in the pipeline many of which are significant innovations.
We also invested considerable effort to ensure productivity improvements in other areas of our business including building the quality and effectiveness of our sales forces.
During the year the results of our second global employee survey indicated major improvements overall and pointed to how we can improve further .
I continue to be hugely impressed by the creativity and commitment of all the people who make up AstraZeneca.
T ogether we have faced the challenges of 2002 and together we are looking forward to delivering the promise of our products and pipeline.
I would like to thank them and the Senior Executive T eam for their continued contribution throughout what was undoubtedly a challenging year .
During 2002 Martin Nicklasson Executive VicePresident Development and Jan Lundberg Executive VicePresident Discovery Research joined the Senior Executive T eam and are making a valuable contribution.
The pharmaceutical industry is in a fascinating period of great change characterised by exciting new opportunities and significant challenges.
The winners in this environment will be the companies that respond with creativity  speed and effectiveness.
I am confident that AstraZeneca will be one of those companies we have the strategy products people and commitment to drive our continued success as a world leader and to create enduring shareholder value.
Sir T om McKillop Chief Executive Sales of key growth products m Seroquel 67%
Casodex 15% Atacand 36%
2002 % growth at constant exchange rates As recently launched growth rates not meaningful
Zomig 19% Arimidex 75%
3tel06 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Board of Directors Board of Directors at 31 December 2002 Sir T om McKillop Chief Executive Dame Bridget Ogilvie NonExecutive Director Marcus Wallenberg NonExecutive Director Karl von der Heyden NonExecutive Director Jonathan Symonds Executive Director Chief Financial Officer Sir Peter Bonfield Senior NonExecutive Director Erna Mller NonExecutive Director John Buchanan NonExecutive Director Percy Barnevik NonExecutive Chairman Hkan Mogren Executive Deputy Chairman ke Stavling Executive Director Business Development Jane Henney NonExecutive Director AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Board of Directors Percy Barnevik 61 NonExecutive Chairman Chairman of the Nomination Committee Appointed as a Director 6 April 1999.
Honorary Chairman of Sandvik AB.
Non
Executive Director of General Motors
Member of the Academies of Engineering Sciences in Sweden and Finland and Honorary Member of the Royal Academy of Engineering UK.
Member of Advisory Councils in Korea India and the Investment Council advising the South African
Member of the Business Council of American CEOs and the Council on Foreign Relations USA.
Member of the Advisory Board of Centre for European Reform UK.
Hkan Mogren 58 Executive Deputy Chairman Member of the Nomination Committee Appointed as a Director 6 April 1999.
Formerly CEO and a Director of Astra AB appointed 18 May 1988.
NonExecutive
Chairman of Reckitt Benckiser plc.
Non
Executive ViceChairman of Gambro AB.
NonExecutive Director of Investor AB Norsk Hydro ASA and the Marianne and Marcus Wallenberg Foundation.
Member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences.
Executive Director  Business
Appointed as a Director 6 April 1999.
Also has overall responsibility for corporate strategy .
NonExecutive Director of Cambridge Antibody T echnology Group plc.
Jane Henney 55 NonExecutive Director Member of the Audit Committee and Nomination Committee Appointed as a Director 24 September 2001.
Senior Scholar  Association of Academic Health Centers Washington DC.
Commissioner of Food and Drugs 1998 2001 and Deputy Commissioner for Operations 19921994 US Food and Drug
Deputy Director  US National Cancer Institute 19801995.
NonExecutive
Director of AmerisourceBergen Corporation.
Member of the Board of T rustees of the Commonwealth Fund and the Scripps Research Institute.
Member of the Medical and Scientific Advisory Board of MPM Capital.
Sir T om McKillop 59 Chief Executive Appointed as a Director 1 January 1996.
NonExecutive Director of Lloyds TSB Group plc.
President of the European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations.
ProChancellor of the University of Leicester .
Chairman of the British Pharma Group and the North West Science Council.
Dame Bridget Ogilvie 64 NonExecutive Director Member of the Audit Committee Appointed as a Director 1 January 1997.
Also has responsibility for overseeing corporate responsibility.
NonExecutive Director of the Manchester T echnology Fund Limited.
Chairman of the Medicines for Malaria Venture the Governing Body of the Institute of Animal Health and the Association of Medical Research Charities.
T rustee of the Science Museum and Cancer Research UK.
Chairman of the T rustees of the AstraZeneca Science T eaching T rust.
Marcus Wallenberg 46 NonExecutive Director Member of the Audit Committee Appointed as a Director 6 April 1999.
Formerly a Director of Astra AB appointed 18 May 1989.
President and Chief Executive Officer of Investor AB.
NonExecutive Vice Chairman of Saab AB Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB and T elefonaktiebolaget LM Ericsson.
NonExecutive Director of Scania AB Stora Enso Oyj and the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation.
Karl von der Heyden 66 NonExecutive Director Chairman of the Audit Committee Appointed as a Director 1 October 1998.
Executive VicePresident 19891992 and Co Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 1993 of RJR Nabisco.
President and Chief Executive Officer of Metallgesellschaft Corp.
1994.
ViceChairman of PepsiCo Inc.
2001.
NonExecutive Director of Federated Department Stores Inc.
ARAMARK Inc and Exult Inc.
Jonathan Symonds 43 Executive Director and Chief Financial
Appointed as a Director 1 October 1997.
Also has overall responsibility for Information
NonExecutive Director of QinetiQ Group plc.
Member of the Accounting Standards Board s Urgent Issues T ask Force.
Sir Peter Bonfield CBE FREng 58 Senior NonExecutive Director Chairman of the Remuneration Committee and Member of the Nomination Committee Appointed as a Director 1 January 1995.
Chief Executive of British T elecommunications plc 19962002.
Non
Executive Director of T elefonaktiebolaget LM Ericsson Mentor Graphics Corporation and T aiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company  Ltd.
VicePresident of The British Quality Foundation.
Erna Mller 62 NonExecutive Director Member of the Remuneration Committee Appointed as a Director 6 April 1999.
Formerly a Director of Astra AB appointed 15 May 1995.
Executive Director of the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation.
Professor of Clinical Immunology and Member of the Nobel Assembly  Karolinska Institute.
Member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences.
John Buchanan 59 NonExecutive Director Member of the Audit Committee and Remuneration Committee Appointed as a Director 25 April 2002.
Executive Director and Group Chief Financial Officer of BP p.
19962002.
Non
Executive Director of The Boots Company PLC BHP Billiton Plc effective 1 February 2003 and Vodafone Group Plc effective 1 April 2003.
Other officers of the Company at 31 December 2002 included members of the Senior Executive T eam as set out on page 45 and Graeme Musker Group Secretary and Solicitor Appointed as Company Secretary 6 June 1993.
31 January 2003.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review
Seroquel and Zomig successful launches worldwide of the high potential products currently in late stage development including Crestor and Exanta active lifecycle management of the product portfolio and delivery of the full sales potential of the established range Full details of product performance are given in this Operational Review and the Financial Review on pages 11 to 43.
Win in the US Special focus is being given to the future growth of the US business as a critical integrated part of our global organisation.
We aim to deliver outstanding performance in the US the world s largest market for pharmaceuticals worth 194 billion and growing at 15% per annum.
We achieved a good US sales performance in 2002 of 9351 million with a growth rate of 10%.
We continued to expand our RandD presence in Boston and to improve the effectiveness of our US sales force to maximise the opportunities provided by the flow of new products.
Further details are given on pages 18 to 19.
Secure the flow of new products Already a world leading RandD organisation we continue to focus on improving RandD productivity and efficiency of new drug delivery  increasing our output of quality CDs vigorously eliminating weaker products from early development and bringing better drugs to market faster.
Our CD delivery has increased by 20% in the last three years and on average one quality CD with more stringent criteria now enters preclinical development each month.
We are well placed to exploit the opportunities in leading edge science and technology and to capture the benefits of scale of a large organisation whilst retaining the spirit and innovation of an entrepreneurial company .
We aim to be at the forefront of innovative technology.
An extensive network with leading universities and biotechnology companies in addition to our inlicensing programme complements our inhouse RandD activities.
RandD spend totalled 3069 million in 2002 and we are on track to meet the challenging RandD targets that will deliver our strategic objectives.
Further details are given on pages 21 to 23.
Build the talent base We recognise that continued success depends on the quality and commitment of our people.
We aim to continue to attract and retain the best talent within a performance based culture that values supports and rewards team and individual contributions.
Our ongoing employer of choice initiative aims to allow the full potential of our people to be realised.
It centres around three global themes work environment learning and development opportunities and reward.
See page 29 for more details.
Fast effective organisation Our success depends on our ability to respond quickly and effectively to changing business needs and we believe this will be increasingly important in the future.
We have achieved productivity gains in a number of areas including RandD supply chain efficiency and speed and clarity of decision making and have identified areas for further improvement to enhance our performance in these and all other aspects of our business.
We are committed to creating enduring shareholder value by delivering a flow of innovative medicines that meet the needs of patients and healthcare professionals in important areas of medicine.
As a prescription pharmaceutical company focused on the introduction of new medicines we are transforming our portfolio from successful but mature brands to a range of exciting new products.
This transformation will involve realising the full potential of our established portfolio and high potential pipeline retaining and building on our leading positions notably in the key markets of the US Japan and Europe sustained focused investment in RandD effective resource allocation and cost control supported by our strong performanceled culture This strategy requires the fulfilment of six key business priorities First choice for customers We aim to continue to build on our leading positions in many important areas of medicine by providing new innovative products and services that meet the medical needs of patients and healthcare professionals and which offer value in the treatment of disease.
We recognise the challenges of cost containment in healthcare and are committed to improving patient choice and access to medicines.
We believe that new global communication channels offer scope for better use and uptake of medicines and we will embrace the opportunities this presents.
Growth through key products Growth of our business will be driven by the rapid growth of our most recently launched high potential products Nexium and Symbicort launched 2001 and Faslodex and Iressa launched 2002 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Key Products Summary Key Products SelokenToprolXL metoprolol beta blocker for hypertension angina heart failure and other uses
Atacand candesartan cilexetil angiotensin II antagonist for hypertension Plendil felodipine calcium antagonist for hypertension and angina Key Products Zoladex goserelin LHRH analogue for prostate and premenopausal breast cancer  certain benign gynaecological disorders and assisted reproduction Casodexbicalutamide antiandrogen for prostate cancer Nolvadex tamoxifen antioestrogen for breast cancer Arimidex anastrozole aromatase inhibitor for breast cancer Iressa gefitinib signal transduction inhibitor for non small cell lung cancer Faslodex fulvestrant oestrogen receptor down regulator for breast cancer Key Products Pulmicort budesonide inhaled antiinflammatory for asthma control Rhinocort budesonide topical nasal antiinflammatory for control of rhinitis Symbicort budesonideformoterol inhaled combination of antiinflammatory and fast onset long acting bronchodilator in a single inhaler Accolate zafirlukast oral leukotriene receptor antagonist for control of asthma Oxis formoterol inhaled fast onset longacting bronchodilator for relief of asthma symptoms 2002 2001 % Growth m m CER Seloken 901 711 27 Zestril 877 1067 18 Atacand 569 410 36 Plendil 489 463 5 Total 3569 3483 1 2002 2001 % Growth m m CER Zoladex 794 718 12 Casodex 644 561 15 Nolvadex 480 618 21 Arimidex 331 188 75 Iressa 67 nm Faslodex 35 nm Total 2369 2111 tel %Growth m m CER Pulmicort 812 766 5 Rhinocort 299 265 13 Symbicort 299 83 nm Accolate 144 143 2 Total 1818 1539 16 Cardiovascular sales Oncology sales Respiratory and Inflammation sales Key Products Diprivan propofol intravenous general anaesthetic for inductionmaintenance of anaesthesia and sedation of intensive care patients
Xylocaine lidocaine local anaesthetic for use in surgery and dentistry Naropin ropivacaine local anaesthetic for surgical anaesthesia and acute pain management 2002 2001 % Growth m m CER Diprivan 443 456 3 Local anaesthetics 432 434 0 Merrem 285 227 26 Total 1418 1496 5 Pain Control Infection and Other Pharma sales Key Products Seroquel quetiapine atypical antipsychotic for schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders Zomig zolmitriptan for the treatment of acute migraine with or without aura 2002 2001 % Growth m m CER Seroquel 1145 685 67 Total 1505 980 53 Central Nervous System sales nm As recently launched growth rates not meaningful Product under license from Merck and Co.
Inc.
Product under license from T akeda Chemical Industries Ltd Product under license from Sumitomo Pharmaceuticals Co.
Ltd
2001 cash discounts reclassified from cost of sales to sales Note all growth rates at constant exchange rates CER 2002 2001 % Growth m m CER LosecPrilosec 4623 5578 18 Nexium 1978 568 nm Total 6664 6190 7 Gastrointestinal sales Key Products LosecPrilosec omeprazole proton pump inhibitor for acid related diseases Losec MUPS omeprazole in tablet form Nexium esomeprazole proton pump inhibitor for acid related diseases 10 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Globally  in 2002 the pharmaceutical industry maintained good annual growth of 10% at constant US dollar exchange rates.
The US with a growth rate of 15% has increased its world share to 53% reinforcing its importance as the worlds largest pharmaceutical market.
In the US the mail order and hospital segments again showed impressive growth in 2002.
Japan 13% of global sales Germany 5% France 5% the UK 4% and Italy 3% remain significant markets for pharmaceuticals whilst countries such as Mexico Thailand Korea and China are increasing in importance.
Negative growth for the second year in succession for Argentina and Brazil reflects difficult conditions in those countries.
Growth in 2002 was largely attributable to volume increases of highly effective products in the major therapeutic categories of hypolipidaemics antiulcerants anti psychotics antianaemics and anticancer drugs.
Underlying demand for modern medicines remains strong from ageing populations and other population groups due to higher use of treatments for chronic conditions.
However meeting this demand within the constraints of satisfying all stakeholders is proving increasingly difficult for pharmaceutical companies.
Key factors affecting the industry at present include Pricing pressure  the economic and political pressure to limit the costs of pharmaceuticals continues.
Pricing pressure is also exerted by the issue of access to affordable medicines for all those who need them.
RandD productivity  the unusually high level of patent expiries across the industry in 2002 coupled with low numbers of new molecular entities being approved illustrates the increasing challenges to the pharmaceutical industry to improve RandD productivity levels to sustain historical growth at a time of increasing RandD costs.
Increasing consolidation  major merger and acquisition activity has been a recent feature of the maturing pharmaceuticals industry.
Including the proposed merger of Pfizer and Pharmacia the market share of the five leading companies has increased from 21% in 1998 to 33% with the top 10 companies accounting for 50% of sales.
Turbulence of the financial markets following a long period of sustained high returns in the 1990s investor confidence has been dented across all sectors due to fears over economic conditions and future growth prospects.
This has been compounded by financial irregularities and economic uncertainty due to world events.
Pharmaceutical stocks have not been immune despite traditionally being perceived as a defensive investment sector .
In general pharmaceutical stocks have put in a mixed performance with a wide range of both over and under performance for individual stocks relative to their local markets this year .
A further consequence of the financial irregularities has been increased regulation on all companies including corporate governance initiatives in the US through the newly introduced SarbanesOxley Act and in Europe .
Global Market Overview 2002 was a challenging year for the pharmaceutical industry .
The demand for pharmaceutical products continues to grow as do external pressures and expectations.
Key factors affecting the industry at present include pricing pressure RandD productivity increasing consolidation turbulence of the financial markets AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Gastrointestinal GI We are the world leader in the treatment of GI diseases in particular acid related disorders.
Key products Nexium has been shown to be the first proton pump inhibitor PPI to offer significant improvements over Losec and its main competitor  lansoprazole in terms of acid control and clinical efficacy in clinical studies involving 55000 patients in 49 countries.
Nexium offers more effective acid inhibition than all other PPIs and in the treatment of reflux oesophagitis provides healing and symptom relief in more patients and in a shorter period of time than Losec or lansoprazole.
Nexium is an effective long term therapy for patients with gastro oesophageal reflux disease GERD with or without oesophagitis.
For the treatment of active duodenal ulcer disease seven day Nexium triple therapy in combination with two antibiotics for the eradication of Helicobacter pylori H. secretory monotherapy .
We expect Nexium to continue to establish a new improved treatment standard for the PPI class.
Following its first launch in Sweden in August 2000 Nexium is now available in more than 75 markets including the US Canada and key European countries.
Major launches in 2002 included Australia Belgium France Italy and
Nexium has been well received by patients and physicians alike and global sales performance is strong particularly in the US where new prescriptions for Nexium overtook those for LosecPrilosec during the year .
Nexium is used to treat a wide range of patients including both those newly diagnosed and patients switched from other therapies such as Losec other PPIs and H2 receptor antagonists.
Over 60 million patient treatments of Nexium had been administered by the end of 2002 and global and US shares of the PPI market were 11% and 14% respectively.
LosecPrilosec the first PPI product set a new global standard in short and long term treatment of acid related diseases in the 1980s and 1990s and today is still the worlds largest selling GI product.
Patients have benefited from over 665 million treatments with Losec since launch.
Global and US shares of the PPI market were 34% and 33% respectively.
Losec MUPS a tablet formulation which offers increased convenience flexibility and predictability over the original Losec capsules has been approved in 62 markets.
Patent protection for omeprazole the active ingredient in Losec has expired.
In a number of countries including some major markets patent term extensions or supplementary protection certificates have been granted for the active ingredient.
In October 2002 the US Court for the Southern District of New Y ork delivered its judgement on the litigation relating to infringement of certain patents including formulation patents by four generic manufacturers.
The judgement upheld the validity of two of these patents and ruled that three of the four defendants had infringed the patents.
The decision has been appealed both by AstraZeneca and three of the defendants.
The first US generic omeprazole product was launched in December 2002.
Further information about the status of patents and patent litigation is set out on pages 103 and 104.
Entocort is a locally acting corticosteroid for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease with better tolerability than other corticosteroids and greater efficacy than aminosalicylic acid medicines.
Pipeline
Regulatory filings for Nexium for the treatment of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs NSAID GI side effects and a parenteral formulation are scheduled for submission in Q2 2003.
AZD0865 is a reversible acid pump inhibitor based on a new concept of acid inhibition which has the potential to provide faster and more effective inhibition of gastric acid secretion than Losec.
AZD3355 and AZD9343 are reflux inhibitors offering a new approach to the treatment of GERD aiming to improve the function of the lower oesophageal sphincter LOS.
This is expected to reduce the abnormal transient LOS relaxations typically associated with
We have discontinued our development of ARH04718 and rofleponide as a result of their failure to meet our target profile.
Strategic priorities T o maintain our number one position in GI treatments through continued market penetration for Nexium worldwide and management of the challenges of Losec patent expiries coupled with high quality innovation and productivity in the research and development of new approaches to treatment.
Therapy area in brief 40% of adults in the western world regularly experience heartburn and 10% have GERD.
H. ylori is the major cause of peptic ulcer disease and is a risk factor for gastric cancer.
PPI world market value 16.3 billion.
Key products Growth product Nexium PPI for acid related disease.
Established products LosecPrilosec PPI for acid related disease.
Losec MUPS Losec in tablet formulation.
2002 in brief GI franchise sales reach all time high of 6.7 billion.
Nexium now launched in more than 75 markets including the US Canada and key European countries.
Nexium continues to establish a new improved treatment standard.
In the US new prescriptions for Nexium overtook those for Losec during 2002.
The challenge of Losec patent expiries continues.
Positive outcome for 2002 in US litigation relating to patent infringement.
Appeal underway.
First US generic omeprazole product launched in December 2002.
RandD focus Includes new areas of clinical use for Nexium and further strengthening the scope of its use in current areas.
Novel approaches to treat GERD H. bowel syndrome.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Cardiovascular CV We are a world leader in CV medicines backed by over 40 years experience.
Key products Atacand is an angiotensin II antagonist for the first line treatment of hypertension.
In
2002 the FDA approved a superiority claim in the labelling of Atacand versus the class leader  losartan.
The Atacand family of products shows a strong market acceptance and competes in the fastest growing sector of the global hypertension market angiotensin II antagonists  plain and combinations with diuretic.
Atacand achieved a global market share excluding Japan of 10%.
Further developments include major studies in heart failure CHARM due to report in 2003 and retinopathy in diabetic patients DIRECT due to report in 2006.
Seloken ZOKToprolXL a once daily tablet for 24 hour control of blood pressure and for use in heart failure is the world s leading product in the beta blocker plain and combinations with diuretic class with a market share of 20% globally and 29% in the
We expect sales growth to continue backed by further inclusions in treatment guidelines for heart failure.
Zestril an angiotensin converting enzyme ACE inhibitor  is used for the treatment of a wide range of CV diseases including hyper tension.
Lisinopril the active ingredient in Zestril lost protection in the US in June 2002 and in Japan the UK and most other major markets during 2002 and as anticipated a major erosion of sales commenced during the second half of 2002.
Nonetheless the Zestril family achieved a 15% share of the global ACE inhibitor sector 19% in the US.
Pipeline
Crestor is a new statin which clinical trials have shown to be highly effective in the treatment of patients with lipid disorders and which has the potential to be superior in efficacy to currently available statins.
It offers significantly greater LDL cholesterol low density lipoprotein reduction than other statins has beneficial effects on HDL cholesterol high density lipoprotein and triglyceride levels and may enable more patients to reach recommended target cholesterol levels.
The approval of products in this class has been subject to additional regulatory scrutiny  partly as a result of the previous market withdrawal of cerivastatin.
Crestor was first approved in Europe in the Netherlands in November and it entered the EU Mutual Recognition Procedure in
In the US we received an approvable letter for Crestor from the FDA which required further information from our ongoing clinical studies to supplement that already submitted which delayed plans for launch in the US.
This data will support the use of Crestor over the dose range of 1040 mg and is scheduled for submission during Q1 2003.
The approval of Crestor in the US is now expected in the latter part of 2003 and we anticipate completion of the regulatory review process in Japan during 2003.
Exanta potentially the first new oral anti coagulant in 50 years is a novel oral direct thrombin inhibitor targeted to prevent and treat the abnormal formation of blood clots thrombosis.
In clinical studies it has been shown to be effective and well tolerated and data published in late 2002 showed that Exanta significantly reduces the risk of venous thromboembolism VTE in orthopaedic surgery and effectively prevents the recurrence of clots.
Its potential practical benefits include oral administration rapid onset of action and lack of drugfood interactions with no need for routine blood coagulation monitoring.
Studies in the major chronic indication prevention of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation are ongoing.
The first regulatory submission in Europe for the prevention of VTE in orthopaedic surgery was made in July 2002.
First regulatory submissions in the US are planned for Q4 2003 as well as the filing for major chronic indications in the rest of the world.
Galida previously known as AZ242 is a treatment for insulin resistance related glucose and lipid abnormalities associated with type 2 diabetesmetabolic syndrome.
Early clinical studies indicate that it has a promising pharmacokinetic profile shows a doserelated effect on lipids glucose and insulin and is well tolerated.
Further phase 2 work is under way with entry into phase 3 anticipated in 2003.
Our further research in thrombosis aims to deliver an oral antiplatelet therapy and AZD6140 has now entered clinical develop ment.
Novel research in atrial fibrillation includes AZD7009 an atrial repolarisation delaying agent.
Also in development AZD0837 an oral direct thrombin inhibitor for thrombosis AZD9684 a carboxy peptidaseU inhibitor for thrombosis and AZD7806 an ilial bile acid transport inhibitor in the dyslipidaemia area.
We have discontinued our development of AZD7545 as a result of its failure to meet our target profile.
Strategic priorities T o build on our strong position in this important area focusing in the short to medium term on the growth segments of hypertension dyslipidaemia thrombosis and type 2 diabetes.
Therapy area in brief CV diseases account for 17 million deaths globally each year  making it the greatest risk to life for most adults.
CV is the single largest therapy area in the global healthcare market.
The statin market has a world market value of 19 billion and is one of the largest and most rapidly growing areas of the pharmaceutical market.
CV treatments world market value 87 billion.
Key products Growth products Seloken ZOKToprolXL beta blocker for hypertension angina heart failure and other uses.
Atacand angiotensin II antagonist for hypertension.
Established products Zestril and Plendil for hypertension.
2002 in brief First approval for Crestor in Europe.
Further information on Crestor required by FDA is planned for submission Q1 2003.
Atacand achieves global market share excluding Japan of 10% 9% in the US.
Continued strong growth for Seloken ZOKToprolXL of 27%.
Rapid erosion of Zestril sales due to patent expiry in major markets.
First regulatory submission for Exanta in Europe.
Publication of data confirming efficacy of Exanta in use for chronic conditions.
RandD focus Broadening the CV portfolio into the areas of thromboembolism dyslipidaemia type 2 diabetesmetabolic syndrome atrial fibrillation and vascular disease prevention.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Already a world leader in the treatment of cancer  during 2002 we introduced two new therapies which strengthen our position in this area of considerable medical need.
Key products Casodex is the world s leading antiandrogen therapy for the treatment of advanced prostate cancer with a global market share in excess of 70%.
Recent growth of the brand has largely been driven by launches in the new indication for early prostate cancer
Casodex 150mg has received regulatory approval for the treatment of EPC in over 40 markets to date.
In the US in June 2002 the FDA issued a nonapprovable letter for Casodex 150mg for the treatment of EPC.
Although disappointing the FDA s decision does not impact on the use and approval of Casodex for advanced prostate cancer treatment.
EPC as a favoured therapy is a demonstration of physicians growing confidence in Casodex as a treatment in all stages of prostate cancer .
Arimidex is the world s leading aromatase inhibitor  with a global market share in excess of 50%.
The ATAC study in breast cancer first reported in December 2001 showed that Arimidex is significantly more effective in prolonging diseasefree survival and has important tolerability benefits compared with the current gold standard tamoxifen.
Regulatory approvals for Arimidex in the adjuvant treatment of early breast cancer in postmenopausal women have been granted in the US the UK and several other markets.
Additionally  label restrictions in Japan have been lifted allowing promotion for its use in the treatment of early breast cancer as well as advanced breast cancer .
Full submissions have been made in all major markets.
Early breast cancer represents a major new market for Arimidex and is expected to drive significant growth.
It is also approved for the treatment of advanced breast cancer in post menopausal women based on demonstrated advantages over tamoxifen and megestrol acetate.
Faslodex was approved in the US in April 2002 for the second line treatment of hormone receptor positive advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal women.
It has a novel mode of action and offers an effective welltolerated treatment option for patients with the compliance and convenience benefits of a oncemonthly injection.
Initial
We anticipate filing a regulatory submission in Europe early in 2003.
The introduction of Faslodex enhances and complements the existing breast cancer portfolio as the use of Arimidex is shifting to first line use and earlier disease treatment.
Iressa is a novel anticancer agent that acts to block signals for cancer cell growth and survival.
Early studies have shown encouraging antitumour activity or disease stabilisation in nonsmall cell lung cancer
Clinical trials with Iressa as monotherapy for NSCLC have shown response rates and disease control in approximately half of patients and symptomatic benefit in over 40% of patients treated.
Regulatory filings based on monotherapy began in December 2001.
Since launch in Japan uptake has been rapid with an estimated 23500 patients treated since launch reflecting the high unmet need in NSCLC and the significant benefit seen with
Reports on the incidence of interstitial lung disease in seriously ill cancer patients receiving Iressa in Japan whilst not proven to be linked to the treatment led the Japanese Ministry of Health Labour and Welfare to introduce strict precautions on its use and specialist supervision of patients.
In the US the FDA announced in January 2003 that it required more time until 5 May 2003 to complete the Priority Review of Iressa following the recommendation supporting approval of Iressa by the Oncologic Drugs Advisory Committee in September 2002.
We are pursuing monotherapy submissions for Iressa in all other major markets including Europe where filing is scheduled for Q1 2003.
In contrast to the monotherapy results trials of Iressa in combination with platinum based chemotherapy unexpectedly showed no additional benefit.
Our focus is to maximise its potential as a single therapy treatment.
Nolvadex is the world s most commonly prescribed breast cancer therapy and the first medication approved in the US for reducing the incidence of breast cancer in women at high risk of developing the disease.
Sales of tamoxifen this year were lower than anticipated as a result of sales of aromatase inhibitors including Arimidex gaining a higher than expected share of the market for the adjuvant treatment of breast cancer and as a result of our US distribution agreement with Barr Laboratories Inc. not being extended.
More details about this are set out on page 104.
Oncology
Strategic priorities T o maintain our position as a world leader in cancer treatment through continued growth for key products Casodex Arimidex and Zoladex continued launches for new products Faslodex and Iressa and the successful introduction of novel approaches currently in the pipeline.
Therapy area in brief Globally  over 12 million people are diagnosed with cancer each year .
Cancer is predicted to be the leading cause of death in the US by 2005.
Cancer therapy world market value 15 billion.
Key products Growth products Casodex antiandrogen for advanced prostate cancer .
Arimidex aromatase inhibitor for breast cancer.
Faslodex for breast cancer .
Iressa for NSCLC.
Established products Nolvadex breast cancer therapy .
Zoladex LHRH analogue treatment for breast cancer  prostate cancer and certain benign gynaecological disorders.
2002 in brief Approval for Arimidex in adjuvant treatment of early breast cancer in the US UK and other markets.
First launch for Faslodex in the US.
First launch for Iressa in Japan.
FDA advisory committee recommend approval of Iressa.
FDA require more time to complete Priority Review.
T rials of Iressa in combination with platinum based chemotherapy unexpectedly showed no additional benefit.
FDA decision not to approve Casodex 150mg for early prostate cancer .
RandD focus Development of new agents and novel approaches across a wide range of cancers which include targeting tumour vasculature to control tumour growth invasion and spread.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Oncology continued Zoladex is our largest oncology brand and one of the world s best selling luteinising hormone releasing hormone LHRH agonists for the treatment of prostate cancer  breast cancer and gynaecological disorders.
It has been approved in 14 countries for the adjuvant treatment of early stage pre menopausal breast cancer  as an alternative to andor in addition to chemotherapy .
Zoladex offers the proven disease free survival benefits of cytotoxics but with improved patient tolerability .
In prostate cancer  Zoladex in the adjuvant setting is the only LHRH analogue shown to improve overall survival following radical prostatectomy or radiotherapy.
Zoladex threemonth depot was approved in Japan for the treatment of prostate cancer in April 2002.
Pipeline
The potential of Iressa to show benefits in a number of tumours in addition to NSCLC is being investigated with around 60 exploratory trials ongoing.
Particular focus is on head and neck cancer  breast cancer and colorectal cancer.
ZD6474 and AZD2171 are antiangiogenics in phase 2 and phase 1 development respectively which target the control of growth of blood vessels of tumours.
AZD9935 is another antiangiogenic in preclinical development.
ZD6126 is a vascular targeting agent that is scheduled to enter phase 2 development which targets and destroys the vasculature of tumours working to destroy the tumour from within.
AZD4440 is a vascular targeting agent a backup compound to ZD6126.
ZD4054 is an endothelin antagonist in phase 2 development that works by inhibiting the ETA receptor  responsible for tumour cell proliferation.
AZD0530 is an antiinvasive designed to prevent tumours from spreading and is scheduled to enter clinical testing in Q3 2003.
AZD3409 is a prenylation inhibitor designed to inhibit the proliferation of cancer cells and is scheduled to enter clinical testing in Q2 2003.
We have discontinued our development of ZD9331 as a result of its failure to meet our target profile and will return all rights to BTG Plc.
Infection
Strategic priorities T o build a franchise in the treatment of infectious diseases by increasing sales of Merrem and by exploiting our internationally competitive microbial genomics platform.
Therapy area in brief Infectious diseases cause more than 13 million deaths each year .
Infection world market value 49 billion.
Key product Merrem antibiotic for serious infection.
2002 in brief Merrem sales growth of 26%.
RandD focus Development of products with new modes of action that combat microbial disease.
We have many years experience in treating infectious diseases.
World demand for  and interest in antibiotics remains high due to escalating bacterial resistance and the increased risk of serious infections.
Key product Merrem Meronem is an intravenous carbapenem antibiotic for the treatment of serious hospital acquired infections.
Clinical studies are in place to support a supplementary new drug application in the US in late 2003 aimed at securing a skin and skin structure infection indication in 2004.
Pipeline
Our RandD facility in Boston US is progressing a range of projects using both traditional and genomic based technologies to deliver innovative antibacterial and antifungal agents to the infection pipeline.
Following the announcement in 2001 of a 10 million capital investment in new laboratories at our RandD facility in Bangalore India the new facility is scheduled to be completed and open in 2003.
Work will focus on finding a new treatment for tuberculosis an infectious disease that is newly diagnosed in approximately two million people every year in India and over eight million people worldwide.
We have discontinued our development of AZD2563 as a result of its failure to meet our target profile.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Respiratory and Inflammation We market a wide range of products for respiratory diseases and aim to broaden our portfolio to include treatments for other inflammatory conditions.
Key products Symbicort is a new innovative and effective asthma treatment that offers adjustable dosing which enables doctors to tailor a patient s treatment of this variable disease with a single inhaler .
It is a combination of the corticosteroid budesonide and the fast onset longacting bronchodilator  formoterol in the Turbuhaler dry powder inhaler .
Symbicort T urbuhaler is approved in 68 countries and launched in 44.
Early sales performance has been encouraging achieving a 23% share of the rapidly growing fixed combination market in Europe.
Encouraging clinical results confirm the efficacy and safety of Symbicort and its use for the adjustable maintenance treatment of asthma.
Further launches are planned in 2003.
Pulmicort is a corticosteroid anti inflammatory inhalation drug that helps prevent symptoms and improves the control of asthma.
Pulmicort remains one of the world s leading asthma medicines and is available in several forms including the Turbuhaler dry powder inhaler  a pressurised metered dose inhaler and the Respules suspension for the treatment of children.
The
START study is a five year global trial involving more than 6000 patients in 31 countries with the objective of evaluating whether early intervention with inhaled glucocorticosteroids will affect the evolution of newly diagnosed asthma.
This study will evaluate the benefits of Pulmicort in the early treatment of asthma in adults and children and is due to report fully in 2003.
Preliminary data was reported in September 2002 at the European Respiratory Society showing high efficacy and a good safety profile supporting the early use of
Pulmicort T urbuhaler was launched in Japan in February 2002.
Pulmicort Respules the first and only nebulised corticosteroid in the US for children as young as 12 months of age achieved 66% growth with 1.8 million prescriptions in 2002.
In December 2002 Pulmicort Respules accounted for 17% of the US paediatric asthma controller market prescriptions.
Pulmicort Respules is the number one prescribed inhaled corticosteroid among paediatricians in the US.
Oxis is a betaagonist asthma therapy with a fast onset and longacting clinical effect for the relief of asthma symptoms when corticosteroid treatment is not adequate.
It is now approved in most of the EU for additional as needed therapy for patients already taking it as part of their regular maintenance therapy .
This additional indication has enabled Oxis to increase its share of the long acting betaagonist market.
Oxis was approved for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease COPD in the EU in December 2002.
Rhinocort is a nasal steroid treatment for allergic rhinitis hay fever perennial rhinitis and nasal polyps.
It combines powerful efficacy with rapid onset of action and minimal side effects and is available as a once daily treatment in the Rhinocort Aqua pressurised metered dose inhaler and the Turbuhaler dry powder inhaler forms.
US sales of Rhinocort Aqua in 2002 showed strong growth and as of December 2002 accounted for 13% of the inhaled nasal steroid market.
Accolate is an oral leukotriene receptor antagonist for the treatment of asthma available in most markets.
Pipeline
Symbicort phase 3 development has started in the US in the pressurised metered dose inhaler .
Further development of Symbicort includes use for the treatment of COPD and regulatory submissions for this indication were made in Europe in 2002.
Three new compounds have entered pre clinical development targeted at COPD AZD3342 AZD0275 and AZD0902 and one compound at osteoarthritis AZD8955.
Compounds currently in early development include AZD7140 AZD8309 and AZD9056 each of which have novel mechanisms of action and are targeted at rheumatoid arthritis.
We have discontinued our development of D5522 AZD4407 and AZD2315 as a result of their failure to meet our target profile.
Strategic priorities T o build on our leading position in asthma treatment through growth of key products particularly Symbicort new indications for Symbicort and Oxis and the successful introduction of novel approaches to other areas of inflammatory disease such as COPD and rheumatoid arthritis.
Therapy area in brief The World Health Organisation estimates that 100 million people worldwide suffer from asthma and that COPD is the fourth greatest cause of death globally .
Respiratory and Inflammation therapy world market value 30 billion.
Key products Growth product Symbicort inhaled combination of anti inflammatory and fast onset longacting bronchodilator in a single inhaler .
Established products Rhinocort topical nasal antiinflammatory for rhinitis control.
Pulmicort inhaled antiinflammatory for asthma control.
Oxis inhaled fast onset longacting bronchodilator for relief of asthma symptoms.
2002 in brief Clinical results confirm efficacy and safety of Symbicort for adjustable maintenance treatment of asthma.
Successful completion of the Mutual Recognition Procedure for the use of Symbicort in children age 611 years in the EU Iceland and Norway .
Regulatory submissions filed in Europe for Symbicort use in COPD.
RandD focus Development of further treatments for asthma and rhinitis and for other inflammatory diseases of the respiratory and musculoskeletal system such as COPD and rheumatoid arthritis.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Central Nervous System CNS We made significant progress in 2002 in our aim to grow as a major force in the CNS area with strong sales growth for our key products and several major RandD milestones being reached.
Globally  in the CNS sector AstraZeneca now ranks number nine and is one of the fastest growing companies.
Key products Seroquel is an atypical antipsychotic for the treatment of schizophrenia.
Since its launch in 1997 Seroquel has been used to treat more than four million people worldwide in over 50 countries.
With strong sales in the US Seroquel commands 19% of new prescriptions in the US antipsychotic market.
It is the only major antipsychotic with increasing share in this key market.
Sales are also growing strongly in major European markets and Japan where it is sold under licence by Fujisawa.
Annual sales exceeded 1 billion for the first time in 2002.
Seroquel is effective against the positive negative cognitive and affective symptoms associated with schizophrenia with an onset of action within one week.
Studies support a positive effect on mood hostility and aggression.
Seroquel offers the efficacy of the newer atypical agents but with unique patient tolerability  characterised by the low profile of extrapyramidal side effects across the entire dose range.
Continuing strong sales growth of Seroquel is anticipated through new indications and increasing penetration in the schizophrenia market.
Filings were made in the US in December 2002 for use of Seroquel in the treatment of bipolar mania and are scheduled for Europe for Q1 2003.
Further developments are planned to show the full spectrum of clinical benefit in the elderly population and in those suffering from mood disorders.
Zomig for the treatment of acute migraine provides rapid relief of symptoms and is effective when taken at all stages of a migraine attack.
Available in over 80 countries it is the leading secondgeneration triptan with a global market share of 16%.
T otal cumulative sales of 1 billion were achieved in July 2002.
Zomig Rapimelt a rapidly dispersible formulation offering patients a convenient orange flavoured meltinthemouth tablet was additionally launched in Japan in June 2002 and early signs indicate that it is generating additional sales for Zomig mirroring the significant success achieved in other markets.
Zomig Nasal Spray is a new formulation in an easytouse and convenient device to deliver fast pain relief for migraine sufferers.
The nasal spray received EU approval in 2002 and was successfully launched in Sweden the UK Germany and Austria with other major markets expected to follow through the first half of 2003.
In Sweden the first market where Zomig was launched sales increased by almost 28% following the introduction of the nasal spray and customer feedback continues to be encouraging with the total Zomig brand capturing share from competing products.
Pipeline
Ongoing development projects include two serotonin antagonists ARA2 and AZD1134 selective for the 5HT 1B receptor subtypes.
Cerovive previously known as NXY059 is a nitronebased free radical trapping agent for treatment of acute ischaemic stroke a disease with substantial unmet need for new effective therapies.
Preclinical data suggests that Cerovive may have the potential to minimise or prevent further neuronal damage to the brain following an acute ischaemic stroke and phase 2 results in stroke patients indicate a favourable safety profile.
Phase 3 studies are scheduled to commence in 2003.
AstraZeneca aims to become a leading player in the area of overactive bladder OAB therapy .
Early development activities for the treatment of OAB include potassium channel activation ZD0947 and neurokinin antagonism AZD5106 both novel approaches to the treatment of this highly prevalent condition.
Alzheimer s disease is a core strategic focus.
AZD0328 is a new candidate drug with a novel mechanism of action.
The collaboration with Shanghai Jiaotong University on neurogenetics established in 2001 is progressing well as is our collaboration with NPS Pharmaceuticals with early and late phase preclinical projects on metabotropic glutamate receptors covering all major CNS and pain control disease indications.
We have discontinued our development of NAD299 for depression as a result of its failure to meet our target profile.
Strategic priorities T o build on the growth of our key products Seroquel and Zomig through continued investment in the treatment of major CNS disorders.
Therapy area in brief Depression and anxiety affect an estimated 30 million people in the developed world.
Prevalence of Alzheimer s disease set to increase exponentially over the next 15 years unless new effective treatments are found.
Acute stroke is the third leading cause of death in North America and Western Europe and the most common cause of adult disability .
CNS therapies world market value 46 billion.
Key products Growth products Seroquel schizophrenia therapy .
Zomig migraine treatment.
2002 in brief Global sales of Seroquel exceed 1 billion annually for first time.
Seroquel was the only major anti psychotic to increase market share in the
Filing in the US for Seroquel for the treatment of bipolar mania submitted in December 2002.
Zomig Rapimelt launched in Japan.
Zomig Nasal Spray launched in Sweden UK Germany and Austria.
Cerovive progressing well through development.
RandD focus New indications for existing products and the development of new approaches to the treatment of acute stroke depressionanxiety multiple sclerosis Alzheimer s disease and overactive bladder.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review We are a world leader in anaesthesia with over 50 years experience and a strong record of innovation and excellence.
Plans to develop our pain control portfolio include exploitation of new mechanisms with novel approaches that are strongly linked to disease processes in key indications.
Key products Diprivan the world s largest selling general anaesthetic is used in the induction and maintenance of anaesthesia and for intensive care sedation.
Despite continued generic competition Diprivan has a 25% share of the global general anaesthetic market.
In the US Diprivan has a 24% share of the general anaesthetic market with 53% of total propofol sales.
In Japan sales continued to grow in anaesthesia and sedation and Diprivan has gained a 36% share of the general anaesthetic market.
The improved microbial resistant formulation Diprivan EDTA is approved in the majority of markets and accounts for more than 90% of total Diprivan sales.
Naropin is a longacting local anaesthetic with improved safety and mobility profile compared with bupivacaine.
Regulatory submissions for intraarticular  spinal and continuous peripheral nerve block uses were filed in 2001 and we have received several approvals in EU countries in 2002.
Xylocaine continues to be the world s most widely used local anaesthetic after 50 years on the market.
Pipeline
AZD3582 is the first compound in a new class of drugs called COXinhibiting nitric oxide donators CINODs.
It represents a novel approach to the treatment of acute and chronic nociceptive pain conditions such as postoperative pain and arthritic diseases.
The rationale for AZD3582 is to retain a balanced inhibition of both Cox1 and Cox2 enzymes to deliver a controlled donation of nitric oxide to provide organ protection.
Nitric oxide is thought to play a major role in maintaining mucosal integrity in the stomach and other organs thereby reducing the gastrointestinal and other damage associated with nonsteroidal anti inflammatory drugs NSAIDs.
AZD4717 is the second compound in the novel CINOD class and is being developed as a followup to AZD3582.
AstraZeneca has recently amended its marketing agreement with NicOx to include Japan and thereby ensure AstraZeneca has exclusive worldwide rights to a number of CINOD development compounds.
AZD4282 oral glycine is an NmethylD aspartate NMDA antagonist under development as a treatment of neuropathic pain.
It is an antagonist at the glycine site associated with the NMDA receptor complex.
Binding to the glycine site is expected to avoid the adverse CNS effects produced by NMDA channel blockers.
Strategic priorities T o become a major force in pain control by building on our world leading position in anaesthesia including maintaining Diprivan sales and increasing Naropin sales and by introducing new products for pain management.
Therapy area in brief Anaesthetics are essential for surgical procedures in hospitals clinics and day care surgeries.
Over 46% of adults in the western world suffer from chronic pain.
Pain management is the most common reason for seeking medical care.
High level of unmet medical need such as improved efficacy and reduced side effects.
Pain control world market value 27.1 billion.
Key products Growth product Naropin local anaesthetic.
Established products Diprivan general anaesthetic.
Xylocaine local anaesthetic.
2002 in brief We maintained our leading position in the anaesthetic market with a share of 33%.
Approvals in EU for extended uses for Naropin.
RandD focus Development of therapies for nociceptive pain caused by tissue damage and neuropathic pain caused by nerve damage.
Pipeline includes projects addressing mechanisms such as Gprotein coupled receptors and novel ion channel blockers aimed at delivering firstinclass therapies.
Pain Control 18 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Geographic Review Nexium became the second most prescribed PPI with a 21% monthly share of total prescriptions and which at year end exceeded those written for Prilosec.
T otal US sales of Nexium in 2002 were 1.5 billion.
Nexium is also now the leading product to which patients switch from other treatments in the antisecretory category .
This performance was attributed to the strong clinical data available to support the sales force Managed Care Access and a nationwide directtoconsumer advertising programme covering both broadcast and print media.
Nexium and Prilosec had a combined 28% share of the US antisecretory market.
Generic omeprazole performance in the early weeks after launch is described on page 31.
Entocort EC for the treatment of Crohns disease achieved sales of 20 million in 2002.
Cardiovascular CV The CV product portfolio achieved sales of 1.6 billion in 2002.
Exclusivity for lisinopril the active ingredient in Zestril expired in the US in June.
As anticipated erosion of the market share of Zestril was rapid and by Q3 of 2002 generic lisinopril gained a 32% share of the ACE inhibitor market.
T otal Zestril sales were 467 million in 2002 compared to 617 million in 2001.
Sales of the combination product Zestoretic Zestril in combination with a diuretic were also significantly affected by the patent expiry.
A strong performance by ToprolXL the leading branded beta blocker in the US led to a 43% increase in sales to 617 million for 2002.
ToprolXL prescription market share increased to 21%.
The Atacand family of products continues to outperform the angiotensin receptor blocker market in terms of total prescription volume growth with 34% in 2002 compared to 23% for the market as a whole.
T otal sales of Atacand products in 2002 were 206 million.
As described on page 12 we received an approvable letter for Crestor which required further information from our ongoing clinical study programme to be provided to supplement that already submitted.
The data is scheduled for submission during Q1 2003.
The launch of Crestor in the US is expected in the latter part of 2003.
Oncology
The FDA announced in January 2003 that it required more time until 5 May 2003 to complete the Priority Review of Iressa following the recommendation supporting approval of Iressa by the Oncologic Drugs Advisory Committee in September 2002.
Sales of Arimidex grew by 127% to 134 million in 2002 following the good results first reported in December 2001 from the ATAC trial for the adjuvant use of the drug in the treatment of postmenopausal women with early breast cancer .
Casodex remained the antiandrogen market leader in the US with 79% prescription market share and total sales of 180 million for the year .
However  in June the FDA issued a nonapprovable letter for Casodex 150mg for the treatment of early prostate cancer more details of which are set out on page 13.
Zoladex achieved a growth rate of 7% and total sales of 212 million in 2002.
We received marketing approval for Faslodex in April 2002 for the treatment of breast cancer further strengthening our leadership position in hormonal cancer treatments.
Our US distribution agreement with Barr Laboratories Inc.
Nolvadex.
At the same time a six month period of market exclusivity commenced which was awarded by the FDA in connection with the successful completion of certain paediatric testing with the product.
Barr thereafter commenced litigation against the FDA challenging the FDA s refusal to grant Barr final approval for its own generic tamoxifen prior to expiration of AstraZenecas exclusivity period.
Barr also declined our offer to extend the distribution agreement to the end of the exclusivity period.
In October 2002 we began shipping nonbranded tamoxifen to customers to ensure an uninterrupted supply of products to patients.
More details about this are set out on page 104.
Our discussions with the US Department of Justice concerning its investigation into the sale and marketing of Zoladex are continuing.
More information about this can be found on page 104.
Respiratory and Inflammation Sales of Pulmicort Respules were up 75% in 2002 to 257 million strengthening its position as the inhaled corticosteroid of choice for the treatment of children under five years of age with asthma.
Pulmicort
Turbuhaler sales only declined modestly to 104 million in 2002 despite the launch of a new competitor fluticasone and salmeterol in combination in the inhaled corticosteroid Our strategy in key markets centres around driving the growth of key products the successful introduction of new medicines and new indications for existing products and continued improvement in the speed and efficiency of our operations.
North America
In support of our key business priority of winning in the US we continued to build our presence in this highly competitive market.
In 2002 our US business increased sales by 10% from 8.5 to 9.4 billion.
This represented a 6% share of the US prescription pharmaceutical market making AstraZeneca the fifth largest company in the
The US market contributed 52% of AstraZeneca s total sales in 2002.
This performance was against the backdrop of a US pharmaceutical industry which faces a number of challenges.
These include the continuing absence of any meaningful prescription drug benefit for Medicare recipients government support for importation of prescription drugs from Canada and price controls and proposed changes to legislation protecting intellectual property .
State governments are introducing preferred drug lists and other restrictions on
In addition the Prescription Drug Use Fee Amendment Act PDUFA the mechanism that allows for the expedited review of drug applications was renewed to increase both risk assessment and post marketing surveillance requirements for new products.
During the year  there was a significant level of criticism of the patent defence strategies typically pursued by RandD based pharmaceutical companies.
The trial in New Y ork of AstraZeneca s suits against four generic drug companies more details of which are set out on page 103 received considerable media attention.
Gastrointestinal GI In 2002 AstraZeneca retained leadership of the US market in GI treatment with the continuing success of Nexium and Entocort
The absence of generic competition for the first 11 months meant that Prilosec also made a substantial contribution to our US sales performance in the year with total US sales of 2.8 billion.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Representative magazine 2002 Pharmaceutical Sales Representative of the Y ear Award.
We welcome and are committed to full compliance with the new policies of the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America PhRMA on promotional practices.
Facilities
During 2002 we completed the relocation of 1200 AstraZeneca employees from our site in Wayne Pennsylvania to our existing campus in Wilmington Delaware.
As a result about 4200 employees are now based at the Wilmington facility  over 40% of our total US workforce.
The expansion of the Wilmington site began in October 2002 and is scheduled for completion in the first half of 2003.
Canada
In 2002 sales growth in Canada was 10% with total sales of 570 million.
AstraZeneca ranks number four in Canada with a 7% market share.
The product portfolio performed well.
Symbicort was successfully launched and is rapidly gaining market share.
Nexium showed strong performance since its 2001 launch and continued to build market share.
T wo product franchises Atacand and Seroquel performed very well over the previous year with increases of 47% and 58% respectively .
The Oncology group had another successful year with sales growth of 13% driven largely by Zoladex and Casodex.
AstraZeneca ranks number one in Canada in oncology with a 22% market share.
Europe
AstraZeneca is ranked third in the European pharmaceutical market with a market share of 5.3%.
Sales grew by 5% in 2002 to 5695 million despite patent expiries specifically Losec and Zestril in the UK and the
Market factors Market trends in Europe are increasingly challenging.
Government imposed price cuts impacted sales with Italy suffering a 5% price reduction on all products.
Generic substitution in Europe is being encouraged through legislation with compulsory generic substitution introduced in Sweden and Germany in 2002.
A further feature of the European market is the significant increase in the movement of products between countries usually from southern Europe where prices tend to be lower than northern Europe.
This particularly affected our performance in Germany and the UK where reported sales are based on invoiced sales by AstraZeneca in the country in question.
Product highlights Across Europe total sales of Nexium and Symbicort reached 630 million in 2002.
The Oncology portfolio has performed well ahead of expectations specifically driven by the growth products Casodex and Arimidex but also Zoladex.
Sales growth of 28% of these brands was achieved in 2002 along with improved market share.
Other growth products that performed well were Seroquel and Atacand achieving 67% and 32% sales growth respectively .
Market highlights Of the large markets France continued to perform well with 13% sales growth comparing favourably to market growth.
Nexium performed particularly well in its launch year achieving sales of 53 million in nine months and a 9% market share.
Symbicort achieved a 24% market share with sales of 67 million in 2002.
Sales growth in Italy of 16% outperformed total market growth.
AstraZeneca sales of Nexium were 61 million with total brand market share including licensees reaching 21% seven months after launch.
Symbicort achieved a 16% market share of the fixed combination market.
Other key contributors to the strong growth were Casodex 69% Arimidex 32% Seroquel 100% and Atacand 29%.
UK sales were down by 20% driven by the patent expiries for Losec and Zestril.
Nexium increased its market share to 6% achieving sales of 40 million in 2002.
Symbicort showed continued strong growth and achieved 14% of the fixed combination market with 23 million sales.
Strong performances were also seen for Casodex and Arimidex.
In Germany Nexium has already gained a 15% market share whilst Symbicort sales continued the strong positive trend seen in 2001 with year end market share of 34%.
Overall sales in Sweden achieved 3% growth in 2002.
Nexium continued to grow and achieved a market share of 16%.
Symbicort performed well and achieved a 48% market share of the fixed combination market. market.
In 2002 Rhinocort Aqua led the aqueous inhaled nasal steroid market in percentage total prescription volume growth and achieved sales of 172 million for the year.
The Symbicort phase 3 clinical trial programme was expanded with several new studies being started in preparation for the scheduled launch of the product in the US market in 2006.
Central Nervous System CNS Sales in CNS were driven primarily by the strong sales growth for Seroquel of 927 million 67%.
Completion of a major clinical trial programme for mania during 2002 is expected to lead to a submission for marketing approval for this new application in early 2003.
Zomig achieved total sales of 177 million in 2002 up 20% on 2001.
We are awaiting approval to market the nasal spray formulation in the US.
The nasal spray delivers a faster onset of action than Zomig in tablet form.
Pain Control Despite the introduction of generic competition Diprivan sales reversed their previous downward trend and in 2002 showed a 3% increase over 2001 levels with total sales of 216 million.
This was principally due to increased use in the intensive care sedation market.
Diprivan continues to be the market leader for injectable general anaesthetics.
Infection
Merrem sales increased by 9% in 2002 and was the driving force behind the increased used of carbapenems in serious infections.
T otal sales for the year were 59 million.
We are currently studying data from the recent trial of Merrem in the treatment of cystic fibrosis with a view to submitting an application for approval for this indication early in 2003.
T rials of Merrem in the treatment of skin and skin structure infections ventilator associated pneumonia and pancreatitis continued to enrol patients during 2002.
The trials are scheduled for completion in 2003 and 2004.
Cefotan a trade mark of Y amanouchi Pharmaceuticals
Ltd licensed to AstraZeneca achieved sales growth of 3% in its sixteenth year on the market with total sales of 54 million in 2002.
Sales and marketing Personal selling by sales representatives remains the single most effective marketing method in the industry .
We continued to improve the effectiveness of our sales force in the US as illustrated by an AstraZeneca sales representative winning the Pharmaceutical 20 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Geographic Review continued Latin America The economic turbulence across the Latin American markets had a mixed effect on AstraZeneca in 2002.
The greatest impact was in Argentina where AstraZeneca sales declined in line with the market decline.
Elsewhere in the region though sales in the key markets remained largely unaffected by economic and political pressures in Brazil growth was well ahead of the market.
Mexico and Venezuela provided exceptionally strong sales growth 25% and 86% respectively.
This was well ahead of market growth.
The Netherlands showed a decline of 29% entirely driven by patent expiries.
Nexium and Symbicort sales continued to increase achieving a market share of respectively 9% and 18%.
The rest of Europe achieved a strong performance broadly above expectations driven by the introduction of Nexium and Symbicort in most markets along with the strong contribution of the oncology portfolio.
Japan
AstraZeneca was the fastest growing major pharmaceutical company in Japan during 2002 with sales growth of 21% significantly exceeding the market.
AstraZeneca is the largest pharmaceutical company in terms of oncology sales and has continued to increase its overall marketing and sales capabilities and now has the second largest field force in
Iressa was launched in August achieving sales of 65 million in 2002.
Casodex sales also grew strongly by 41% and now has a 78% market share.
Losec was the fastest growing PPI in Japan in 2002 with sales growth of 40%.
Seroquel outlicensed to Fujisawa has also grown strongly by 50% and now has a 22% market share.
During 2002 in addition to the Iressa launch AstraZeneca launched Pulmicort Zoladex LA and Zomig Rapimelt and received approval to promote Arimidex adjuvant use and Losec for H. pylori eradication.
Asia Pacific Australia provided strong growth 16% ahead of the market.
A highlight was the successful launch of Nexium.
In December following an appeal by AstraZeneca the High Court of Australia overturned a previous decision by the Federal Court which declared the formulation patent for omeprazole the active substance used in Losec invalid.
The latest judgement restored the patents validity which will significantly reduce further threats of generic competition to Losec in Australia.
Strong growth also occurred in China and South Korea 13% in both cases providing a firm platform for future growth and expansion plans.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Research and Development RandD clinical medicine to the drug discovery process.
This provides better understanding of human diseases and how future drugs will work to prevent and treat those diseases.
We are also introducing more stringent safety and drug metabolismpharmacokinetic testing earlier .
This allows for early identification of CDs that are unlikely to succeed.
We have increased CD delivery by 20% in the last three years.
On average one quality CD now enters preclinical development each month.
During 2002 a further 11 CDs were selected and in addition six early development projects reached volunteer dosing.
In 2002 we introduced a global knowledge exchange project incorporating systems that maximise the benefits of using the latest communication and informatics technologies.
Our global Enabling Science and Technology activity continues to support all research areas worldwide with skills in compound management and natural product screening structural chemistry  bioimaging genetics transgenics protein science and supply and informatics.
We have also initiated a new global compound collection enhancement project.
Our advanced science and technology activity has introduced a variety of new enabling technologies for drugs search programmes.
We continued to invest in RandD facilities by upgrading or replacing older laboratories in Sweden the UK the US and India and by purchasing new technology and equipment to improve our capability in leading edge science.
Recruitment of highly skilled new staff continued alongside the ongoing training and development of existing employees where appropriate.
Development
Our Development organisation consists of people skilled in clinical research regulatory affairs and pharmaceutical development.
Maximum efficiencies are achieved from global working applied flexibly across the business subject to the provision of site specific needs or technologies.
Our focus in 2002 was to complete the development programmes and deliver the regulatory support which we require for the approval and launch of Faslodex Iressa Crestor and Exanta.
We also placed high priority on successful delivery of lifecycle programmes designed to optimise growth of our marketed range of products.
We continue to improve our productivity and speed of product development through initiatives designed to make maximum use of local expertise within our global organisation.
Specific ebased clinical and regulatory projects have been initiated to further speed our access to data worldwide and to improve regulatory file preparation and submission timelines.
Productivity gains have also been realised through a more strategic approach to purchasing and outsourcing arrangements across the whole drug development process.
Independent industry sources CMR International identify AstraZeneca as being among the fastest in drug development in the industry.
Collaborations
Over 300 new collaborations have been entered into in 2002 with leading academic centres and biotech companies to complement our inhouse RandD capabilities.
Our RandD is focused on improving productivity and efficiency of new drug delivery  increasing our output of quality CDs vigorously eliminating weaker products from early development and bringing better drugs to market faster .
We will continue to simplify our processes speed up our decision making and increase our focus on key projects.
In RandD we employ over 11000 people at nine major sites in five countries  the UK the US Sweden Canada and India.
Our 2002 RandD investment totalled 3069 million.
AstraZeneca RandD remains an integrated project driven organisation.
Our approach is therapy area led with scientific medical technical and ethical input and control being provided by large multiskilled Discovery and Development organisations.
This offers a number of significant advantages including sharing of best practice in terms of science and technology and efficient use of resources in a multisite global organisation.
During 2002 we looked closely at overall productivity and efficiency throughout our global organisation.
In Discovery  our aim is to increase the output of high quality candidate drugs CDs with a lower risk of failure in development.
In Development our aim is to develop better drugs faster .
We remain focused on meeting our principal RandD performance target of delivering new medically important and commercially successful products to the market every year .
Discovery
Our Discovery organisation consists of highly skilled employees working in each of our eight research areas.
The scientific groups are spread over a number of research sites worldwide but are organised so as to gain critical mass efficiencies and exchange of ideas and project opportunities.
Safety assessment and process RandD teams work across all areas starting in Discovery and following projects through Development and life cycle management.
T o increase the likelihood that CDs will progress through late stage development to market we are bringing new aspects of 22 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Development Pipeline Compound Mechanism Areas under investigation Estimated filing date MAA NDA
PC 1 2 3 Gastrointestinal GI
AZD0865 reversible acid pump inhibitor acid related GI disease 2005 2005 AZD3355 inhibitoroftransientloweroesophagealGERD 20052005 sphincter relaxations AZD9343 inhibitor of transient lower oesophageal GERD 2005 2005 sphincter relaxations Line extensions Nexium proton pump inhibitor NSAID GI side effects  symptom resolution 2Q 2003 2Q 2003 parenteral formulation 2Q 2003 2Q 2003 NSAID GI side effects  healing and prevention 1H 2004 1H 2004 extraoesophageal reflux disease 2005 2005 Cardiovascular CV
Crestor statin dyslipidaemia Filed Filed Crestor statin atheroma 2005 2005 Crestor statin outcomes 2005 2005 Exanta melagatran thrombin inhibitor sc prevention of VTE Filed  2005 Exanta H37695 thrombin inhibitor prevention of VTE Filed 4Q 2003 prevention of stroke in AF 4Q 2003 4Q 2003 treatment of VTE 4Q 2003 2005 arterialpost MI 2005 2005 Galida PPAR agonist diabetesmetabolic syndrome 2005 2005 AZD6140 ADP antagonist arterial thrombosis 2005 2005 AZD7009 atrial repolarisation delaying agent ARDA AF 2005 2005 AZD9684 CPU inhibitor thrombosis 2005 2005 AZD0837 thrombin inhibitor thrombosis 2005 2005 AZD7806 IBA T inhibitor dyslipidaemia 2005 2005 Line extensions Atacand angiotensin II antagonist hypertension outcomes SCOPE study Filed Under evaluation CHF outcomes CHARM study 4Q 2003 4Q 2003 diabetic retinopathy 2005 2005 ToprolXL beta blocker HCTZ combination 2005 submission for variation to existing label.
Oncology
NCEs
Faslodex oestrogen receptor antagonist 2nd line advanced breast cancer 1Q 2003 Launched 1st line advanced breast cancer 2005 2005 Iressa EGFRTK inhibitor NSCLC 1Q 2003 Filed ZD6474 angiogenesis inhibitor VEGFRTKI solid tumours 2005 2005 ZD4054 endothelin A receptor antagonist solid tumours 2005 2005 ZD6126 vascular targeting agent solid tumours 2005 2005 AZD2171 angiogenesis inhibitor VEGFRTKI solid tumours and haematological malignancies 2005 2005 AZD3409 farnesyltransferase inhibitor solid tumours 2005 2005 AZD0530 nonreceptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor solid tumours 2005 2005 AZD4440 vascular targeting agent solid tumours 2005 2005 AZD9935 angiogenesis inhibitor VEGFRTKI solid tumours 2005 2005 Line extensions Arimidex aromatase inhibitor adjuvant breast cancer Launched Launched Casodex antiandrogen early prostate cancer Launched Under evaluation Zoladex LHRH agonist premenopausal adjuvant breast cancer Launched Iressa EGFRTK inhibitor head and neck cancer 2005 2005 breast cancer 2005 2005 colorectal cancer 2005 2005 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Estimated filing date MAA NDA
PC 1 2 3 Compound Mechanism Areas under investigation Respiratory and Inflammation
AZD9056 ion channel blocker rheumatoid arthritis 2005 2005 AZD8309 chemokine receptor antagonist rheumatoid arthritis 2005 2005 AZD7140 chemokine receptor antagonist rheumatoid arthritis 2005 2005 AZD3342 protease inhibitor COPD 2005 2005 AZD0275 chemokine receptor antagonist COPD 2005 2005 AZD0902 ion channel blocker COPD 2005 2005 AZD8955 collagenase inhibitor osteoarthritis 2005 2005 First indication use in other diseases such as COPD under consideration.
Line extensions Symbicort inhaled steroidfast onset COPD Filed Turbuhaler longacting beta agonist single therapy for asthma 3Q 2003 Symbicort pMDI inhaled steroidfast onset asthma 4Q 2003 1H 2004 longacting beta agonist Oxis Turbuhaler fast onset longacting beta agonist COPD Approved Oxis pMDI fast onset longacting beta agonist asthma 3Q 2003 Central Nervous System CNS
Cerovive free radical trapping agent stroke 2005 2005 ZD0947 K channel opener overactive bladder 2005 2005 ARA2 5HT 1B antagonist anxietydepression 2005 2005 AZD1134 5HT 1B antagonist anxietydepression 2005 2005 AZD5106 NK2 antagonist overactive bladder 2005 2005 AZD4750 chemokine receptor antagonist multiple sclerosis 2005 2005 AZD0328 alpha7 nicotinic Alzheimers disease 2005 2005 receptor agonist Line extensions Seroquel D25HT2 antagonist granules 2005 2005 sustainedrelease Under Under evaluation evaluation mania 1Q 2003 Filed Zomig 5HT1B1D receptor antagonist nasal spray Launched Filed Pain Control
AZD3582 CINOD acutechronic nociceptive pain 2005 2005 AZD4282 NMDA antagonist neuropathic pain 2005 2005 AZD4717 CINOD acutechronic nociceptive pain 2005 2005 Line extensions Naropin sodium channel blocker spinal anaesthesia Filed
Line extensions Merrem carbapenem antibiotic skin and soft tissue infections 4Q 2003 ADP  adenoside diphosphate AF  atrial fibrillation CHF  congestive heart failure CINOD  Cox inhibiting nitric oxide donator COPD  chronic obstructive pulmonary disease CPU  carboxy peptidaseU EGFRTKI  epidermal growth factor receptortyrosine kinase inhibitor GERD  gastrooesophageal reflux disease HCTZ  hydrochlorothiazide IBAT  ilial bile acid transport potassium LHRH  luteinisinghormone releasing hormone MAA  marketing authorisation application Europe MI  myocardial infarction NCE  new chemical entity NDA  new drug application US NK2  neurokinin 2 antagonist NMDA  NmethylDaspartate NSAID  nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug NSCLC  nonsmall cell lung cancer PC  preclinical candidate drug accepted for development but not yet administered to man pMDI  pressurised metered dose inhaler PPAR  peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor sc  subcutaneous VEGFRTKI  vascular endothelial cell growth factor receptortyrosine kinase inhibitor VTE  venous thromboembolism 2005  not earlier than 2006 24 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Commercialisation and Portfolio Management Our products are marketed primarily to physicians both general and specialist as well as to other healthcare professionals.
Marketing efforts are also directed towards explaining the economic and therapeutic benefits of our products to governments and healthcare buying groups for example managed care organisations in the US trust hospitals and budgetholding medical groups in the UK and other organisations which pay for healthcare costs in various countries.
In the US we invest a significant amount of money in directtoconsumer advertising campaigns for certain of our products.
Our ebusiness strategy focuses on supporting product development and marketing increasing productivity and reducing costs.
We use ebusiness opportunities to strengthen our relationships with key stakeholders and to improve our overall speed and effectiveness.
Efficient pharmaceutical development requires transparent quality assured processes acceptable to regulatory authorities and increasingly relies on new technologies as well as strategic outsourcing.
We are making significant investments in these new approaches and use internet enabled processes and external partnerships to simplify the capture collation analysis and reporting of clinical trials data.
In 2002 we used internetenabled processes to capture data in clinical studies in many geographic regions including Europe Japan and the US.
In addition more than 50 studies are currently supported by internet tools such as document exchange sites and extranets.
Significant progress has been made in businesstobusiness activity including the licensing of an application which improves efficiencies with suppliers and which is expected to realise savings in the procurement area.
In 2002 we launched a customer internet portal in the US that enables our direct trade customers to place orders and obtain up to the minute information on billing and order status.
Emarketing has been integrated into our worldwide commercial operations to improve marketing effectiveness and offer new customer value.
In particular  we focus on providing a wide range of innovative internetbased physician resources in key therapy areas.
In the US AstraZeneca maximises opportunities for direct contact with the consumer by providing patientfocused websites as well as a range of other online promotions.
In Europe and Asia we have ebusiness programmes underway to improve interaction with healthcare providers and are developing internet strategies to support patients online needs.
Our products are in fierce competition with others in respect of clinical efficacy tolerability  price cost effectiveness and ease of use for patients.
The prescription pharmaceutical market is intensely competitive.
AstraZeneca s principal competitors are other international research based pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies which also sell branded patent protected prescription pharmaceuticals.
Following patent expiry  our products also compete with generic pharmaceuticals.
Competition with generic pharmaceuticals is principally on price since generic pharmaceutical companies typically incur only limited RandD costs compared to those of researchbased companies such as AstraZeneca.
Our ability to maintain and enhance our competitive position in our chosen therapy areas depends mainly on our development of new innovative costeffective products from our RandD and inlicensing activities the manufacture and supply of products to high quality standards and the effective marketing of products to our global customer groups.
We have one of the broadest portfolios in the industry today.
Maintaining the quality of this portfolio requires stringent prioritisation to maximise the value of high potential products and manage the progress of promising compounds in earlier development.
T o develop successful medicines we need to address unmet needs find novel solutions minimise the technical risk and maximise the commercial opportunity .
Product Strategy and Licensing PSandL working closely with RandD and major marketing companies leads the commercial aspects of drug development and coordinates global product marketing strategy .
This includes selecting the right products and projects for investments developing effective marketing platforms in time for new product launches and directing the creation and delivery of product marketing strategies that successfully align global and national plans.
Successful commercialisation of new products is dependent on satisfying the needs of our different customer groups with a product with the right profile.
T arget product profiles TPPs are clearly defined early in development and act as a focal point for RandD activity as well as planning by the sales and marketing organisations.
The TPPs describe the unmet needs of main patient and customer groups as well as how we should develop our project to meet these needs.
Among the factors considered in developing a TPP are product features and benefits medical and health outcomes information positioning pricing and the competitive environment.
In common with other leading pharmaceutical companies we seek to strengthen our portfolio where appropriate by licensing in attractive products or technologies from external sources.
With sales in over 100 countries we have an extensive high quality global sales and marketing network.
In the majority of key markets we sell through our whollyowned local marketing companies and in other countries through third party distributors or local representative offices.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Supply and Manufacturing Our strategy remains to operate a small number of sites for the manufacture of active ingredients supported by speciality chemical contractors operating mainly in Europe and
We have five active pharmaceutical ingredient sites in France Puerto Rico Sweden and the UK as well as a bulk drug purification plant in Germany .
Some 1500 people are employed in active pharmaceutical ingredient supply .
For certain key products there are a number of global formulation facilities.
In addition there are a small number of facilities that produce established products for regional or local markets as well as a small number of contractors supplying specialist formulations.
Our principal formulation sites for oral solid dosage forms such as tablets and capsules are in France Germany Puerto Rico Sweden the UK and the US.
There are also major formulation sites for the global supply of parenteral dosage forms and inhalation products in France Sweden and the UK.
Packaging is undertaken at a large number of locations both at AstraZeneca facilities and contractors facilities to support our local sales and marketing companies.
Some
12500 people are employed in formulation and packaging.
Our manufacturing asset base is routinely adjusted to ensure effective use is made of our production capacity and an appropriate balance achieved between high utilisation and sufficient additional production capacity to launch new products and grow existing products.
A number of older units were closed during the year with residual manufacture transferred to contractors.
The intention to sell a small manufacturing facility in Mexico was also announced.
We will continue to make further adjustments to our manufacturing base to ensure optimum utilisation of production capacity.
Continuing investment Investment for growth remains a core element of our supply strategy and in 2002 capital expenditure totalled 557 million.
New plant brought into operation included capacity for Casodex in Germany and Puerto Rico for Seroquel and Iressa in the UK for Pulmicort in the US and for Crestor in Puerto Rico and the UK.
Looking ahead plans are in place to expand our manufacturing capability in France Germany  Japan Puerto Rico Sweden the UK and the US to help to meet the growing demands of our product portfolio.
Regulatory environment Ensuring both patient safety and the efficacy of our medicines is a core priority .
Our supply and manufacturing organisation works diligently to exceed the expectations of all stakeholders as well as those of regulatory authorities.
The outcome from all inspections is rigorously reviewed and action taken to further enhance compliance.
Device presentations of inhalation products present manufacturing challenges and where appropriate like other manufacturers we keep these under review with relevant regulators.
During 2002 we did not experience any delays to approvals due to regulatory compliance issues at our manufacturing sites or those of our contractors.
There were several successful preapproval inspections by regulatory authorities during the year including those for Iressa and
All sites involved in the proposed manufacture of Crestor were approved in 2001.
SHE operating standards around the world continue to become more stringent with regulators placing emphasis on environmental standards.
Our manufacturing sites are operated under various sitelicensing regimes and during the year  we had three legal sanctions across our global operations which have been dealt with satisfactorily .
There are currently no environmental issues that constrain AstraZeneca from fully utilising any sites.
Our aim is continuous improvement learning from incidences of noncompliance to ensure that we meet both the regulatory requirements and current good practice standards.
Further information about our SHE performance can be found in the separate 2002 Corporate Responsibility Summary Report.
Raw materials AstraZeneca s global purchasing policies together with our business interruption risk management BIRM process are aimed at ensuring the supply of raw materials manufacturing equipment and other key supplies all of which are purchased from a range of suppliers.
The BIRM process systematically examines a range of risk scenarios to global supply  such as disasters that remove supply capability or the unavailability of key raw materials and ensures that these risks are mitigated by the implementation of contingency plans including the appointment of dual or multiple suppliers and maintenance of appropriate stock levels.
Although the price of raw materials may fluctuate from time to time our global purchasing policies seek to avoid such fluctuations becoming material to our business.
With 32 manufacturing sites in 20 countries and 15000 employees worldwide our Operations organisation aims to provide robust fast flexible and cost effective supply of AstraZenecas product range globally .
Fast effective supply The fast and effective introduction of new products is key to future business success and multiple launches around the world within short timeframes has become the accepted industry norm.
High initial demand followed by rapid growth in a variety of markets requires us to deliver a reliable flow of products to exacting quality standards and in a safe and environmentally sound manner .
All new product launches in 2002 were successful with product available to meet the required launch dates and the early product growth demand.
In preparation for these launches as well as readiness for Crestor and Exanta several new facilities were commissioned for active ingredient and formulated product manufacture and packaging in Puerto Rico Sweden and the UK.
Continued success also depends on unconstrained supply of our established products.
Some limited supply problems on certain products occurred during the year and were addressed.
A comprehensive programme was also put in place during 2002 to shorten production lead times and move manufacture from a make to stock bias to a demand pull approach.
Positive results have already been achieved with significant leadtime reductions on several key products supported where necessary by improved process reliability .
Crossfunctional team working and a strong focus on robust fast and responsive product supply has been key to achieving this improvement.
The programme is expected to deliver further improvements in the cost of manufacture of our products as well as significant working capital benefits through better utilisation and management of stock.
An efficient supply network 2002 saw the continued development of our supply network that consists of both our own manufacture and that of our contractors.
AstraZeneca s supply network is supported by global supply chain teams as well as purchasing engineering safety  health and environment SHE and quality and compliance functions.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Other Businesses Marlow Foods Marlow Foods is a leading company in the fast growing healthy eating sector of the food market.
Marlow Foods has established this position through the Quorn brand.
Quorn foods use mycoprotein an innovative protein provided by fermentation.
Quorn is the leading meat alternative brand in the UK with a 17% market share TN
Quorn foods are currently sold in six other European countries and now the US following market entry in January 2002.
Sales of the business increased by 8% in 2002 and Marlow Foods made positive profit and cash contributions.
AstraZeneca owns and operates numerous production marketing and RandD facilities worldwide.
Our corporate headquarters are in London UK and our RandD headquarters are in Sdertlje Sweden.
Out of a total 32 manufacturing sites in 20 countries our principal manufacturing facilities are in the UK Avlon and Macclesfield Sweden Snckviken and Grtuna Sdertlje the US Newark Delaware and Westborough Massachusetts Australia North Ryde New South Wales France Dunkirk Monts and Reims Germany Plankstadt Italy Caponago Japan Maihara and Puerto Rico Canovanas Carolina and Guayama.
Bulk drug production is concentrated in the UK Sweden France and Puerto Rico.
Our principal RandD facilities are in the UK Alderley Park and Charnwood Sweden Lund MIndal and Sdertlje the US Boston Massachusetts and Wilmington Delaware Canada Montreal Qubec and India Bangalore.
Other RandD activity is carried out at Macclesfield and Avlon in the UK and Reims in France.
Substantially all of our properties are held freehold free of material encumbrances and we believe such properties are adequate for their purposes and suitably utilised.
Astra T ech Astra T ech is engaged in the RandD manufacture and marketing of medical devices and implants for use in healthcare primarily in urology but also in odontology diagnostic radiology and surgery .
Astra T ech has a leading position in the Nordic countries and is expanding its operations in Europe and other key markets.
All products showed good sales growth in particular the Dental Implant System which is gaining market share in several key markets.
Further investments have been made in RandD clinical research and new production facilities to strengthen the product portfolio and in the US in sales and marketing capabilities.
Salick Health Care Salick Health Care SHC is a leading provider of outpatient oncology management and consulting services in the US.
Ownership of SHC provides AstraZeneca with a unique window on the provider sector of the US oncology market and access to many leading oncologists.
SHC manages fullservice outpatient comprehensive cancer centres in affiliation with major teaching and community hospitals in California Florida and New Y ork and is affiliated with a large network of over 100 physicians working in specialised areas such as medical radiation and surgical oncology .
In 2002 SHC performed well in its cancer centre management business with positive profit and cash contributions and is pursuing growth of its recently launched consultancy business which provides hospitals with assessments of cancer care programmes and their financial feasibility .
Additionally  SHC has continued its development of an innovative clinical research network to improve patient care and cancer treatment.
Main Facilities AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Intellectual Property Our products are subject to numerous regulations concerning their safety and efficacy .
In many cases governments also fix their price andor restrict access to reimbursement.
The degree and scope of regulation varies according to the product and countries concerned.
Regulations governing prescription pharmaceuticals are stringent and the manufacture and marketing of these products are normally conditional upon regulatory approval.
Registration processes are complex and timeconsuming and involve significant expenditure.
Regulation is concerned not only with a products chemical composition but also with matters such as manufacturing handling packaging labelling distribution promotion and marketing.
AstraZeneca routinely participates in various industry associations and other bodies which among other things seek to ensure that those implementing legislation and regulation affecting pharmaceutical companies are fully informed as to its impact.
Product regulation Before a pharmaceutical product is approved for marketing it must undergo exhaustive and lengthy clinical trials.
The process of developing a new pharmaceutical product from discovery to launch in the market can take up to 12 years but this period varies considerably in different cases and countries.
The time taken from submission of an application for marketing approval to launch of the product is typically one to two years.
After a product has been approved and launched it is a condition of the product licence that all aspects relating to its safety efficacy and quality must be kept under review.
Depending on the country fines and other penalties may be imposed for failure to adhere to the conditions of product licences.
In extreme cases the product licence may be revoked resulting in withdrawal of the product from sale.
Our promotional and marketing activities are also tightly controlled by regulations and self regulating codes of ethical marketing practices.
During the marketing of a product strict procedures must be in place to monitor evaluate and report any potential adverse reactions.
Where adverse reactions occur or it is judged that they may occur  changes may be required to prescribing advice and to the product licences.
In extreme cases the product licence may be revoked resulting in withdrawal of the product from sale.
Manufacturing plants and processes are subject to periodic external inspection by regulators as part of their monitoring procedures to ensure that manufacturers are complying with prescribed standards of operation.
Price regulation Prescription medicines are subject to government controls on price and reimbursement which operate in most countries in which we sell our products.
This can result in large price differentials between markets which may be further aggravated by currency fluctuations.
US
Currently  there is no direct government control of prices for nongovernment drug sales in the US.
Federal legislation mandates minimum discounts to US government agencies purchasing drugs for senior citizens the poor and other populations with special needs.
Providing these substantial discounts to the US government is also a condition for the manufacturers drugs to be reimbursed by state Medicaid programmes and an additional rebate is required if manufacturer price increases after 1990 exceed the increase in inflation.
In addition certain states have taken action to require further manufacturer rebates on Medicaid drug utilisation and for other state pharmaceutical assistance programmes.
In 2000 President Clinton signed the Medicines Equity and Drug Safety Act.
However  the legislation was not implemented due to concerns over safety and costeffectiveness.
Nevertheless the US Congress is likely to revisit this legislation.
The law would allow for the reimportation into the US of pharmaceutical products produced in the US and exported to countries where governmental price controls result in lower prices than in the US.
If introduced such a law could have an adverse impact on our revenues.
Several bills have been introduced in Congress that could provide limited financial help to the elderly for prescription drugs.
These various bills would likely result in lower prices for pharmaceutical products and may or may not be offset by increased demand.
During 2002 AstraZeneca invested 3069 million in global healthcare RandD activities.
Obtaining adequate protection for the intellectual property associated with these activities continues to be a key business imperative.
The range of protection includes patents trade marks design registrations copyrights and internet domain name registrations.
Our policy is to seek patent or other appropriate intellectual property protection for all of the inventions and innovations of significant commercial value which arise from our drug discovery  development manufacturing marketing and other business activities.
This policy is designed to provide each of our new products with an effective portfolio of valid enforceable patent and other intellectual property rights in all significant markets to protect unauthorised competition during commercialisation.
This shield of intellectual property rights extends to those areas of target identification genomics and other research technologies in which we invest significant resources.
The adequacy of the patent trade mark and domain name portfolio for individual products is kept under review during product development clinical evaluation and marketing so that wherever possible additional protection may be sought for new applications and other developments.
The therapy area focus of our RandD operating model allows appropriate intellectual property strategies to be formulated and regularly updated from an early stage in product development.
We vigorously defend our intellectual property rights including taking appropriate infringement action in various courts throughout the world.
Industry Regulation 28 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review Industry Regulation continued Product regulation Astra T ech Product registration and certified quality management systems form the basis of the regulatory environment relating to medical devices.
In Europe compliance with regulatory requirements involves the implementation and maintenance of a quality management system and for certain products a design dossier review.
Medical devices in the US are regulated through a product registration requirement.
Astra T ech continues to maintain a European and US compliant quality management system.
Product regulation Salick Health Care
The healthcare facilities to which SHC provides administrative and management services on behalf of certain hospitals are subject to extensive US federal state and local legislation and regulations such as those relating to the reimbursement and control of healthcare costs.
The largest single component of SHC revenue continues to be fees that are affected by the reimbursement rates for healthcare services which are set or regulated by federal or state authorities.
Product regulation Marlow Foods National legislation governs the safety of food products and the nutritional content of foods and their ingredients.
Generally  the responsibility for achieving the required standards and for the processes adopted in so doing resides with the manufacturer .
The regulatory agencies audit compliance by way of process audits and product analysis.
Europe
Most governments in Europe control the price and reimbursement of medicines after taking into account the medical financial and social impact of a product.
This budgetbased approach reflects increasing constraints in overall healthcare spending.
Governments increasingly require more assurance of value in their expenditures on medicines.
In several European countries the pricing and reimbursement systems are being evaluated with the aim of controlling and limiting drug budgets.
This is an ongoing process that puts a downward pressure on pricing and reimbursement of medicines in Europe.
Japan
There is formal central government control of prices in Japan.
New product prices are determined primarily by comparison with existing product classes.
All existing products are subject to a price review based on the market price at least every two years.
In addition products without patent protection are forced to further reduce prices by 46%.
Regulations introduced in 2000 included an overseas price referencing system under which prices can be adjusted according to the average price of four major countries the US the UK Germany and France.
Generally  if the US pricing environment remains unchanged these regulations are likely to have a positive impact on pharmaceutical prices in Japan.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Operational Review With a global workforce of over 58000 people our employees have always represented a significant part of our corporate responsibility.
We are committed to ensuring their health safety and wellbeing within a culture of equal opportunity in which people feel valued supported and rewarded for their individual contribution to AstraZeneca s success.
Communication with and feedback from our employees is very important to us and opportunities for feedback are integrated into all our communication programmes.
We also use a twoyearly global employee survey to identify areas of both satisfaction and concern.
The first of these in 2000 indicated the progress AstraZeneca had made in its first year people were proud to be associated with the Company and were clear about and committed to our objectives.
The survey also highlighted some challenges including managing heavy workloads and maintaining the right balance between work and home life.
The results of our second survey in 2002 indicated major improvements overall comparing favourably with external global benchmarks and including good progress in previous areas of concern.
Improvement is a continuous process and the 2002 survey highlighted other areas for attention such as opportunities for improving the speed of decisionmaking and cross company collaboration.
Recommendations on how improvements can be made are being developed across the Company .
Implementation in specific areas is the responsibility of the relevant functional and territorial management.
Wherever AstraZeneca is located worldwide we aim to be responsible members of our local communities through charitable donations sponsorships and other initiatives that help to make a positive difference. shared internally to promote good practice.
During 2002 we issued a new community support policy to provide global guidelines for local management.
In particular  we focus on bringing benefit in ways that are consistent with our business of improving health and quality of life and on promoting the value of science among young people.
The policy also encompasses reporting of local initiatives through a central database developed and launched during 2002 to address the need for improved data collection and information sharing.
In 2002 our community support totalled 316 million 303 million of which covered product donations at average wholesale price.
We also made good progress during the year in further developing our CR framework in other areas including the publication of supporting policies and principles such as our Bioethics Policy  reflecting our commitment to high ethical standards in our RandD processes and our Purchasing Principles designed to encourage and support our suppliers in embracing similar CR standards to our own.
Measuring our performance is essential to our understanding of the progress we are making and for identifying potential areas for improvement.
Whilst we have long standing measurement processes in place for monitoring our economic environmental safety and health performance we recognise the need to broaden our approach in other areas of social performance.
T o that end we have been reviewing our dataprocessing systems to ensure that where possible further social responsibility performance indicators are included.
We are also working to include more CR issues in our annual compliance report by senior management to the AstraZeneca Board the letter of assurance and in our internal audit processes.
An essential part of our corporate responsibility is to continue to operate to high standards of corporate governance.
This has been reinforced by recent high profile incidences of financial irregularities which have resulted in heightened public attention on areas such as financial reporting accounting procedures and directors remuneration.
The recent US SarbanesOxley legislation and other similar initiatives being introduced in response to these events are requiring changes to corporate governance processes in a number of areas that will further reinforce good practice.
In addition to the processes for employees for expressing concerns outlined in our Code of Conduct during 2002 the AstraZeneca Board nominated Sir Peter Bonfield as the senior NonExecutive Director contact for investors wishing to raise highlevel concerns to ensure clear lines of communication on any potential corporate governance issues.
Further information about corporate governance is provided in the Directors Report on pages 44 to 48.
More information about our 2002 CR performance is provided in the separate 2002 Corporate Responsibility Summary Report and on our website.
We believe good CR performance depends on achieving an appropriate balance between the economic environmental and social priorities of sustainable development.
AstraZeneca s business is focused on delivering shareholder value by maintaining a flow of new medicines that benefit society through improved healthcare.
We recognise that to be able to achieve this in the longer term we must continue to be welcomed as a valued member of society .
Good management of our wider responsibilities as a global business is key to our continued success.
This is not a new concept for AstraZeneca we have always worked to high ethical standards.
Our CR programme is an evolution of that commitment building on our existing policies and best practice to provide a global platform for ensuring appropriate and consistent behaviour worldwide.
In 2002 we published our CR Policy  followed by CR Management Standards and advice for implementation.
One of the priorities for 2003 is to continue to communicate these widely within the Company to ensure the integration of CR into all of our activities worldwide.
The medicines that we discover improve patients health and quality of life.
They also relieve pressure on healthcare systems by reducing incidence of disease or the time needed for treatment.
In addition they help to improve productivity by reducing the time taken off work through illness.
Our
Managing AstraZeneca s environmental impact continues to be a priority and our attention is focused in particular on areas where we believe our global business has the greatest potential impact including climate change arising from energy use and use of propellants in some of our inhalation products and ozonedepletion through use of CFC propellants.
We have effective management processes and systems in place to support achievement of the targets we set ourselves in these areas and ensure continuous improvement.
Corporate Responsibility CR 30 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
Financial Review
Introduction
The purpose of the Financial Review is to provide understanding and analysis of our results for the year 2002 and of the progress made since 2001.
It also provides details of material changes in financial performance between 2001 and 2000.
The Financial Review describes Business events influencing 2002 page 30 Results of operations 20002002 in tabular form pages 30 and 31 Results of operations  analysis of year to 31 December 2002 page 31 Financial position page 34 Liquidity and capital resources 2000 2002 page 34 Financial policies page 34 Critical accounting policies and estimates page 37 Off balance sheet transactions contingent liabilities and commitments page 38 New accounting standards page 39 International accounting page 40.
Additionally  in accordance with US requirements Results of operations  analysis of year to 31 December 2001 page 40 US GAAP information 20002002 page 42.
Business events influencing 2002 The business background is described in the Operational Review sections to this report.
The following comments highlight how these and other factors affect our financial performance.
Our operations are focused on prescription pharmaceuticals and more than 97% of our sales are made in that sector .
Sales of pharmaceutical products tend to be relatively insensitive to general economic circumstances in the short term.
They are more directly influenced by medical needs and are generally financed by health insurance schemes or national healthcare budgets.
However  we are exposed to currency fluctuations which can significantly affect our results.
We report our activities in US dollars as this is our single largest currency and best reflects our currency exposure.
The fluctuation of currencies against the US dollar consequently causes variation in our financial results principally because a substantial part of our income is denominated in US dollars whereas a large part of our cost base is in sterling and Swedish kronor .
During
2002 there was a significant weakening of the US dollar  particularly as compared with the euro Swedish kronor and sterling.
Although this has had the effect of increasing the dollar value of our European sales compared with 2001 it means our UK and Swedish costs have also increased correspondingly.
Our approach to managing currency exposures is described below in the Financial Policies section.
The net impact of currency fluctuations on profit compared with 2001 was slightly negative.
In addition to fluctuating exchange rates our operating results in the short term can be affected by a number of factors other than normal competition Risk of loss or expiration of patents and the potential adverse effect on sales volumes and prices from generic competition The costs associated with new product launches the timings of those launches and the risk that such new products do not succeed as anticipated and The adverse impact on pharmaceutical prices as a result of the regulatory environment.
Although there is no direct governmental control on prices in the US pressures from individual state programmes and health insurance bodies are leading to downward forces on realised prices.
In other parts of the world there are a variety of price and volume control mechanisms and retrospective rebates based on sales levels which are imposed by governments.
Over the longer term the success of our research and development is crucial.
In common with other pharmaceutical companies we devote substantial resources to RandD the benefit of which emerges over the long term and carries considerable uncertainty as to whether it will generate future products.
In 2002 the business events which had most significance for our financial results are described briefly in the following paragraphs.
The key business priority is the transformation of our product portfolio whereby existing growth products and the late stage product pipeline replace the loss of sales from products facing generic competition.
In the US which is our largest market accounting for 52% of sales Faslodex was launched in April 2002 whilst Nexium Seroquel and ToprolXL sales continued to grow strongly .
We had planned to launch Crestor and Iressa in the second half of the year but as described elsewhere in this report FDA approval of these products is now expected in 2003.
Our US product portfolio faces generic competition on three products  Zestril in 2002 Nolvadex in 2003 and Prilosec.
The
Prilosec situation is described in detail on page 31 and we have had generic omeprazole competition from December 2002 although this had no impact on AstraZeneca salestel reclassified reclassified m m m Continuing operations 17841 16222 15583 Agrochemicals discontinued   2299 17841 16222 17882 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
Prilosec sales declined 21% as a result of patients switching to Nexium during the year and competition from other products.
Zestril sales have fallen sharply since the lisinopril patent expired in June 2002.
The patent for Nolvadex expired in August 2002 but the FDA granted a further six months exclusivity following work on the paediatric indication of McCuneAlbright syndrome.
Although exclusivity will last until February 2003 sales of Nolvadex and tamoxifen have started to decline partly through the success of Arimidex and are expected to fall sharply after February 2003.
In Europe Nexium and Symbicort launches continued and both products are now marketed in most countries.
Patents covering Losec and Zestril expired in the UK and the Netherlands during 2002.
In Japan the launch of Iressa generated significant sales in the second half of 2002.
European markets generate 32% of our total sales and Japan 5%.
Investment has continued in RandD and in selling and marketing activities.
In both areas prioritisation of resources across the portfolio is actively managed to avoid committing resources before opportunities are clear .
RandD spend was particularly focused on completing the development programmes for Crestor Iressa and Exanta.
Selling and marketing resources were prioritised to recently launched and growth products such as Nexium Symbicort and Seroquel.
As discussed in further detail in the results of operations of the year to 31 December 2002 we have taken a 350 million exceptional charge in respect of the US Department of Justice investigation into the sales and marketing of Zoladex in the US.
As part of AstraZeneca s objective to align with accounting best practice cash discounts arising from prompt payment of invoices have been reclassified from cost of sales to sales.
Comparatives have also been reclassified for consistency of presentation.
Both sales and cost of sales have been reduced by 287 million in the current year 2001 258 million 2000 221 million.
The change has minimal impact on previously stated sales growth rates.
Furthermore neither profits nor net assets have been affected.
Results of operations The tables on this and the previous page show our sales and operating profit before exceptional items.
Y ear to 31 December 2002 Growth rates described in this section exclude the effects of exchange rate movements unless noted otherwise.
This is consistent with our internal management reporting and we believe it provides a better understanding of underlying trends than using actual growth.
Our sales increased by 9% from 16222 million in 2001 to 17841 million in 2002.
Operating profit before exceptional items rose by 5%.
The weaker US dollar increased our reported sales growth by 1% whilst there was no significant currency effect on operating profit growth.
Earnings per share before exceptional items grew by 7% from 1.73 to Earnings per share after exceptional items decreased from 1.65 to 1.64.
Our sales growth for the year was impacted significantly by the decline in our LosecPrilosec sales which fell by 18%.
If this effect is excluded the sales growth is 23% strong evidence of the positive underlying momentum of our business.
This growth was fuelled by a trebling of Nexium sales strong performances from the CNS up 53% Respiratory up 16% and the Oncology up 12% product ranges.
Generic competition for Zestril resulted in a sales growth for Cardiovascular products of just 1%.
The successful launches of Faslodex in the US Iressa in Japan and Symbicort outside the US combined with Nexium sales generated nearly 2.4 billion in sales in 2002 up from 651 million in 2001.
Five other growth products we highlight in our portfolio Casodex Arimidex Atacand Seroquel and Zomig  grew by another 900 million to just over 3 billion in aggregate.
T ogether they comprise a solid foundation upon which to build our future performance.
2003 should see the final elements of our portfolio transformation fall into place.
We believe we are well positioned to absorb the full year effects of generic competition for Prilosec Nolvadex and Zestril.
Following the planned launches of Crestor and Exanta all the elements will be in place to drive sales and earnings growth in 2004 and beyond.
Gastrointestinal
Gastrointestinal sales grew by 7% to 6664 million.
The strong growth of Nexium more than offset declines in LosecPrilosec.
Nexium sales were 1978 million for the year  including 453 million from markets outside the US.
There were a further 38 launches in 2002 bringing the total to 76 countries.
The global PPI market continues to grow strongly around 20% per annum.
Nexium share of the PPI market across major markets was 16% in October 2002.
In the US Nexium share of total prescriptions for PPI products reached 20.5% in December .
LosecPrilosec sales were down by 18% for the year .
The 21% decline in the US was broadly in line with the prescription trend.
Sales performance outside the US down 12% was aided by strong growth in Japan up 40% from 69 million to 92 million and Australia up 25% from 72 million to 95 million.
A generic omeprazole product became available in the US market on 8 December .
In the week ending 17 January 2003 Prilosec brand share of total omeprazole prescriptions was 47% a rate that is consistent with reports of constrained supply of generic product.
AstraZeneca operating profit before exceptional itemstel m m m Continuing operations 4356 4156 3984 Agrochemicals discontinued   346 4356 4156 4330 32 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
Financial Review continued
Cardiovascular
Cardiovascular sales grew by 1% to 3569 million.
Zestril sales have fallen by 18% from 1067 million to 877 million as a result of the introduction of generic competition in the US where revenues dropped by 24% to 467 million.
Sales of Atacand products grew by 36% on a global basis in 2002 to 569 million with sales in the US increasing by 37% to 206 million.
Prescriptions continue to grow strongly for SelokenToprolXL in the US generating sales of 617 million up 43%.
Worldwide sales grew by 27% from 711 million to 901 million.
Plendil sales rose by 5% to 489 million  as in 2001 growth in the US up 6% to 209 million was offset by lower growth in the rest of the world.
Respiratory and Inflammation Respiratory sales increased by 16% to 1818 million.
Symbicort sales for the year were 299 million up around 250%.
The product has now been launched in more than 40 countries.
Value share of the fixed combination asthma products across Europe was over 22% in November 2002 with notably higher shares achieved in Sweden 48% and Germany 30%.
The regulatory submission for COPD treatment is being reviewed in the European Union.
Pulmicort T urbuhaler sales globally reflect the declining inhaled bronchial steroid market in the face of growing acceptance of combination products.
This was more than offset by the strong growth of Pulmicort Respules in the US up 75% enabling Pulmicort to achieve a 5% global sales increase for the full year to 812 million.
Rhinocort sales in the US increased by 19% for the year to 211 million fuelled chiefly by share gains for Rhinocort Aqua in the aqueous intranasal steroid market of more than three percentage points  Rhinocort Aqua revenues grew by 39%.
Sales were flat in the rest of the world resulting in a global 13% increase in Rhinocort franchise sales to 299 million in 2002.
Oncology
Oncology sales grew by 12% to 2369 million.
Arimidex has enhanced its position as the leading product in the aromatase inhibitor market for breast cancer treatment.
Market share has grown as the positive results of the ATAC trial in early breast cancer have been incorporated into product labels and are being adopted in clinical practice.
Monthly prescriptions in the US have doubled since December 2001 driving the 127% increase in US sales for the year to 134 million.
Sales outside the US increased by 51% to give total global sales growth of 75% to 331 million.
Sales of Casodex outside of the US increased by 42% to 464 million in 2002 as the use of Casodex 150 mg tablets in the treatment of early prostate cancer has now been approved in 41 countries.
However  in December 2002 the Oncology Drugs Advisory Committee to the US FDA did not recommend approval of this indication in the
Even without the benefit of this new indication prescriptions for Casodex grew by some 5% in the US market last year .
The reported sales decline in the US of 23% to 180 million is therefore not indicative of underlying demand but rather an adverse comparison against wholesaler stockbuilding which occurred at the end of 2001.
US revenues for Nolvadex in the year were 337 million down 27% as sales of our tamoxifen products fell as a result of the expiry of our distribution agreement with Barr
Furthermore a sharp decline in sales in the US is expected Key products sales by therapeutic area 2002 and 2001 Gastrointestinal 7 6190 6664 18 5578 4623 568 1978
Nexium % of AstraZeneca total sales continuing operations %CER growth Cardiovascular 1 3483 3569 18 1067 877
SelokenToprolXL
Plendil
Atacand
7 404 370 Tenormin 2 Oncology 12 2111 2369
Casodex
Arimidex
21 618 480 Nolvadex 3 Central Nervous System 53 980 1505 67 685 1145
Zomig
Pain Control Infection and Other Pharma 5 1496 1418
Merrem
Others
Local anaesthetics Other Pharma Products Respiratory 16 1539 1818
Rhinocort
Accolate
Oxis
83 299 Symbicort 2 as recently launched growth rates not meaningful AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
2003.
Sales of Faslodex in the treatment of advanced breast cancer reached 35 million after eight months in the US market.
European submission for second line treatment of advanced breast cancer is planned for the first quarter of 2003.
Sales of Iressa for the treatment of inoperable or recurrent nonsmall cell lung cancer reached 65 million out of global sales of 67 million in just over four months on the market in Japan indicating a high level of acceptance in this area of great unmet medical need notwithstanding strict precautions introduced locally.
In the US the FDA has indicated that it will require an additional three months to May 2003 to complete its review of the pending
A regulatory submission in Europe is planned for the first quarter of 2003.
Central Nervous System CNS sales increased by 53% to 1505 million.
Seroquel sales reached the 1 billion annualised sales megabrand milestone in 2002.
Sales grew strongly in the US up 67% and in the rest of the world also up 67% to 1145 million.
Market share of new prescriptions in the US market was 19.2% in December  up 3.7 percentage points in the year  annual sales totalled 927 million.
Seroquel value share of the market in Japan is now 25% in just over one year on the market.
An sNDA submission in the US for use of Seroquel in the treatment of acute mania associated with bipolar disorder manic depressive illness was announced on 2 January 2003.
A filing in Europe is planned for the first quarter of 2003.
Zomig sales for the full year grew by 19% to 328 million with the bulk of the increase arising in Japan up 67% to 14 million France up 29% to 60 million as well as from the US up 20% to 177 million.
Rapimelt tablets and nasal spray formulations have been valuable additions to the product range in countries where they have been introduced.
Zomig sales in the fourth quarter in the US appear to reflect some wholesaler stockbuilding.
Zomig prescriptions in the US increased by 11% for the year  in line with the triptan market overall.
Pain Control Infection and Other Pharma Pain Control Infection and Other Pharma sales fell by 5% to 1418 million.
Sales of Merrem grew by 26% for the full year to 285 million chiefly on the 31% increase on sales outside the US.
In the US sales grew by 9% to 59 million.
The small sales increase for Diprivan in the US up 3% to 216 million was the result of growth in the underlying demand for propofol offsetting small market share losses to generic products.
This rise did not compensate for declines elsewhere and global sales fell by 3% to 443 million.
Other pharmaceutical products fell by 31% from 379 million to 258 million mainly as a result of the disposal of the Sular product range at the beginning of the year .
Others
Salick Health Care and Astra T ech achieved sales growth of 20% and 14% in the year to 233 million and 151 million respectively .
Marlow Foods sales increased by 8% to 114 million the business saw its first sales in the US generating 3 million.
Geographic analysis In the US sales increased by 10% for the full year .
Excluding Prilosec sales growth was 33% with excellent performances in Nexium Seroquel ToprolXL Pulmicort Respules and
Strong sales performance in France up 13% to 1140 million and Italy up 16% to 765 million more than offset declining sales in Germany and the UK resulting in a 5% increase in Europe for the full year .
Sales growth was driven by Nexium Symbicort Casodex and Seroquel.
A strongly performing product range in Oncology including the excellent uptake for Iressa and continued strong growth in Losec up 40% fuelled the 21% sales growth in Japan for the full year .
Sales reached 977 million in 2002 up from 851 million in 2001.
Research and development Our RandD costs rose in 2002 from 2687 million before exceptional items to 3069 million.
Part of this 14% increase can be attributed to exchange fluctuations 4%.
Operating margin and retained profit Operating profit before exceptional items increased by 5% to 4356 million.
Operating
Currency impacts reduced margin by 0.3% whilst the other 0.9% reduction was largely due to lower other operating income.
Elsewhere improved product mix and lower Merck payments reduced cost of sales by 0.6 percentage points to 25.3 percentage points of sales whilst SGandA growth was broadly inline with sales growth.
RandD increased by 0.6% to 17.2% of sales principally due to the growth in clinical trial costs.
In aggregate RandD and SGandA grew by around 10% at constant exchange rates.
Other operating income fell from 368 million to 243 million reflecting both lower royalty income and product disposal gains.
As previously disclosed the US Department of Justice has been conducting a civil and criminal investigation into the sale and marketing of Zoladex goserelin acetate implant.
This investigation was prompted by the filing of a qui tam complaint by a private party in 1997 and involves allegations of improper submissions of claims to the Medicare and Medicaid programmes.
The
Company and federal and state authorities are in the process of negotiating a potential settlement of the civil and criminal claims at issue in the investigation.
As a result although no final agreement has been concluded we believe it appropriate to accrue 350 million to cover estimated settlement costs as an exceptional item.
Interest and dividend income was 31 million 2001 113 million for the full year and includes the effects of some small exchange and revaluation losses.
Excluding exceptional items the effective tax rate for the full year 2002 was 26.8% compared with 28.4% for 2001.
The 2001 tax rate has been restated under FRS19.
No tax relief has been provided on the exceptional item charge in 2002.
We paid a first interim dividend for 2002 on 7 October 2002 of 0.23 per Ordinary
A second interim dividend for 2002 of 0.47 per Ordinary Share has been declared which the Annual General Meeting will be asked to confirm as the final dividend.
This together with the first interim dividend makes a total of 0.70 for the year in line with the Group s dividend policy .
The policy in the absence of unforeseen circumstances anticipates that dividends will be maintained at 0.70 until earnings cover dividends by between two and three times thereafter dividends are intended to be grown in line with earnings.
In 2002 we repurchased 28.4 million Ordinary Shares nominal value 0.25 each for cancellation at a total cost of 1190 million.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
Financial Review continued
Financial position The net book value of our assets increased from 9629 million at 31 December 2001 to 11226 million at 31 December 2002.
The increase was driven by the net profit for the year of 2836 million and consolidation translation gains of 1110 million offset by repurchases of shares and the 2002 dividends amounting to 1190 million and 1206 million respectively .
T angible fixed assets Our tangible fixed assets amounted to 6597 million at the year end 2001 5409 million.
This includes 1298 million of construction in progress 2001 1119 million the major elements of which are new manufacturing capability in Puerto Rico and Sweden research facilities in the UK and administrative and other facilities in the US.
Goodwill and intangible fixed assets As discussed in critical accounting policies a substantial element 1237 million of our goodwill and intangible assets balance of 2807 million arose as a result of the set up in 1994 and subsequent restructuring in 1998 of the Astra Merck joint venture.
A further 742 million relates to the Advanced Payment in relation to the Merck arrangements discussed below.
We also own the marketing rights to Losec and Plendil in Italy and Spain acquired from Schering Plough in 1999 amounting to 297 million.
Stocks
Our stock value has risen from last year to 2593 million 2001 2402 million.
Most of this increase can be attributed to an increase in levels of stock of products in prelaunch and early marketing phases as well as currency fluctuations.
Debtors and creditors The increase in debtors and creditors reflects year end timings of settlement of trade creditors and increased trading activity in the year together with exchange effects.
Net funds We have significant net funds which have grown due to a cash inflow for the year to 3844 million from 2867 million.
The net funds are summarised in the note below.
Within loans the 6.3% guarantee notes amounting to 284 million are due for repayment in 2003.
Liquidity and capital resources All data in this section is on an actual basis unless noted otherwise.
Cash flow Before exceptional cash expenditure we generated 5686 million cash inflow from operations in 2002 significantly higher than the corresponding figure of 4130 million in 2001.
Higher profits before depreciation and amortisation contributed 300 million and there were significant working capital inflows particularly from stocks and creditors. arises from the timing of payments to Merck.
Expenditure on exceptional items was 275 million lower than in 2001 as the integration and synergy programmes reach their conclusion.
T ax cash outflows at 795 million were marginally higher than 2001 whilst cash inflows from interest fell to 35 million as a result of lower returns.
We applied the remaining cash in continuing our share repurchase programme up 110 million from 2001 to 1190 million continued investment in fixed assets broadly similar to 2001 at 1608 million and dividends 1234 million.
As a result our net cash inflow before nonequity financing was 902 million compared to an outflow in 2001 of 691 million.
Undrawn committed and uncommitted bank facilities at 31 December 2002 totalled 0.5 billion with maturities ranging from one to two years.
Our working capital is sufficient for our present requirements and includes sufficient cash for our capital programme share repurchases and any costs of launching new products.
Future operating cash flows may be affected by a number of factors as outlined in the business background section on page 30.
Capitalisation
The share repurchase programme has been extended and will continue as an integral part of the Company s financial management until the end of 2003 at a total cost of 4 billion.
We repurchased 28.4 million shares in 2002 for 1190 million bringing the total number of shares repurchased since the start of the repurchase programme in 1999 to 65.6 million at a cumulative cost of 2805 million.
The number of shares in issue at year end was 1719 million.
Our reserves were increased by 1110 million due to the effect of exchange rate movements on translation of nondollar denominated assets and liabilities.
Shareholders funds increased by a net 1586 million to 11172 million at year end.
Investments divestments and capital expenditure There were no significant acquisitions or disposals in 2002.
Our cash expenditure in 2002 on fixed assets including intangible assets goodwill and fixed asset investments totalled 1543 million net of disposals of 65 million.
This expenditure was broadly similar to the last two years and includes the elements discussed above together with a further instalment to purchase marketing rights of 146 million.
The capital expenditures are financed from internally generated funds.
Financial policies
Our risk management processes are described in the Directors Report on page 46.
An outcome of these processes is that they enable us to identify risks which can be partly or entirely mitigated through use of insurance or which we can selfinsure.
We negotiate best possible premium rates with insurance providers on the basis of our extensive risk management procedures.
In the current insurance market level of cover is decreasing whilst premium rates are increasing.
Rather than simply paying higher premiums for lower cover we focus our insurance resources on the most critical areas or where there is a legal requirement and where we can get best AstraZeneca net funds 2002 2001 m m Short term investments 3962 3118 Cash net of overdrafts and short term borrowings 524 491 Loans 642 742 Total 3844 2867 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
Risks which we give particular attention to include product liability business interruption directors and officers liability  and property damage.
Treasury
Our financial policies covering the management of cash borrowings and foreign exchange are deliberately conservative and intended to support our objective of building shareholder value by managing and controlling our financial risks.
Our treasury operations are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures approved by the Board.
The T reasury activities are managed centrally from London and over 90% of our cash and short term investments are managed directly from London.
With only limited and specifically approved exceptions all currency and interest rate hedging is conducted from
Operating units benefit from local currency billing which has the effect of consolidating their foreign exchange exposures back into central T reasury .
Foreign exchange The US dollar is the most significant currency for us.
As a consequence we have chosen to report our results in US dollars and manage our exposures against US dollars accordingly .
Approximately half of our sales in 2002 were denominated in currencies other than the US dollar  while a significant proportion of our manufacturing and RandD costs are denominated in sterling and Swedish kronor .
As a result our operating profit in US dollars can be affected by movements in exchange rates.
Currency exposure is managed centrally using 12 month currency cash flow forecasts for Swedish kronor  sterling euro Japanese yen Australian dollar and Canadian dollar and monthly updated working capital forecasts for the major currencies reported by subsidiaries.
We use derivative financial instruments principally currency options and forward foreign exchange contracts to hedge our currency exposure.
It is our policy not to engage in any speculative transactions nor to actively hedge through the financial markets currency translation exposures arising from the consolidation of our nonUS dollar subsidiaries.
Key controls applied to transactions in derivative financial instruments are to use only instruments where good market liquidity exists to revalue all financial instruments daily using current market rates and to sell options only to offset previously purchased options.
The transaction exposures that arise from nonlocal currency intercompany sales and transactions with third parties of our subsidiaries are fully hedged using forward foreign exchange contracts and purchased currency options.
Longer term forecast cash flow currency exposure is managed by forecasting cash flows by major currency for the next 12 months on a monthly rolling basis.
The policy is to limit the potential downside by hedging 50% subject to variation within authorised limits using a mixture of purchased currency options and forward exchange contracts.
In 2002 the US dollar depreciated against all major currencies.
It is estimated that the effect of currency movements was to increase our continuing business sales by approximately 111 million and reduce our operating profit by 25 million net of hedging benefits.
Interest rate risk The management of our liquid assets and loans are coordinated and controlled centrally by our treasury operations.
We have significant positive cash flows and the liquidity of major subsidiaries is coordinated in cash pools and concentrated daily in London.
Interest rate risk is managed according to a benchmark reflecting 90 days duration of net liquid funds.
Our liquid funds are primarily invested in US dollars.
Our debt has an average maturity of 10 years and the majority is denominated in US dollars.
A large portion has been swapped from fixed rate into floating rate debt thereby reducing our exposure to downside interest rate movements.
Credit exposure Our exposure to financial counterparty credit risk is controlled by our treasury team centrally by establishing and monitoring counterparty limits.
Our funds are invested almost entirely with counterparties whose credit rating is A or better .
T rade debtor exposures are managed locally in the operating units where they arise.
We are exposed to customers ranging from large private wholesalers to Governmentbacked agencies and the underlying local economic and sovereign risks vary throughout the world.
Where appropriate we endeavour to minimise risks by the use of trade finance instruments such as letters of credit and insurance.
Funding risk We have significant net funds to finance ongoing working capital requirements for our operations.
In addition we also have guaranteed credit facilities in the amount of 75 million and retain a commercial paper programme should the need arise for significant additional funding.
Sensitivity analysis The sensitivity analysis set out in this Financial Review on page 36 summarises the sensitivity of the market value of our financial instruments to hypothetical changes in market rates and prices.
Changes to the value of the financial instruments are normally offset by our underlying assets and liabilities.
The range of variables chosen for the sensitivity analysis reflects our view of changes which are reasonably possible over a one year period.
Market values are the present value of future cash flows based on market rates and prices at the valuation date.
Market values for interest rate risk are calculated using third party systems which model the present value of the instruments based on the market conditions at the valuation date.
For long term debt a favourable change in market value results in a decline in the absolute value of debt.
For other financial instruments a favourable change in market value results in an increase in the absolute value.
The sensitivity analysis on page 36 assumes an instantaneous 100 basis point change in interest rates in all currencies from their levels at 31 December 2002 with all other variables held constant.
Based on the composition of our long term debt portfolio as at 31 December 2002 which is predominantly floating rate a 1% increase in interest rates would result in an additional 4.5 million in interest being incurred per year .
The exchange rate sensitivity analysis on page 36 assumes an instantaneous 10% change in foreign currency exchange rates from their levels at 31 December 2002 with all other variables held constant.
The 10% case assumes a 10% strengthening of the US dollar against all other currencies and the 10% case assumes a 10% weakening of the US dollar .
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
Financial Review continued
Sensitivity analysis  31 December 2001 Market value change favourableunfavourable Market value Interest rate Exchange rate 31 December 2001 movement movement 1 % 1 % 10 % 10 % m m m m m Cash and short term investments 3897 4 4 13 13 Long term debt 805 20 24 10 10 Interest and currency swaps 70 Foreign exchange forwards 10  10 11 Foreign exchange options 81  9 108 Sensitivity analysis  31 December 2002 Market value change favourableunfavourable Market value Interest rate Exchange rate 31 December 2002 movement movement 1 % 1 % 10 % 10 % m m m m m Cash and short term investments 4793 7 7 29 29 Long term debt 733 26 32 3 3 Interest and currency swaps 82 Foreign exchange forwards 9  3 3 Foreign exchange options 97  10 150
As at end and for the year ended 31 Decembertel restated restated Return on shareholders equity % 27.3 30.6 23.2 Equityassets ratio % 51.8 51.8 49.8 Net fundsequity ratio % 34.4 29.9 38.4 Number of employees 58700 54600 52300 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
Critical accounting policies and estimates Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United Kingdom UK GAAP and the accounting policies employed are set out under the heading Financial Statements  Accounting Policies on pages 63 and 64 of the Company s Annual Report and Form 20F .
In applying these policies we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities the actual outcome could differ from those estimates.
Some of these policies require a high level of judgement either because the areas are especially subjective or due to their complexity .
We believe that the most critical accounting policies and significant areas of judgement and estimation are in revenue recognition research and development goodwill and intangible assets post retirement benefits share option compensation and provisions for contingent liabilities.
Revenue recognition.
Revenue represents sales of products net of estimated rebates to external third parties and excludes intercompany income and value added taxes.
We also receive income from royalties and from sales of intellectual property  brands and product lines which are included in other operating income.
Sales of products to third parties Sales revenue is recorded as turnover in our financial statements and valued at the invoiced amount excluding sales and value added taxes less estimated provisions for product returns and rebates given to managed care and other customers  a particular feature in the US.
Cash discounts for prompt payment are also deducted from sales.
Revenue is recognised when title passes to the customer which is usually either on shipment or on receipt of goods by the wholesaler depending on local trading terms.
Industry practice in the US allows wholesalers and pharmacies to return unused inventories within six months of shelflife expiry .
At point of sale management estimate the quantity and value of goods which may ultimately be returned.
Our returns provisions are based on actual experience over the preceding 12 months although in certain situations for example a new product launch or at patent expiry  further judgement may be required.
With
Prilosec facing generic competition at the end of 2002 we have given particular attention to the possible level of returns.
Overall we believe that our estimates are reasonable.
Similarly  at the time of invoicing sales rebates which could be paid out over the following six to nine months are estimated.
These rebates typically arise from sales contracts with managed care organisations and hospitals and from Medicaid best price contracts.
The estimates are made on a customer by customer basis taking into account specific contract provisions and are reviewed each month.
Management believes that it has been reasonable in its estimate for future rebates using similar methodology to that of 2001.
Inevitably
Experience has shown these estimates to be substantially accurate.
A further feature of the US market is that sales can also be significantly influenced by wholesaler buying patterns.
Wholesalers often place orders which are significantly larger than their normal levels of demand ahead of anticipated price increases or they may seek to build up or run down their inventory levels for other reasons.
If such speculative orders are shipped shortly before a quarter or year end it can result in revenue being recorded in the current financial period in respect of the following year s underlying demand and distortion of the financial results from one period to the next.
Management tracks wholesaler inventory levels by product using its own and third party estimates and where we believe such distortions occur  we disclose in the financial review for each product where shipments may be out of line with underlying prescription trends.
The
Company does not offer any incentives to encourage wholesaler speculative buying and attempts where possible to restrict shipments to underlying demand when such speculation occurs.
We offer cash discounts on prompt settlement of invoices and once again this is a particular feature in the US although it is seen elsewhere.
As noted above we deduct cash discounts from revenue.
Royalty income Royalty income is recorded under Other Operating Income in the financial statements.
Royalties tend to be linked to levels of sales or production by a third party .
At the time of preparing the financial statements we may have to estimate the third party s sales or production when arriving at the royalty income to be included in the accounts.
These estimates which may differ from actual sales do not result in a material impact on reported other operating income.
Sales of intangible assets intellectual property  brands goodwill etc A consequence of charging all research and development expenditure to the profit and loss account in the year that it is incurred which is normal practice in the pharmaceutical industry is that we own valuable assets intellectual property brands etc which are not recorded on the balance sheet.
We also own acquired intangible assets which may be included on the balance sheet see Research and development below.
As a consequence of its regular reviews of product strategy from time to time the Company sells such assets and generates income.
In a simple situation the recognition of income may be easily defined but often the transfer of title can require ongoing commitment by us for example ongoing manufacturing arrangements technology transfer transfer of product licences etc.
In these circumstances the recognition of revenue may be spread over the period of our ongoing commitment.
Profits or losses from the sale of product related intangible assets are classified in Other Operating Income and are stated after taking account of product disposal costs the valuation of which includes a degree of judgement.
Research and development.
Our business is underpinned by our marketed products and development portfolio the research and development expenditure to generate these products is charged to the profit and loss account in the year that it is incurred.
This policy is in line with practice adopted by all major pharmaceutical companies.
Purchase of intellectual property  product rights etc to supplement the Groups RandD portfolio can lead to differing accounting treatment depending on managements assessment of the nature of the acquisition 38 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
Financial Review continued
For example payments in respect of rights to a compound in early stage development would normally be expensed immediately against income on the basis that at this point the probability of the compound successfully reaching the market place is still low.
Payments in respect of rights to a compound in late stages of development however  or to one already being marketed would probably be capitalised as an intangible asset see Goodwill and intangible assets below as the prospect of success is much greater .
There have been no material capitalisation of or charges for such items during 2002.
Goodwill and intangible assets.
We have significant investments in goodwill and intangible assets as a result of acquisitions of businesses and purchases of such assets as product development and marketing rights.
Under UK GAAP these are amortised over their estimated useful lives.
Changes in these lives would result in different effects on the profit and loss account.
We estimate that a one year reduction in the estimated useful lives of goodwill and intangible assets would increase the annual amortisation charge by 23 million.
A substantial part of our investments in intangible assets and goodwill relate to the restructuring of the AstraMerck joint venture in 1998 and we are satisfied that the carrying value is fully justified by future earnings.
Goodwill and intangible assets are reviewed for impairment where there are indications that their carrying values may not be recoverable and any impairments are charged to the profit and loss account.
T ests for impairment are based on discounted cash flow projections which require management to estimate both future cash flows and an appropriate riskadjusted discount rate.
Such estimates are inherently subjective.
No impairments to goodwill or intangibles 2001 nil 2000 24 million were identified in 2002.
Under UK GAAP  the merger of Astra and Zeneca in 1999 was recorded as a merger of equals pooling of interests.
Under US GAAP  the merger has been accounted for as the acquisition of Astra by Zeneca as discussed in more detail on page 42.
Contingent liabilities.
In the normal course of business contingent liabilities may arise from environmental liabilities connected with our current or former sites from product specific and general legal proceedings or from guarantees.
Where we believe that potential liabilities have a low probability of crystallising or are very difficult to quantify reliably we treat these as contingent liabilities.
These are not provided for but are disclosed in the notes.
Further details of these are set out in Note 34 on page 101.
Although there can be no assurance regarding the outcome of these proceedings we do not expect them to have a materially adverse effect on our financial position or profitability .
We also have significant commitments which are not currently recognised in the balance sheet arising from our relationship with Merck.
These are described more fully in Off balance sheet transactions contingent liabilities and commitments.
Postretirement benefits.
We account for the pension costs relating to the UK retirement plans under SSAP 24 and under local accounting practices for non UKsubsidiaries due to the cost and difficulty of obtaining SSAP 24 information for nonUK schemes.
In all cases the pension costs are assessed in accordance with the advice of independent qualified actuaries but require the exercise of significant judgement in relation to assumptions for future salary and pension increases long term price inflation and investment returns.
SSAP 24 permits flexibility in the actual assumptions and bases to be used and the application of different assumptions could have a significant effect on the amounts reflected in the financial statements.
Management considers that the assumptions and bases detailed in Note 32 are appropriate for the business.
The offbalance sheet aspects of post retirement benefits are discussed on page 39.
On pages 94 to 96 we also provide additional disclosures in accordance with FRS17.
Had
FRS17 been applied the additional charge to profit and loss would have been about 30 million.
Share option compensation.
Through the remuneration committee we offer share options to certain employees as part of their compensation and benefits packages designed to improve alignment of the interests of employees with shareholders.
Details of these are given in Note 33.
It is likely that at some point international UK and US accounting standards will require share option grants to be valued and charged against income.
At present US GAAP requires some share option costs to be charged to the profit and loss account and stipulates disclosure of the cost should all eligible options be expensed as set out on page Using the BlackScholes model as a valuation basis which is appropriate for traded options but less so for more restrictive employee grants we estimate an additional charge of approximately 122 million would arise.
This would result in a charge to profit and loss but would have no impact on our net assets or on our current or future cash flows.
Offbalance sheet transactions contingent liabilities and commitments Details of our contingent liabilities and commitments are set out in Note 34 to the Financial Statements.
We have no off balance sheet entities and our hedging activities are non speculative.
Arrangements with Merck
In 1998 Astra and Merck and Co Inc restructured their joint venture the restructuring which had been established some years earlier for the purpose of selling and marketing certain Astra products in the United States.
Under the restructuring a US limited partnership in which Merck is the limited partner and we are the general partner was set up.
The restructuring agreement provided for certain termination clauses and provisions for amending these clauses on the occurrence of certain defined events including a merger by Astra.
Under the terms of the 1998 restructuring the merger between Astra and Zeneca in 1999 triggered two onetime payments from us to an Advance Payment of 967 million.
This Advance Payment was calculated as the then net present value of 2.8 billion discounted from 2008 to the date of payment of a rate of 13% per annum and causes Merck to relinquish any rights to future Astra products with no existing or pending US patents at the time of the merger.
We make ongoing payments to Merck based on sales of certain of our products in the US the contingent payments on the agreement products as well as certain other partnership returns the latter of which are not material to the Group.
As a result of the 1999 merger  these contingent payments excluding those in respect of Prilosec and AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
Nexium are subject to defined annual minimum amounts between 2002 and 2007 ranging from 125 million to 225 million.
Our payments have exceeded the minimum level in 2002 and we have no reason to believe that the annual payments in the future will fall below the minimum obligations.
Merck also performs certain manufacturing stages for certain agreement products.
The terms of the 1998 restructuring provide for the following events Partial Redemption First Option Second Option These are described in more detail below.
Partial Redemption In 2008 there will be a partial redemption of Merck s limited partnership interest  which will end Merck s rights to contingent payments in respect of certain agreement products  by distribution to Merck of an amount calculated as a multiple of the previous three years contingent payments on the relevant products plus 750 million.
First Option In 2008 a calculation will be made of the Appraised Value being the net present value of the future contingent payments in respect of all other agreement products not covered by the Partial Redemption other than Prilosec and Nexium.
Payment of this amount to Merck in 2008 is however contingent on Merck s exercise of the First
Exercise of the First Option will require us to repurchase Merck s interest in these products.
Should Merck not exercise this option in 2008 we may exercise it in 2010 for a sum equal to the 2008 Appraised Value.
If neither Merck nor we exercise the option the contingent payment arrangements in respect of these agreement products will continue and the Appraised Value will not be paid.
In addition in 2008 there will be a true up of the Advance Payment.
The calculation of this will be based on a multiple of the previous three years contingent payments in respect of all the agreement products with the exception of Prilosec and Nexium plus other defined amounts which are then reduced by the Appraised Value whether paid or not the Partial Redemption and the Advance Payment.
This could result in a further payment by us to Merck or a payment by Merck to us.
The precise amount of settlements with Merck under the Partial Redemption and the First Option cannot be determined at this time as some of the payments are based on calculations based on trading performance between 2005 and 2007 and another is contingent upon Merck exercising the First
However  if Merck does exercise this option the combined effect will involve a minimum amount payable to Merck in 2008 of approximately 4.7 billion.
If we exercise this option in 2010 the combined effect will involve a minimum aggregate amount payable to Merck in 2008 and 2010 of approximately 4.7 billion.
Finally  in 2008 Merck will repay to us a loan in the amount of 1.4 billion made at the time of the restructuring.
Second Option A Second Option exists whereby we have the option to repurchase Merck s interests in Prilosec and Nexium in the US.
This option is exercisable by us two years after the exercise of the First Option in either 2008 or 2010.
Exercise of the Second Option by us at a later date is also provided for in 2017 or if combined annual sales of the two products fall below a minimum amount provided in each case only so long as the First Option has been exercised.
The exercise price for the Second Option is the fair value of these product rights as determined at the time of exercise.
If the Second Option is exercised Merck will have no further rights to contingent payments from us.
Accounting treatment Under current UK and US generally accepted accounting principles we believe that the payments described under the three headings above are likely to constitute purchase consideration in respect of future trading rights and accordingly  would be capitalised within the goodwill and intangible assets category and amortised as appropriate.
Postretirement benefits We offer postretirement benefit plans which cover many of our employees around the world.
In keeping with local terms and conditions most of these plans are defined contribution in nature where the resulting profit and loss account charge is fixed at a set level or is a set percentage of employees pay .
However  several plans mainly in the UK which has by far the largest single scheme the US and Sweden are defined benefit plans where benefits are based on employees length of service and final pensionable pay .
The UK and US schemes were closed to new entrants in 2000.
All new employees in these countries are offered defined contribution schemes.
Under FRS17 the disclosures on page 95 highlight a deficit of 637 million after deferred tax for all Group postretirement defined benefit schemes.
FRS17 prescribes detailed rules for the calculation of scheme assets and liabilities and indicates the net accounting surplus or deficit that would exist if the schemes were wound up at the balance sheet date.
Fluctuations in investment conditions andor FRS17 prescribed assumptions can result in significant volatility in the surplus or deficit.
Pension and other postretirement schemes however  are managed over the long term.
Investment and liability decisions are based on underlying actuarial and economic circumstance with the intention of ensuring that the schemes have sufficient assets to meet liabilities as they fall due rather than meeting accounting requirements.
This actuarial approach tends to produce less volatility than is likely under FRS17.
The UK pension plan is the largest single scheme in the Group.
At the last actuarial valuation at 31 March 2002 the market value of the fund s assets represented 90.1% of its liabilities as valued on the actuarys funding basis.
The trustee manages both investments and liabilities closely .
In particular  over the last 12 months it has increased the weighting of the bond portfolio that now represents 62.4% of the asset portfolio compared with 58.2% a year ago.
As a result the sterling value of the asset portfolio decreased by only 2.8% during 2002 significantly better than the UK or global equity markets.
The Company has indicated its intention to target a solvency ratio of 91% following the 2003 actuarial valuation and to restore full solvency over a period of around 15 years.
New accounting standards New UK or US applicable accounting standards which have been issued both adopted and not yet adopted are discussed on pages 62 and 115 respectively .
We implemented FRS19  Deferred T ax in full in 2002 and have complied with the disclosure requirements of FRS17  Retirement Benefits details are set out on page 62 and Note 32 respectively .
The effects of the impact of SFAS No 144  Accounting for the Impairment of Disposal of LongLived Assets 40 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
Financial Review continued
Key products sales by therapeutic area 2001 and 2000 Gastrointestinal 2 6214 6190 7 6152 5578
Nexium % of AstraZeneca total sales continuing operations %CER growth Cardiovascular 6 3431 3483 6 1163 1067
SelokenToprolXL
Tenormin
Plendil
Atacand
Oncology 16 1902 2111
Nolvadex
Casodex
Arimidex
Central Nervous System 49 669 980
Zomig
Pain Control Infection and Other Pharma  1610 1496
Merrem
Others
19 383 434 Local anaesthetics 3 21 555 379 Other Pharma products 2 Respiratory 17 1361 1539
Rhinocort
Accolate
Bricanyl
Oxis
Symbicort 1 was not to be material.
The adoption of SFAS No 141  Business Combinations and SFAS No 142  Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets resulted in an increase in US net income of about 755 million and no impact on US shareholders funds as a result of impairment.
The effects of the impact of SFAS No 143  Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations SFAS No 146  Accounting for Costs Associated with Exit or Disposal Activities and SFAS No 148  Accounting for Stock Based compensation are not expected to be material.
International accounting Under current European proposals we will be required to adopt International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs and International Accounting Standards IASs in the preparation of our financial statements from 2005 onwards.
The transitional arrangements for implementation of IFRSs and IASs have not been finalised by the regulatory bodies.
However  in our opinion the net profit and shareholders funds in accordance with current international standards are not significantly different from those presented under UK GAAP .
The following information is provided in accordance with US requirements.
Y ear to 31 December 2001 Growth rates described in this section exclude the effects of exchange rate movements unless noted otherwise.
Comparisons with the previous year are in terms of our continuing operations.
In 2001 sales increased by 8% to 16222 million from 15583 million in 2000.
Operating
The strength of the US dollar reduced reported sales and profits by 4% and 2% respectively .
Earnings per share before exceptional items grew by 11% to 1.73.
Excluding the Gastrointestinal area sales growth for 2001 was 12% based on strong results from the Respiratory up 17% Oncology up 16% and CNS up 49% areas.
Gastrointestinal sales were up 2% in the year  with Losec sales outside of the US growing by 4%.
In the US LosecPrilosec sales decreased by 13% offset by strong Nexium performance leaving Gastrointestinal sales 2% lower than 2000.
Gastrointestinal
Gastrointestinal sales grew by 2% to 6190 million.
Nexium sales in the US totalled 446 million and in December 2001 accounted for a 16.3% share of new prescriptions in the US PPI market after only nine months.
In the rest of the world sales were 122 million  by the end of the year Nexium had been launched in 38 countries.
Losec sales fell by 7% to 5578 million.
The US decline of 13% was caused largely by reduced stocks of the product being held by wholesalers but also by the switch of prescriptions to Nexium.
This was offset in part by an overall 4% sales increase elsewhere.
Cardiovascular
Cardiovascular sales grew by 6% to 3483 million.
Although the underlying prescription demand for Zestril in the US increased uneven phasing of wholesaler shipments as well as higher rebates contributed to a worldwide reduction in sales of 6% to 1067 million.
Prescription increases for SelokenToprolXL in the US aided by the new indication led to a 47% increase in sales value contributing to the 28% worldwide growth to 711 million.
Atacand continued to perform well across all major markets with sales in the US and in the rest of the world growing by 29% and 58% respectively  to a total of 410 million.
Plendil worldwide sales increased by 2% to 463 million growth in the US of 6% was offset by declines in Europe and the rest of the world of 2% and 4% respectively .
Respiratory and Inflammation Respiratory and Inflammation sales grew by AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
17% to 1539 million.
Total Pulmicort sales were 766 million an increase of 13% driven by US growth of 81%.
Rhinocort Aqua increased its share of the US aqueous intranasal steroid segment of the rhinitis market contributing towards the growth of Rhinocort worldwide of 25% to 265 million.
Symbicort was launched in the major markets in Europe and 23 countries in total.
Rapid market penetration was achieved in many of these markets in a matter of weeks after launch.
Oncology
Oncology sales grew by 16% to 2111 million.
Casodex is the world s leading antiandrogen for the treatment of prostate cancer .
Strong growth was reported in all major markets with sales increasing to 561 million worldwide.
Arimidex remains the leading product in the aromatase inhibitor market.
Sales in the US were up 11% and grew by 33% in the rest of the world to reach 188 million worldwide.
Nolvadex sales increased by 12% to 618 million driven by strong growth in the US where sales reached 462 million up 18%.
Central Nervous System CNS sales rose by 49% to 980 million.
In 2001 sales of Seroquel in the US were up 51% to 555 million in line with a strong growth in prescriptions.
With the successful launch in Japan and continued growth in Europe sales outside the US grew to 130 million.
Sales of Zomig increased by 20% to 273 million.
The August 2001 launch in Japan and good growth in Europe were the key contributors.
In the US the Zomig share of new prescriptions increased above 15%.
Pain Control and Infection Merrem enjoyed good growth in Europe where sales were up 21% and continued market share gains in the US led to strong growth for the year .
Diprivan sales reduced by 5% in the US a trend reflected elsewhere except for Japan where sales increased by 21% to 51 million.
Worldwide sales reduced by 4% to 456 million.
Others
Salick Health Care sales grew by 10% to 194 million Astra T ech sales rose by 19% to 126 million driven by growth in Europe the major market for the business.
Marlow Foods saw a strong performance with sales growing by 22% to 103 million.
Geographic analysis Sales growth in the US was led by the successful launch of Nexium which generated 446 million in just nine months on the market.
Excluding sales of LosecPrilosec sales growth was 28% for the full year  with strong performances from Seroquel ToprolXL and Faslodex.
Double digit growth in France and Italy contributed to good performance in Europe.
This performance was offset by declines in Sweden and the UK.
Product highlights in the region included the launches of Nexium and Symbicort as well as good growth from Atacand Casodex and Seroquel.
Strong growth in Losec up 85% and Casodex up 56% and the launches of Seroquel Arimidex and Zomig led to excellent results in Japan.
Research and development Our RandD expenditure totalled 2687 million for 2001 an increase of 67 million from 2000.
The level of the cost was reduced due to the effect of lower sterling and kronor exchange rates and the synergy and integration activities which realised cost benefits of approximately 180 million for the year .
Investment in facilities continued particularly in Boston US and Bangalore
Operating margin and retained profit Our operating profit before exceptional items grew by 6% to 4156 million.
In 2001 currency reduced our operating profits by 2%.
The adverse effect of the euro was partially offset by a favourable impact from our sterling and kronor cost base.
The operating margin for the year was 25.6% 0.3 percentage points higher than 2000.
Excluding the effect of the reclassification of 120 million of distribution costs cost of sales as a percentage of sales was broadly similar to 2000.
Our RandD costs for the year was 16.6% of sales broadly unchanged from 2000.
Increases in RandD expenditure to support the megabrand launches were offset by currency benefits particularly from the Swedish sites.
We recorded increased selling costs as a result of the new product launches and field force expansion particularly in the US whilst general and administrative costs continued to be tightly controlled.
Other operating income which included gains from product rationalisation increased to 368 million for the full year 2.3% of sales.
During 2001 the merger related synergy and integration programme initiated in 1999 was completed resulting in an exceptional charge of 202 million.
An exceptional profit of 10 million on sale of fixed assets was recorded in the year .
Our 50% interest in the seeds company Advanta BV resulted in sales attributed to us of 183 million.
In 2001 we settled the dispute with our joint venture partner Koninklijke VanderHave Groep BV over certain aspects of the shareholders agreement.
We recorded net interest and dividend income of 113 million compared with 138 million in 2000.
Falling rates had an adverse effect on the interest income.
The taxation charge for continuing operations before exceptional items was 1214 million representing an effective rate of 28% 2000 35%.
The total tax charge including exceptional item effects and discontinued operations was 1160 million compared to 1425 million in 2000.
Synergy and integration programme Following completion of the merger in 1999 we established integration task forces to consolidate the operations of the newly merged Group remove duplicate activities throughout the organisation and rationalise the number of facilities around the world.
The costs of the synergy and integration programme were incurred fully by the end of 2001 at a total cost of 1388 million.
Cash flow In 2001 we generated cash from operating activities before exceptional items amounting to 4130 million compared to 4992 million in 2000.
The reduction is almost entirely attributable to the effects of the demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals and oneoff accelerated creditor settlement.
After the 2000 final dividend and 2001 first interim dividend 1236 million capital expenditure and financial investment of 1543 million exceptional item costs of 368 million tax payments of 792 million and share issues and repurchases of 994 million our net cash outflow before nonequity financing was 691 million.
This compares to an equivalent inflow in 2000 of 1314 million augmented by 909 million of net cash repayment from Syngenta AG on the demerger of the Zeneca Agrochemicals business.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
Financial Review continued
Investments divestments and capital expenditure There were no significant acquisitions or disposals in 2001.
In 2001 cash expenditure on fixed assets amounted to 1385 million.
Major projects included a new business centre in the US manufacturing facilities for new products in the UK Puerto Rico and Sweden together with ongoing research and development facility costs.
This compared with a net cash outflow in 2000 of 1426 million again focused on manufacturing facilities including resource in France and research premises in the UK and the US.
Our capital expenditures are financed from internally generated funds.
US GAAP Our Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with UK GAAP which differs in certain significant respects from US GAAP .
In particular  under US GAAP  the AstraZeneca merger has been accounted for as a purchase accounting acquisition of Astra AB Astra by Zeneca Group PLC Zeneca.
Although there are several differences between our net income and assets under UK and US GAAP  the difference in accounting for the merger with Astra represents substantially all of the adjustments.
Results of continuing operations US GAAP The table below shows the trend of sales under US GAAP for our continuing operations.
2002 compared with 2001 The US GAAP treatment of the merger under purchase accounting gave rise to additional goodwill and intangible assets with net book values at 31 December 2002 of 12692 million and of 7479 million respectively .
Following the adoption of SFAS No.
142 we are no longer amortising the group goodwill element but are performing annual impairment tests on all our US GAAP goodwill balances.
These tests show that our US GAAP goodwill balances are not impaired.
Sales from continuing operations rose from 16222 million in 2001 to 17841 million in 2002.
The principal drivers of this growth were improved performances from Nexium Symbicort and Seroquel offset by falls in Zestril and Losec.
Net income under US GAAP has increased from 1397 million to 2279 million.
These increases are as a result of both higher sales and the cessation of amortisation of goodwill.
We estimate that the latter has improved profit by 755 million.
Further details of the impact of the differences between UK GAAP and US GAAP are set out in the Additional Information for US Investors on pages 113 to 122.
2001 compared with 2000 Sales from continuing operations US GAAP grew by 639 million from 15583 million in 2000 to 16222 million in 2001.
Organic
In Europe sales grew to 5238 million and in the US to 8483 million again driven by established products and Nexium.
Operating income for the year was 2286 million compared with 1693 million in 2000.
Both years were impacted by amortisation charges arising from the acquisition of Astra total goodwill amortisation amounting to 728 million in 2001 ceased with effect from 1 January 2002 as described below.
Taxation
Total taxation amounted to 1035 million an effective rate of 31% compared with 44.8% in 2001.
The cessation of amortisation of goodwill which did not attract tax relief was the major factor in the rate improvement.
T axation on continuing operations in 2001 amounted to a charge of 1109 million compared to a charge of 969 million in 2000.
Discontinued operations The 2000 net income from discontinued operations includes the results of Zeneca Agrochemicals up until its demerger on 13 November 2000.
Cash flow In 2002 operating activities produced cash inflows of 4833 million after tax outflows of 795 million and interest inflows of 46 million.
There was a cash outflow in respect of investing activities of 2349 million reflecting further investment in short term investments and fixed deposits.
Financing cash outflows absorbed 2506 million through the share repurchase programme 1190 million and equity dividends 1234 million.
In 2001 operating activities generated net cash of 3126 million after exceptional cash outflows of 368 million.
There was a cash outflow in respect of investing activities of 1327 million comprising mainly of capital expenditure of 1582 million.
Financing cash outflows totalled 2195 million the principal payments being in respect of the share repurchase programme 1080 million and equity dividends 1236 million.
Net cash of 3554 million was generated by operating activities in 2000 after exceptional cash outflows of 809 million.
There was a cash outflow in respect of investing activities Sales of continuing operations in each geographic area in which customers are located US GAAPtel reclassified reclassified m m m Continental Europe 5072 4479 4359 The Americas 10287 9353 8799 Asia Africa and Australasia 1859 1631 1638 Total 17841 16222 15583 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Financial Review
909 million in connection with the demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals.
Financing cash outflows totalled 1620 million the principal elements being the share repurchase programme of 353 million and dividend payments of 1220 million.
Net assets Net assets at 31 December 2002 in accordance with US GAAP  are significantly higher than those under UK GAAP as a result of the acquisition accounting for Astra.
The goodwill arising on the acquisition of Astra had a net book value of 12.9 billion 11.1 billion at 31 December 2001 and fixed assets were 7.8 billion 8.1 billion at 31 December 2001.
These effects were partly offset by approximately 2.3 billion 2.3 billion in 2001 of other adjustments being principally deferred tax liabilities related to the acquisition.
Accordingly  of our net asset value under US GAAP at 31 December 2002 of 30.2 billion 16.2 billion is attributable to fixed assets 13.6 billion to goodwill and 2.8 billion to deferred tax.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Directors Report Directors Report each Director to be the beneficial owner of Ordinary Shares in the Company with an aggregate nominal value of 125 500 shares.
Such holding must be obtained within two months of the date of the Directors appointment.
All of the Directors comply with this requirement and full details of each Director s interests in shares of the Company are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 49 to 54.
Annual General Meeting The Company s Annual General Meeting will be held on 30 April 2003.
The principal meeting place will be in London.
There will be one satellite meeting place in Stockholm.
Corporate Governance Combined Code Throughout 2002 the Company has applied all of the principles of good governance in Part 1 Section 1 of the Combined Code published by the Hampel Committee on Corporate Governance and appended to the Listing Rules of the UK Listing Authority .
The way in which these principles have been applied is described below.
Throughout 2002 the Company has complied with all of the provisions of the code of best practice in Part 2 Section 1 of the Combined Code with two exceptions.
These are provision A.2.1 concerning the appointment of a senior NonExecutive Director  with which the Company has complied since March 2002 and provision B.1.7 relating to the notice period of Executive Directors service contracts.
In March 2002 the Board appointed Sir Peter Bonfield as the senior NonExecutive Director .
During 2002 the service contracts of the Executive Directors provided for a notice period of two years.
However  in January 2003 all of the Executive Directors agreed to reduce the notice periods of their service contracts to one year .
For new Executive Directors the Board would aim to negotiate a one year notice period.
In exceptional circumstances the initial notice period may be for longer than one year .
In those circumstances the Board would explain to shareholders the reasons why it believed a longer notice period was necessary and it would be the Board s intention that the notice period should be reduced to one year subsequently.
Full details of the service contracts and remuneration of the Company s Executive Directors are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 49 to 54.
The US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 AstraZeneca PLC American Depositary Shares are traded on the New York Stock Exchange and the Company is subject to the reporting and other requirements of the US Securities and Exchange Commission applicable to foreign issuers.
The US SarbanesOxley Act came into force at the end of July 2002.
As a result of its New Y ork listing the Company is subject to those provisions of the Act applicable to foreign issuers.
Many of the rules implementing the Act are currently being written and proposed by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
As a result the detailed provisions of the Act are likely to become effective during 2003.
The Company will comply with those provisions of the Act applicable to foreign issuers as and when they become effective.
The Board takes the view that the Company already has a sound corporate governance framework good processes for the accurate and timely reporting of its financial position and results of operations and an effective and robust system of internal controls.
Consequently  the Company s approach to compliance with the Act principally involves the development and adjustment of the existing corporate governance framework and associated processes concerning reporting internal controls and other relevant matters.
In particular  some additional work has been undertaken to ensure that the Chief Executive and the Chief Financial Officer are in a position to provide the certifications required by the Act in respect of the Company s Annual Report on Form 20F for the year ended 31 December 2002.
The New Y ork Stock Exchange In August 2002 the Corporate Accountability and Listing Standards Committee of the New Y ork Stock Exchange filed new draft corporate governance rules with the US Securities and Exchange Commission.
The draft rules are currently under review by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The
Company  as a foreign issuer with American Depositary Shares listed on the New Y ork Stock Exchange is obliged to disclose any significant ways in which its corporate governance practices differ from the rules.
The Company has reviewed the draft rules and believes that in most areas its corporate governance practices are consistent with the draft rules andor the principles behind the draft rules with two significant exceptions.
AstraZeneca PLC is the holding company for a group of subsidiaries whose principal activities are described in the Operational and Financial Reviews on pages 8 to 29 and 30 to 43 which are incorporated in this report by reference.
Principal subsidiaries joint ventures and associates and their locations are given on page 112.
The Company s dividend for 2002 of 0.70 43.2 pence SEK6.20 per Ordinary Share amounts to a total dividend payment to shareholders of 1206 million.
The Directors believe that the Company and its subsidiaries have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and therefore continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Financial Statements.
Changes in the Company s Ordinary Share capital during 2002 including details of the allotment of new shares under the Company s share plans are given in Note 38 to the Financial Statements.
Board of Directors Details of members of the Board at 31 December 2002 are set out on pages 6 and 7.
Board Changes Claes Wilhelmsson Executive Director  retired from the Board in June 2002.
The Company announced in November 2002 that ke Stavling also an Executive Director  would be leaving the Company at the end of January 2003.
Lars Ramqvist NonExecutive Director retired from the Board in April 2002 with effect from the end of the Annual General Meeting.
Also at the Annual General Meeting shareholders elected Jane Henney and John Buchanan as NonExecutive Directors.
Dr
Henney was first appointed to the Board in September 2001.
Dr Buchanans appointment was effective from the end of the Annual General Meeting in April 2002.
Reelection of Directors Other than ke Stavling who will have left the Company  all of the Directors will retire under Article 65 of the Company s Articles of Association at the Annual General Meeting in April 2003 and are presenting themselves for reelection.
All are recommended by the Board for reelection.
Mandatory Shareholding for Directors The Company s Articles of Association require AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Directors Report Board members are NonExecutive
The differing roles of Executive Directors and NonExecutive Directors are clearly delineated both having fiduciary duties towards shareholders.
However  Executive Directors have direct responsibility for business operations whereas the Non Executive Directors have a responsibility to bring independent objective judgement to bear on Board decisions.
The Board considers that all of the Non Executive Directors are independent of management and free from any business or other relationship which could materially interfere with the exercise of their independent judgement.
However  the Board acknowledges that independence as it applies to nonexecutive directors is not defined in a way which is uniformly accepted by all regulatory bodies codes of governance or best practice stock exchanges or organisations representing institutional investors.
T wo of the Company s Directors Hkan Mogren Executive Deputy Chairman and Marcus Wallenberg NonExecutive Director are also members of the Board of Directors of Investor AB a company which at 31 December 2002 had a 5.04% holding in the Ordinary Shares of the Company .
This holding represents a significant proportion of Investor AB s overall investment portfolio.
Marcus Wallenberg is the Chief Executive Officer of Investor AB.
Additionally  Dr Mogren and Erna Mller  NonExecutive Director  are Directors of the Marcus and Marianne Wallenberg Foundation and the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation respectively.
The Board sets the Companys strategy and policies and monitors progress towards meeting its objectives.
This includes regular reviews of the Companys financial performance and critical business issues.
The
Board normally meets six times a year .
There is an established and transparent procedure for appointments of new directors to the Board which is operated by the Nomination Committee.
All of the Directors retire at each Annual General Meeting and may offer themselves for reelection by shareholders.
Chief Executive and the Senior Executive
The Chief Executive Sir T om McKillop has delegated authority from and is responsible to the Board for directing and promoting the profitable operation and development of the Company  consistent with the primary aim of enhancing long term shareholder value.
The Chief Executive is responsible to the Board for the management and performance of the Company s businesses within the framework of Company policies reserved powers and routine reporting requirements.
He is obliged to refer certain major matters defined in the formal delegation of the Boards authority back to the Board.
The roles of the Board the Board s committees the Chairman the Executive Deputy Chairman the Chief Executive and the Senior Executive T eam are documented as are the Companys delegated authorities and reserved powers the means of operation of the business and the roles of corporate functions.
The Chief Executive has established and chairs the Senior Executive T eam.
While the Chief Executive retains full responsibility for the authority delegated to him by the Board the Senior Executive T eam is the vehicle through which he exercises that authority in respect of the Company s business including Salick Health Care Astra T ech and Marlow
The other members of the Senior Executive T eam are ke Stavling Executive Director until 31 January 2003 Jonathan Symonds Chief Financial Officer Bruno Angelici Executive VicePresident Europe Japan Asia Pacific and ROW David Brennan Executive VicePresident North America and President and CEO AstraZeneca LP Jan Lundberg Executive VicePresident Discovery Research John Patterson Executive VicePresident Product Strategy and Licensing and Business Development Martin Nicklasson Executive VicePresident Development Barrie Thorpe Executive Vice President Operations and T ony Bloxham Executive VicePresident Human Resources.
Dr Lundberg and Dr Nicklasson succeeded Dr Wilhelmsson who retired in June 2002.
The Senior Executive T eam normally meets once a month to consider and decide all major business issues.
It also usually reviews those matters which are of a size or importance to require the attention of or which are reserved to the Board before such matters are submitted to the Board for review and decision.
Each business function is subject to an annual budget and targetsetting process including forecasts for the following two years together with a sensitivity and risk analysis quarterly updates of the forecast for the current year and regular reporting.
Performance reviews are undertaken in each part of the business regularly .
The Companys The draft rules state that nonexecutive directors must have regular scheduled meetings without the directors involved in the management of the company present.
Currently  other than meetings of those Board committees comprised only of NonExecutive Directors the Company s NonExecutive Directors do not hold formal meetings without the Executive Directors of the Company present.
Under the draft rules listed companies audit committees are given increased authority and responsibility .
The Company s current corporate governance practices regarding the Audit Committee are not consistent in all respects with the draft rules.
However  as described below it is anticipated that changes to certain of those practices will be introduced during 2003 in the context of the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002.
The
Company anticipates that any such changes made would bring the Company s corporate governance practices in this area more closely in line with the proposed New Y ork Stock Exchange rules.
Disclosure Policy The Company s Disclosure Policy  approved by the Board in October 2002 provides a framework for the handling and disclosure of price sensitive information.
A Disclosure Committee comprising the Chief Financial Officer  the Group Secretary and Solicitor and the VicePresident Corporate Affairs meets regularly .
The role of the Disclosure Committee is to assist and inform the decisions of the Chief Executive concerning price sensitive information and its disclosure.
Recent Developments During the first half of 2003 the Company will review two significant new proposals in the UK concerning corporate governance the report of Derek Higgs Review of the Role and Effectiveness of NonExecutive Directors and that of Sir Robert Smith Audit Committees Combined Code Guidance both published in January 2003.
The reports both propose changes to the Combined Code appended to the Listing Rules of the UK Listing Authority .
Subject to completing its review of the proposals the Company expects to comply with any changes to the Combined Code resulting from the reports proposals.
Board Structure and Processes Board Composition Responsibilities and
The Board includes a balance of Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
The majority of 46 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Directors Report Directors Report continued quarterly business performance management system uses a broad range of measures that link directly to the achievement of key business priorities.
Treasury operations are centralised operate within defined limits and are subject to regular reporting requirements and Audit Committee reviews.
Audit Committee Internal Controls and
Management of Risk
Audit Committee The members of the Audit Committee are Karl von der Heyden Chairman of the Committee John Buchanan Jane Henney Dame Bridget Ogilvie and Marcus Wallenberg.
They are all NonExecutive Directors.
The core remit of the Audit Committee is to review and report to the Board on the annual and other published financial reporting carried out by the Company its accounting policies the scope and audit programmes of its internal and external auditors and any material issues arising from these audits the effectiveness of its systems of financial reporting and internal financial controls and the framework for risk management with particular emphasis on financial risks.
The Audit Committee met four times in 2002 and is currently scheduled to meet at least four times in 2003.
All of the members of the Audit Committee attended each meeting in 2002.
The Chairman of the Board a Non Executive Director  attended two of the meetings held in 2002.
During 2002 the business considered and discussed by the Audit Committee included the financial disclosures contained in the Company s annual and quarterly reports to shareholders and other interested parties various accounting matters raised in the context of the financial disclosures including reports from management and the external auditor concerning those accounting matters reports from management and the internal audit function on the Companys risk profile and the assessment and management of risk reports from management the internal audit function and the external auditor on the effectiveness of the Company s system of internal controls and in particular  internal financial controls proposals from the internal audit function and the external auditor about their audit programmes for 2002 a report from the Company s treasury function about its operations and approach to risk management the amount of audit and non audit fees of the external auditor the appointment of a new Chief Internal Auditor and the impact of the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 on the Company and in particular  on the operation of the Audit Committee and its relationship with the external auditor .
More information about the work of the internal audit function and the Companys external auditor is given below.
At the scheduled meeting of the Audit Committee held at the end of January 2003 the Chief Executive and the Chief Financial Officer presented to Audit Committee members their conclusions following the evaluation of the effectiveness of the Company s disclosure controls and procedures required by Item 15a of Form 20F .
Based on their evaluation the Chief Executive and the Chief Financial Officer concluded that the Company maintains an effective system of disclosure controls and procedures.
There have been no significant changes in the Company s internal controls or other factors that could significantly affect internal controls subsequent to the date of their evaluation.
During the year  in line with its normal practice the Audit Committee also held a number of private meetings without management present with both the Company s Chief Internal Auditor and the lead partner from the Company s external audit firm.
The purpose of these meetings was to facilitate free and open discussions between the Audit Committee members and the Chief Internal Auditor and the external lead audit partner independent of the main sessions of the Audit Committee attended by the Chief Financial Officer and the Group Financial Controller .
Internal Controls and Management of Risk The Board has overall responsibility for the Company s system of internal controls which aims to safeguard shareholders investments and the Company s assets ensure that proper accounting records are maintained and that the financial information used within the business and for publication is accurate reliable and fairly presents the financial position of the Company and the results of its business operations.
The Board is also responsible for reviewing the effectiveness of the system of internal controls.
The system is designed to provide reasonable assurance of effective operations and compliance with laws and regulations although any system of internal controls can only provide reasonable not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Since the publication in September 1999 by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales of the T urnbull Report Internal Control Guidance for Directors on the Combined Code the Directors have continued to review the effectiveness of the Group s system of nonfinancial controls including operational and compliance controls risk management and the Company s high level internal control arrangements.
These reviews have included an assessment of internal controls and in particular internal financial controls by the internal audit function management assurance of the maintenance of control and reports from the external auditor on matters identified in the course of its statutory audit work.
A key part of these reviews is an annual letter of assurance process by which responsible managers confirm the adequacy of their systems of internal financial and non financial controls their compliance with Company policies including those relating to safety  health and the environment local laws and regulations including the industrys regulatory requirements and report any control weaknesses identified in the past year.
The Directors believe that the Company maintains an effective embedded system of internal controls and complies with the T urnbull Report guidance.
The Company views the careful management of risk as a key management activity . consistent with the Company s values.
These risks which may be strategic operational reputational financial or environmental should be understood and visible and the business context should determine the level of acceptable risk and control.
Much of the Company s work in the area of risk management is facilitated by the Risk Advisory Group consisting of representatives from each business function.
Its role is advisory and is to assist senior management to identify and assess the main risks faced by the Company s business in a coordinated manner  to assess identify and document the Company s risk profile and to ensure that the business focuses on critical business issues.
It is chaired by the Chief Financial Officer and reports twice a year to the Senior Executive T eam.
The Risk Advisory Group s reports on the Company s risk profile are reviewed by both the Audit Committee and the Board.
Under the auspices of the Risk Advisory Group the Company has developed and is establishing an integrated risk management framework with the aim of ensuring that the AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Directors Report business understands the key risks it faces especially crossfunctional risks has an embedded risk management approach to all of its activities links risk management to business performance reporting and seeks continuous improvement in the management of risk by sharing best practice throughout the organisation.
Code of Conduct The policy of the Company is that all of its subsidiaries and their employees observe high standards of integrity and act with due skill care diligence and fairness in the conduct of business.
The Companys management recognises that such standards make a significant contribution to the overall control environment and seeks by its words and actions to reinforce them throughout the business.
In particular  all employees are required to comply with the letter and spirit of the AstraZeneca Code of Conduct and with the detailed standards issued in support of it.
The AstraZeneca Code of Conduct is set out on page 137.
The current version of the Code of Conduct was first published in June 2000 and will be reviewed during 2003.
The review will include consideration of the relevant requirements of the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 such as those concerning a code of ethics for senior financial officers.
Group Internal Audit Group Internal Audit GIA is an independent appraisal function which derives its authority from the Board through the Audit Committee.
Its primary role is to provide reasonable and objective assurance about the adequacy and effectiveness of the Company s financial control framework and risk management.
It also assists senior management with its responsibility to improve the processes by which business risks are identified and managed and to report and advise on the proper and effective use of resources.
GIA seeks to discharge the responsibilities set down in its charter by reviewing the processes which ensure that business risks are effectively managed reviewing the financial and operational controls which help to ensure that the Companys assets are properly safeguarded from losses including fraud reviewing the controls which help to ensure the reliability and integrity of management information systems reviewing the processes which ensure compliance with corporate objectives policies and procedures and external legislation and regulation other than those relating to safety  health and the environment and regulatory compliance which are the responsibility of other audit functions and on an ad hoc basis reviewing that value for money is obtained.
GIA also acts as a source of constructive advice and best practice.
External Auditor A resolution will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting on 30 April 2003 for the re appointment of KPMG Audit Plc London as auditor of the Company .
The external auditor has undertaken various nonaudit work for the Company during 2002.
More information about this work and the fees paid by the Company for it are set out in Note 36 to the Financial Statements on page 107.
The external auditor is not engaged by the Company to carry out any nonaudit work on which it might in the future be required to express an audit opinion.
The Audit Committee has determined policies as to what nonaudit work can be undertaken by the Companys external auditor .
Any item of nonaudit work proposed to be undertaken for which its fees may exceed 500000 must be approved in advance by the Audit Committee.
The Audit Committee also monitors the level of audit and nonaudit fees on a quarterly basis.
The US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 is likely to lead to changes in the Companys relationship with the external auditor  such as greater involvement of the Audit Committee in managing the relationship and the pre approval by the Audit Committee of all non audit work.
Certain provisions of the Act are also likely to lead to changes in how the external auditor conducts its business such as the mandatory rotation of the principal audit partners.
Other Board Committees Remuneration Committee The members of the Remuneration Committee are Sir Peter Bonfield Chairman of the Committee John Buchanan and Erna Mller .
They are all NonExecutive Directors.
The remit of the Remuneration Committee is primarily  to recommend for decision by the Board the fundamental remuneration policy for the Company and to ensure the proper operation of all plans for employees involving the Company s shares.
More particularly  it makes specific proposals in respect of the remuneration packages of individual Executive Directors and the Companys most senior executives.
Further information about the membership and work of the Remuneration Committee and the Company s remuneration policy and practice is set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 49 to 54.
Nomination Committee The members of the Nomination Committee are Percy Barnevik Chairman of the Committee Hkan Mogren Sir Peter Bonfield and Jane Henney .
With the exception of Dr Mogren they are all Non Executive Directors.
The remit of the Nomination Committee is primarily  to make proposals to the Board for any new appointments as Directors of the
Shareholders
In its financial reporting to shareholders and other interested parties by means of annual and quarterly reports the Board aims to present a balanced and understandable assessment of the Company s financial position and prospects.
The Company maintains a corporate website containing a wide range of information of interest to institutional and private investors site The Company has frequent discussions with institutional shareholders on a range of issues affecting its performance.
These include meetings following the announcement of the annual results with the Company s largest institutional shareholders on an individual basis.
In addition the Company responds to individual ad hoc requests for discussions from institutional shareholders.
All shareholders including private investors have an opportunity to put questions to members of the Board on matters relating to the Company s operation and performance at the Annual General Meeting.
Employees
The Company maintains an open management style and involves its employees both in daily decisions which affect them and longer term matters.
The
Company is fully committed to keeping all of its employees informed about their work unit and the wider business as well as discussing the implications of major business changes and other relevant matters.
Key business priorities are communicated throughout the organisation and form part of the basis for the Company s employee incentive plans.
Details of employees share plans appear in Note 33 to the Financial
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Directors Report Directors Report continued In line with legal requirements and cultural standards more formal national and business level employee consultation arrangements exist in some countries including the UK.
There is a forum for employee consultation at European level chaired by the Chief Executive in which employee representatives from 19 countries participate.
The Company also has a variety of constructive relationships with trade unions across its worldwide operations including formal recognition and active dialogue where appropriate.
The Company believes that every employee should be treated with the same respect and dignity .
It values the rich diversity and creative potential of people with differing backgrounds and abilities and encourages a culture of equal opportunities in which personal success depends on personal merit and performance.
It is Company policy that there should be no discrimination against any person for any reason.
All judgements about people for the purposes of recruitment development and promotion are made solely on the basis of their ability and potential in relation to the needs of the job.
Every manager is responsible for implementing this policy .
It is Company policy that people with disabilities should have the same consideration as others with respect to recruitment retention and personal development.
Depending on their skills and abilities people with disabilities enjoy the same career prospects as other employees and the same scope for realising potential.
The Company also takes all reasonable steps to ensure that its working environments can accommodate special needs.
Other Stakeholders The Company aims to set promote and maintain high standards of corporate responsibility wherever it operates.
Dame
Bridget Ogilvie a NonExecutive Director  is the Board member responsible for this area and oversees the work of a crossfunctional committee.
The Company has established systems to monitor its performance.
Policies and standards relating to corporate responsibility are maintained and widely communicated within the organisation.
In
2002 the Company was again included in the FTSE4Good and the Dow Jones Sustainability Indices.
The Company publishes and sends to shareholders a separate Corporate Responsibility Summary
More detailed information about the Company s approach to this area of its business can be found on its website site It is not Company policy formally to comply with the Confederation of British Industrys code of practice on the prompt payment of suppliers.
It is however  Company policy to agree appropriate payment terms with all suppliers when agreeing the terms of each transaction to ensure that those suppliers are made aware of the terms of payment and subject to their compliance abide by the terms of payment.
The total amount of money owed by the Company s subsidiaries to trade creditors at the balance sheet date was equivalent to 83 days average purchases.
No equivalent disclosure is provided in respect of the Company as it has no external creditors.
Purchase of Own Shares The Company s stated distribution policy contains both a regular dividend cash flow and a share repurchase component to give the Company more flexibility in managing its capital structure over time.
In August 1999 the Company announced a 2 billion share repurchase programme to be completed by the end of 2002.
This programme was completed ahead of schedule in the second quarter of 2002.
In January 2002 the Company announced an additional 2 billion repurchase programme to be completed by the end of 2003.
During 2002 the Company purchased 28.4 million of its own Ordinary Shares with a nominal value of 0.25 each for an aggregate cost of 1190 million.
Following the purchase of these shares they were all cancelled as required by applicable English law.
This number of shares represents 1.65% of the Company s total issued share capital at 31 December 2002.
Since the beginning of the repurchase programme in 1999 the Company has purchased for cancellation in total 65.6 million of its own Ordinary Shares with a nominal value of 0.25 each for an aggregate cost of 2805 million.
This number of shares represents 3.82% of the Company s total issued share capital at 31 December 2002.
The Company continues to maintain robust controls in respect of all aspects of the share repurchase programme to ensure compliance with English law and the Listing Rules of the UK Listing Authority .
In particular the Companys Disclosure Committee meets to ensure that the Company does not purchase its own shares during prohibited periods.
At the Annual General Meeting on 30 April 2003 the Company will seek a renewal of its current permission from shareholders to purchase its own shares.
Political Donations Under the UK s Political Parties Elections and Referendums Act 2000 shareholder authority is required for political donations to be made or political expenditure to be incurred by the Company or its subsidiaries in the European
Neither the Company nor its subsidiaries made any donations or incurred any expenditure in 2002 in the European Union in respect of which shareholder authority or disclosure in this Directors Report is required under the Act.
Neither the Company nor its subsidiaries intend to make any such donations or incur any such expenditure in the European Union in the foreseeable future.
However  the Act defines political organisation widely and for example interest groups or lobbying organisations concerned with the review of government policy or law reform may be caught by the definition.
T o enable the Company to continue to support such organisations without inadvertently breaching the Act a resolution will in the same way as last year  be proposed at the Annual General Meeting on 30 April 2003 authorising the Company to make donations or incur expenditure in the European Union up to an aggregate limit of 150000.
In 2002 AstraZeneca s US legal entities made contributions amounting in aggregate to 275000 to state and national political party committees and to campaign committees of various state candidates affiliated with the major parties.
This total includes 54500 in national political party committee donations made prior to the implementation of the US Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act.
All contributions were made only where allowed by state and federal law.
American nationals exercised decision making over the contributions and the funds were not provided or reimbursed by any non US corporation.
On behalf of the Board G H R Musker Group Secretary and Solicitor 30 January 2003 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Directors Remuneration Report
Directors Remuneration Report
At the Annual General Meeting on 30 April 2003 a resolution will be proposed to approve the Directors Remuneration Report.
Remuneration Committee The members of the Remuneration Committee are Sir Peter Bonfield Chairman of the Committee John Buchanan and Erna Mller .
They are all NonExecutive Directors.
Sir Peter became Chairman of the Remuneration Committee in April 2002 in succession to Lars Ramqvist following Dr Ramqvist s retirement from the Board.
Dr
Buchanan became a member of the Remuneration Committee following his election as a NonExecutive Director at the Annual General Meeting in April 2002.
The remit of the Remuneration Committee is primarily  to recommend for decision by the Board the fundamental remuneration policy for the Company and to ensure the proper operation of all plans for employees involving the Company s shares.
More particularly  it makes specific proposals in respect of the remuneration packages of individual Executive Directors and the Company s most senior executives.
The Remuneration Committee met six times during 2002.
At its request Peter Brown VicePresident Global Compensation and Benefits attended a number of the meetings and provided advice and services which materially assisted the Remuneration Committee during 2002.
In doing so Mr Brown drew on various sources of data concerning directors and executives salaries bonus levels and other incentives including general pharmaceutical industry reports and surveys as well as surveys specifically carried out for the Company .
These included certain surveys prepared for the Company by T owers Perrin.
During 2002 T owers Perrin also provided consultancy and share plan administration services to the
Overall Remuneration Policy and Purpose The Company is committed to maintaining a dynamic performance culture in which every employee champions the growth of shareholder value is clear about the Company s objectives knows how their work impacts on those objectives and that they will benefit from achieving high levels of performance.
The Board has confirmed that the Companys overall remuneration policy and purpose is to attract and retain people of the quality necessary to sustain the Company as one of the best pharmaceutical companies in the world and to motivate them to achieve the level of performance necessary to create sustained growth in shareholder value.
In order to achieve this remuneration policy and practice is designed to closely align individual and team reward with business performance at each level to encourage employees to perform to their fullest capacity to encourage employees to align their interests with those of shareholders to support managers responsibility to achieve business performance through people and for them to recognise superior performance in the short and longer term to be as locally focused and flexible as is practicable and beneficial to be competitive and costeffective in each of the relevant employment markets and to be as internally consistent as is practicable and beneficial taking due account of market need.
The cost and value of the components of the remuneration package are considered as a whole and are designed to ensure a proper balance of fixed and variable performance related components linked to short and longer term objectives and to reflect market competitiveness taking account of the total value of all of the benefit components.
The benefit components contained in the total remuneration package are annual salary  based on conditions in the relevant geographic market with the provision to recognise in addition the value of individuals sustained personal performance resulting from their ability and experience ad hoc rewards  special payments and other measures available to reward individuals other than Executive Directors and teams following a particular and outstanding business contribution short term bonus  a lump sum payment related to the targeted achievement of identified business drivers and where appropriate personal performance goals measured over a year within a specific plan share participation  various plans provide the opportunity for employees to take a personal stake in the Companys wealth as shareholders and other benefits such as holidays sickness benefit and pensions which are cost effective and compatible with the relevant national welfare arrangements.
The way in which these elements are combined and applied varies depending for example on market need and practice in various countries.
For Executive Directors the individual components are annual salary  the actual salary for each of the Executive Directors is determined on behalf of the Board by the Remuneration Committee these salaries reflect the experience and sustained performance of the individuals to whom they apply  as judged annually by the Remuneration Committee taking account also of market competitiveness short term bonus  the Deputy Chairman and the Chief Executive are entitled to bonuses related solely to the achievement of the targeted performance of earnings per share other Executive Directors are entitled to annual bonuses related to the achievement of both the targeted performance of earnings per share and the achievement of functional measures relevant to their particular area of responsibility the bonus payable for Executive Directors is on a scale of 0 100% of salary and 50% of salary is payable for the achievement of target business performance 80% of the bonus relates to the achievement of the earnings per share target and 20% to the individual measures longer term bonus  Executive Directors are also rewarded for improvement in the share price performance of the Company over a period of years by the grant of share options the grant of options under the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan is supervised by the Remuneration Committee which also determines whether any performance targets will apply to the grant andor exercise of options the exercise of options previously granted under the Zeneca 1994 Executive Share Option Scheme is currently subject to the performance condition that before any exercise earnings per share must grow by at least 50 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Directors Remuneration Report
Directors Remuneration Report continued
Other customary benefits such as a car and health benefits are also made available.
In the UK this happens by way of the Executive Directors participation in the Companys flexible benefits arrangements which apply to the vast majority of the Company s UK employees.
A similar programme was introduced in Sweden in January 2003.
Executive Directors Service Contracts As stated in the Directors Report during 2002 the Company did not comply with provision B.1.7 of the code of best practice in Part 2 Section 1 of the Combined Code published by the Hampel Committee on Corporate Governance and appended to the Listing Rules of the UK Listing Authority relating to the notice period of Executive Directors service contracts.
During 2002 the service contracts provided for a notice period of two years.
However  in January 2003 all the Executive Directors agreed to reduce the notice periods of their service contracts to one year .
For new Executive Directors the Board would aim to negotiate a one year notice period.
In exceptional circumstances the initial notice period may be for longer than one year .
In those circumstances the Board would explain to shareholders the reasons why it believed a longer notice period was necessary and it would be the Boards intention that it should be reduced to one year subsequently.
At the time of the Annual General Meeting on 30 April 2003 the unexpired term of Executive Directors service contracts will be a maximum of one year.
The details of the Executive Directors individual service contracts are set out in the table below.
In the event of the termination of an Executive Director s service contract depending upon the circumstances the Company may be liable to provide compensation to the Executive Director equivalent to the benefits which he or she would have received during the contractual notice period.
The Companys policy in the event of the termination of an Executive Director s service contract is to avoid any liability to the Executive Director in excess of his or her contractual entitlement and aim to ensure that any liability is mitigated to the fullest extent possible.
The Company announced in November 2002 that ke Stavling Executive Director  would be leaving the Company at the end of January 2003.
Mr Stavling will receive compensation from the Company  to be paid on a monthly basis equivalent to two years base annual salary.
Position of the NonExecutive Directors None of the NonExecutive Directors has a service contract.
They are not eligible for performancerelated bonuses or the grant of share options.
No pension contributions are made on their behalf.
AstraZeneca Share Option Plan As stated above the Remuneration Committee determines the grant of options under the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan and ensures that on every occasion before the grant of any option the performance of the Company and the performance and contribution of each participant is fully taken into account when determining the number of shares to be put under option and the number of options to be granted.
In respect of the grants of options under the Plan in March and August 2002 the Remuneration Committee considered the fact that business targets had been met in 2001 Nexium sales continued to grow strongly  the Respiratory Central Nervous System and Oncology product portfolios continued to grow strongly key products were progressing well through late stage development and the RandD pipeline remained strong and concluded a grant of options was justified.
The Remuneration Committee also received assurances from each member of the Senior Executive T eam that the participants for whom they were recommending a grant of options had achieved the appropriate level of performance.
In respect of the grants of options under the Plan in March 2002 to each individual Executive Director the Remuneration Committee considered the performance factors described above and also received an appraisal from the Chief Executive in respect of the performance of each Executive Director .
In each case the Remuneration Committee concluded a grant of options was justified.
Although the Company does not use total shareholder return TSR as a measure of performance for its share plans a graph is set out on page 53 illustrating the Companys TSR performance over the last five years against the FTSE 100 index.
External Appointments With the specific approval of the Board in each case Executive Directors may accept external appointments as nonexecutive directors of other companies and retain any related fees paid to them.
Directors Emoluments in 2002 The Directors emoluments in 2002 are disclosed on pages 51 and 52.
Directors Interests in Shares Details of the Directors interests in the Company s Ordinary Shares are disclosed on pages 53 and 54.
Audit
The Directors emoluments in 2002 and the details of the Directors interests in the Company s Ordinary Shares disclosed on pages 51 to 54 have been audited by the Companys external auditor.
Details of Executive Directors Service Contracts Executive Director Date of service contract Unexpired term at Notice period 31 December 2002 Hkan Mogren 14.12.98 Two years One year Sir T om McKillop 11.01.96 T wo years One year Jonathan Symonds 20.05.98 Two years One year ke Stavling 28.06.93 Leaving the Company on 31.01.03 Reduced to one year subsequently AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Directors Remuneration Report
Directors Emoluments in 2002 The aggregate remuneration excluding pension contributions paid to or accrued for all Directors and officers of the Company for services in all capacities during the year ended 31 December 2002 was 16 million including 373000 to the Chairman.
Remuneration of individual Directors was as follows Salary Taxable Total Total Total and fees Bonuses benefits Othertel Percy Barnevik 373  373 368 385 Hkan Mogren 1032 660 146 2010 1623 1564 Sir T om McKillop 1277 816 3 112 2208 1918 1917 ke Stavling 674 405 101 1246 1047 934 Jonathan Symonds 1357 1199 1245 Sir Peter Bonfield 68  68 56 59 John Buchanan 49  49 Jane Henney 60  30 Karl von der Heyden 70  70 60 63 Erna Mller 63  30 Dame Bridget Ogilvie 63  30 Marcus Wallenberg 63  63 56 59 Former Directors Claes Wilhelmsson 683 Lars Ramqvist 23  23 60 63 Others   34 1466 Total 5272 2542 269 564 8647 7534 8967 Relates to relocation allowances Payment for pension related tax liabilities Fees for AstraZeneca Scientific Advisory Board Includes settlement on retirement of accrued holiday entitlement Includes provision for accommodation in the UK Payment for accommodation related tax liabilities Part year only The remuneration of Directors is or was in the case of former Directors with minor exceptions established and paid in either Swedish kronor Claes Wilhelmsson or pounds sterling other Directors and has been converted into US dollars in the table above at the average exchange rate for the year in question.
These rates were GBPUSD SEKUSD 2000 0.65 8.91 2002 0.67 9.86 The movement of exchange rates affects the year on year comparison of the dollar amounts.
Some Directors and officers were also granted options to subscribe for Ordinary Shares under the Company s share option plans.
Details of share options granted to and exercised by  Directors and the aggregate of gains realised on exercised options in the year are given on page 54.
No Director or officer has a family relationship with any other Director or officer .
T ransactions with Directors During the year there were no material recorded transactions between the Company and the Directors.
T ransactions with Former Directors Following his retirement as a Director in June 2002 and pursuant to the terms of an agreement dated 31 March 1999 Claes Wilhelmsson purchased an apartment in Stockholm from the Company .
The price paid for the apartment the Swedish kronor equivalent of 963000 at the average exchange rate for 2002 set out above was an arm s length market value as determined by independent third party valuations of the property carried out in 2002.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Directors Remuneration Report
Directors Remuneration Report continued
Directors Emoluments in 2002 continued Executive Directors Sir T om McKillop Jonathan Symonds Hkan Mogren ke Stavling Claes Wilhelmsson Pension Arrangements 000 000 000 000 000 per annum Defined Benefit Arrangements Accrued pension at 1 January tel873 356 583 Increase in accrued pension during year as a result of inflation Adjustment to accrued pension as a result of salary increase relative to inflation 23 6  49 65 Increase in accrued pension as a result of additional service 28 16  44 Accrued pension at 31 December tel892 Employee contributions during year  29 T ransfer value of accrued pension at 31 December 2001 12364 2343 7784 3042 5482 T ransfer value of accrued pension at 31 December 2002 14480 2300 8465 4188 6031 Change in transfer value during the period less employee contributions 2116 72 681 1146 549 Age at 31 December 2002 59 Pensionable service years 33 Accrued pension payable between the age of 60 and 65.
Once 65 the pension payable is reduced by 27ths or 28.6% from the figures shown.
At retirement on 30 June 2002 Pensions are payable to Directors in either Swedish kronor or pounds sterling.
For ease of understanding the above table has been presented using the exchange rates for 2002 set out on page 51.
UK Executive Directors Pension Arrangements Sir T om McKillop is a member of the Company s main UK defined benefit pension plan.
The normal pension age under this plan is 62.
However  a member s accrued pension is available from age 60 without any actuarial reduction.
In addition the accrued pension is available unreduced from age 57 if the Company consents to a request for early retirement and from age 50 if the retirement is at the Company s request.
On death in retirement the accrued pension shown is guaranteed payable for the first five years of retirement and then reduces to twothirds of this amount should there be a surviving spouse or other dependant.
Any member may choose higher or lower levels of survivor s pensions at retirement subject to Inland Revenue limits in return for an adjustment to their own pension of equivalent actuarial value.
Pensions are also payable to dependent children.
In the event of a senior employee becoming incapacitated from performing his work then a pension is payable immediately as if such person had reached normal retirement age subject to a maximum of 10 years additional service based on current pensionable salary .
In the event of death prior to retirement dependants are entitled to a pension of twothirds of the pension that would have been earned had such person remained in service to age 62 plus a capital sum of four times pensionable pay .
Pensions in payment are increased annually in line with inflation as measured by the retail prices index up to a maximum of 5%.
In respect of UK Executive Directors whose pensionable earnings are capped by the earnings limit imposed by the Finance Act 1989 unapproved defined contribution schemes are made available.
Currently  only Jonathan Symonds is affected by this limit.
The Company has agreed to pay annually 50% of base salary in excess of the statutory earnings cap for the pension and associated tax liability  with the intention of providing equivalence of benefits with noncapped UK Directors.
If this does not provide equivalence the Company has agreed to make up the difference.
The benefits derived from equivalence are shown above as if the scheme was a defined benefit arrangement.
The Company contribution in 2002 in respect of the pension element was 171000.
Swedish Executive Directors Pension Arrangements Normally  Swedish Executive Directors participate in the collectively bargained ITP pension plan which provides pensions dependants pensions and lump sums on death in service.
In respect of those Swedish Directors or former Directors namely Hkan Mogren ke Stavling and Claes Wilhelmsson whose pensionable earnings are or were in excess of the earnings limit imposed by the Swedish Communal T ax Law Kommunalskattelagen supplementary pension commitments are made.
The Company has agreed to pay 70% of pensionable salary from age 60 to age 65 and 50% of such earnings from age 65.
The ITP provisions are included in this additional commitment.
Paid in pension capital may also be used in the event of retirement or termination before the age of 60.
In the event of long term illness then a pension is payable immediately as if such person had reached the normal retirement age of 70% of current pensionable salary .
On death in retirement the accrued pension shown is payable to a surviving spouse or other dependant.
In the event of death prior to retirement the accrued pension shown is payable to a surviving spouse or other dependant plus a capital sum of three times pensionable salary less 100000 if married or two times pensionable salary less 100000 if not.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Directors Remuneration Report
Graph Showing T otal Shareholder Return The UK Directors Remuneration Report Regulations 2002 require the inclusion in the Directors Remuneration Report of a graph showing total shareholder return TSR over a five year period in respect of a holding of the Company s shares plotted against TSR in respect of a hypothetical holding of shares of a similar kind and number by reference to which a broad equity market index is calculated.
This illustrates the Companys TSR performance against the broad equity market index selected and is required even though the Company does not use TSR as a measure of performance for its share plans.
For the purposes of this graph set out below we have selected the FTSE 100 Index as the appropriate index.
Directors Interests in Shares The interests at 31 December 2002 or on date of retirement of the persons who on that date were Directors including the interests of their families in shares and debentures of AstraZeneca PLC are shown below all of which were beneficial except as otherwise stated.
None of the Directors has a beneficial interest in the shares of any of the Companys subsidiaries.
Interest in Interest in Ordinary Shares Ordinary Shares including shares including shares Shares held Shares held held in trust at Net held in trust at in trust at in trust at 1 Jan 2002 shares 31 Dec 2002 1 Jan 2002 31 Dec 2002 or appointment acquired or resignation or appointment or resignation date disposed date date date Percy Barnevik 100000  100000 Hkan Mogren 65706 268 65974 9966 10234 Sir T om McKillop 74443  74443 16824 13424 ke Stavling 8929 210 9139 8041 8157 Jonathan Symonds 14314 486 13828 10774 7788 Sir Peter Bonfield 500  500 John Buchanan  500 500 Jane Henney 500  500 Karl von der Heyden 20000  20000 Erna Mller 2718  2718 Dame Bridget Ogilvie 500  500 Marcus Wallenberg 74504  74504 Former Directors Claes Wilhelmsson 27462 1059 28521 8774 8897 Lars Ramqvist 500  500 No Director or senior executive beneficially owns or has options over  1% or more of the outstanding shares of the Company  nor do they have different voting rights to other shareholders.
Shares held in trust above include both long term incentive bonus shares appropriated under the Zeneca Executive Performance Bonus Scheme and also shares allocated on the demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals in respect of executive share options held on 10 November 2000 and which have not yet been released.
In respect of the latter  the shares generally will not become beneficially owned by Directors until 13 November 2003.
Graph showing total shareholder return 1 January 1998  31 December 2002
FTSE100
Source Thomson Financial Datastream 9telJan 98 Jan 99 Jan 00 Jan 01 Jan 02 Dec 02 54 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site
Directors Remuneration Report
Directors Remuneration Report continued
Directors Interests in Shares continued The interests of Directors and former Directors in options to subscribe for Ordinary Shares of the Company  which include options granted under the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme together with options granted and exercised during the year are included in the following table Exercise Market price
Hkan Mogren At 1 Jan 2002 137417 2947p 13.12.02 28.03.11 Granted 41928 3487p 28.03.05 27.03.12 At 31 Dec 2002 179345 3073p 13.12.02 27.03.12 Sir T om McKillop At 1 Jan 2002 259256 2332p 05.04.97 28.03.11 Granted 79812 3487p 28.03.05 27.03.12 At 31 Dec 2002 339068 2604p 05.04.97 27.03.12 ke Stavling At 1 Jan 2002 84197 2862p 26.05.02 28.03.11 Granted 27020 3487p 28.03.05 27.03.12 At 31 Dec 2002 111217 3014p 26.05.02 27.03.12 Jonathan Symonds At 1 Jan 2002 130561 2678p 01.10.00 28.03.11 Granted 29815 3487p 28.03.05 27.03.12 At 31 Dec 2002 160376 2828p 01.10.00 27.03.12 Claes Wilhelmsson At 1 Jan 2002 92593 2855p 26.05.02 28.03.11 Granted 27824 At 30 Jun 2002 120417 3001p 26.05.02 29.06.04 Exercise prices at 1 January and 31 December are weighted averages.
First and last exercise dates of groups of options within which periods there are shorter exercise periods.
Amends the Company s announcement dated 2 April 2002 stating option granted over 27983 shares which resulted from an exchange rate discrepancy.
In addition to the above the following Directors or former Directors held options under the Astra Shareholder Value Incentive Plan which were converted into options over AstraZeneca shares on completion of the merger based on an exchange ratio of 0.5045 AstraZeneca options for each Astra option held.
No further options have been or will be granted under the scheme Hkan Mogren At 1 Jan 2002 37480 359SEK 06.04.99 23.01.06 Sold 12400 298.28SEK 345SEK 06.04.99 03.01.03 At 31 Dec 2002 25080 389.68SEK 06.04.99 23.01.06 ke Stavling At 1 Jan 2002 16193 369SEK 06.04.99 23.01.06 Sold 3655 298.28SEK 533SEK 06.04.99 03.01.03 Sold 4395 316.13SEK 533SEK 06.04.99 09.01.04 At 31 Dec 2002 8143 429.38SEK 06.04.99 23.01.06 Claes Wilhelmsson At 1 Jan 2002 17168 365SEK 06.04.99 23.01.06 Sold 4630 298.28SEK 518SEK 06.04.99 03.01.03 Sold 4395 316.13SEK 518SEK 06.04.99 09.01.04 At 30 Jun 2002 8143 429.38SEK 06.04.99 23.01.06 The aggregate amount of gains made by Directors on the exercise of share options during the year amounted to 0.4 million 2001 0.02 million 2000 0.8 million and the gains made by the highest paid Director were nil 2001 13000 2000 nil.
The market price of shares trading on the London Stock Exchange at 31 December 2002 was 2220 pence and the range during 2002 was 1799 pence to 3625 pence.
The market price of shares trading on the Stockholm Stock Exchange at 31 December 2002 was 306SEK and the range during 2002 was 255SEK to 541SEK.
The Register of Directors Interests which is open to inspection contains full details of Directors shareholdings and options to subscribe for Ordinary Shares.
On behalf of the Board G H R Musker Group Secretary and Solicitor 30 January 2003 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements AstraZeneca Financial Statements Financial Statements Preparation of the Financial Statements and Directors Responsibilities 56 Independent Auditor s Report to the Members of AstraZeneca PLC 57 Group Profit and Loss Account 58 Group Statement of T otal Recognised Gains and Losses 58 Group Balance Sheet 60 Statement of Group Cash Flow 61 Basis of Consolidation and Presentation of Financial Information 62 Accounting Policies 63 Notes to the Financial Statements 65 Notes to the Financial Statements 1 Composition of the Group 65 2 Note of historical cost profits and losses 65 3 Group operating profit 66 4 Share of operating profitslosses of joint ventures and associates 66 5 Exceptional items 68 6 Net interest 69 7 T axation 70 8 Dividends 73 9 Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share 73 10 Segment information 74 11 T angible fixed assets 78 12 Goodwill and intangible assets 79 13 Fixed asset investments 79 14 Stocks 80 15 Debtors 80 16 Short term investments 81 17 Short term borrowings 81 18 Other creditors 82 19 Loans 82 20 Financial instruments 83 21 Provisions for liabilities and charges 86 22 Reconciliation of movements in shareholders funds 87 23 Reserves 87 24 Net cash inflow from trading operations 89 25 Cash flows related to exceptional items 89 26 Acquisitions of subsidiaries and purchases of minority interests 90 27 Zeneca Agrochemicals demerger 91 28 Disposals 91 29 Reconciliation of net cash flow to movement in net funds 91 30 Analysis of net funds 92 31 Financing 92 32 Postretirement benefits 93 33 Employee costs and share option plans for employees 97 34 Assets pledged commitments and contingent liabilities 101 35 Leases 106 36 Statutory and other information 107 37 Company information 108 38 Calledup share capital of parent company 111 Principal Subsidiaries Joint Ventures and Associates 112 Additional Information for US Investors 113 56 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Preparation of the Financial Statements and Directors Responsibilities The Directors are required by UK company law to prepare for each accounting period financial statements which give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company as at the end of the accounting period and of the profit or loss for that period.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are required to select and apply consistently suitable accounting policies and make reasonable and prudent judgements and estimates.
Applicable accounting standards also have to be followed and a statement made to that effect in the financial statements subject to any material departures being disclosed and explained in the notes to the financial statements.
The
Directors are required to prepare the financial statements on a going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for ensuring proper accounting records are kept which disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 1985.
They are also responsible for taking reasonable steps to safeguard the assets of the Company and prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Independent Auditor s Report to the Members of AstraZeneca PLC We have audited the Financial Statements on pages 58 to 122.
We have also audited the information in the Directors Remuneration Report that is described as having been audited.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body  in accordance with section 235 of the Companies Act 1985.
Our
T o the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Company s members as a body  for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Respective responsibilities of Directors and Auditor The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and Form 20F and the
Directors Remuneration Report.
As described on page 56 this includes responsibility for preparing the Financial Statements in accordance with applicable UK law and accounting standards the Directors have also presented additional information under US requirements.
Our responsibilities as independent auditor  are established in the UK by statute the Auditing Practices Board the Listing Rules of the Financial Services Authority  and by our profession s ethical guidance.
We report to you our opinion as to whether the Financial Statements give a true and fair view and whether the Financial Statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
We also report to you if in our opinion the Directors Report is not consistent with the Financial Statements if the Company has not kept proper accounting records if we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or if information specified by law regarding Directors remuneration and transactions with the Group is not disclosed.
We review whether the statement on page 46 reflects the Company s compliance with the seven provisions of the Combined Code specified for our review by the Listing Rules and we report if it does not.
We are not required to consider whether the Boards statements on internal control cover all risks and controls or form an opinion on the effectiveness of the Group s corporate governance procedures or its risk and control procedures.
We read the other information contained in the Annual Report and Form 20F  including the corporate governance statement and consider whether it is consistent with the audited Financial Statements.
We consider the implications for our report if we become aware of any apparent misstatements or material inconsistencies with the Financial
Basis of audit opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with Auditing Standards issued by the Auditing Practices Board.
An audit includes examination on a test basis of evidence relevant to the amounts and disclosures in the Financial Statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited.
It also includes an assessment of the significant estimates and judgements made by the Directors in the preparation of the Financial Statements and of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Group s circumstances consistently applied and adequately disclosed.
We planned and performed our audit so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered necessary in order to provide us with sufficient evidence to give reasonable assurance that the Financial Statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or other irregularity or error .
In forming our opinion we also evaluated the overall adequacy of the presentation of information in the Financial Statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited.
Opinion
In our opinion the Financial Statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and the Group as at 31 December 2002 and of the profit of the Group for the year then ended and the Financial Statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
30 January 2003 KPMG Audit Plc Chartered Accountants Registered Auditor 8 Salisbury Square London EC4Y 8BB The above opinion is provided in compliance with UK requirements.
An opinion complying with auditing standards generally accepted in the US will be included in the Annual Report on Form 20F filed with the US Securities and Exchange Commission.
Generally accepted accounting principles in the UK vary in certain significant respects from generally accepted accounting principles in the US.
Application of generally accepted accounting principles in the US would have affected results of operations for each of the years in the threeyear period ended 31 December 2002 and consolidated shareholders equity at 31 December 2002 and 2001 to the extent summarised on pages 113 to 122.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Group Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31 December Continuing Exceptional 2002 operations items Total Notes m m m T urnover Group and share of joint ventures 18032  18032 Less Share of joint venture turnover 191  191 Group turnover 3 17841  17841 Operating costs 3 13728 350 14078 Other operating income 3 243  243 Group operating profit 3 4356 350 4006 Share of operating loss of joint ventures and associates 4 Profits less losses on sale closure or demerger of operations 5 Profits on sale of fixed assets 5 Dividend income 1  1 Profit on ordinary activities before interest 4357 350 4007 Net interest 630  30 Profit on ordinary activities before taxation 4387 350 4037 Taxation 7 1177  1177 Profit on ordinary activities after taxation 3210 350 2860 Attributable to minorities 24  24 Net profit for the financial year 3186 350 2836 Dividends to shareholders Cash 8 1206 Dividend in specie  demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals 8 Profitloss retained for the financial year 1630 Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share before exceptional items 9 1.84  1.84 Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share basic 9 1.84 0.20 1.64 Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share diluted 9 1.84 0.20 1.64 Weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue millions 9 1733 Group Statement of T otal Recognised Gains and Losses for the year ended 31 December Notes m Net profit for the financial year 2836 Exchange adjustments on net assets 22 1106 T ranslation differences on foreign currency borrowings 22 6 T ax on translation differences on foreign currency borrowings 22 2 T otal recognised gains and losses relating to the financial year 3946 Prior year adjustment page 62 200 T otal recognised gains and losses since the last annual report 3746 m means millions of US dollars AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Continuing Exceptional 2001 Continuing Discontinued Exceptional 2000 operations items Total operations operations items Total restated restated restated restated restated restated restated m m m m m m m 16405  16405 15778 2299  18077 16222  16222 15583 2299  17882 12434 202 12636 11822 1996 322 14140 4156 202 3954 3984 346 322 4008 4164 192 3972 3975 346 609 3712 4269 192 4077 4110 346 609 3847 1214 54 1160 1453 135 28 1560 3055 138 2917 2657 211 581 2287 3044 138 2906 2648 210 581 2277 1225 1236 1681 628 1758 1tel restated restated m m 2906 2277 2416 1519 60 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Group Balance Sheet at 31 December 2002 2001 restated Notes m m Fixed assets T angible fixed assets 11 6597 5409 Goodwill and intangible assets 12 2807 2700 Fixed asset investments 13 46 23 9450 8132 Current assets Stocks 14 2593 2402 Debtors 15 4845 4139 Short term investments 16 3962 3118 12126 10364 T otal assets 21576 18496 Creditors due within one year Short term borrowings 17 202 214 Current instalments of loans 19 314 107 Other creditors 18 7699 6159 8215 6480 Net current assets 3911 3884 T otal assets less current liabilities 13361 12016 Creditors due after more than one year Other creditors 18 34 152 Provisions for liabilities and charges 21 1773 1600 Net assets 11226 9629 Capital and reserves Calledup share capital 38 429 436 Share premium account 23 403 334 Capital redemption reserve 23 16 9 Merger reserve 23 433 433 Other reserves 23 1440 1470 Profit and loss account 23 8451 6904 Shareholders funds  equity interests 22 11172 9586 Minority equity interests 54 43 Shareholders funds and minority interests 11226 9629 The Financial Statements on pages 58 to 122 were approved by the Board of Directors on 30 January 2003 and were signed on its behalf by Sir T om McKillop Jonathan Symonds Director Director AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Statement of Group Cash Flow for the year ended 31 Decembertel Notes m m m Cash flow from operating activities Net cash inflow from trading operations 24 5686 4130 4992 Outflow related to exceptional items 25 93 368 809 Net cash inflow from operating activities 5593 3762 4183 Dividends received from joint ventures Returns on investments and servicing of finance Interest received 142 232 180 Interest paid 96 84 145 Dividends received  8 Dividends paid by subsidiaries to minority interests 11  16 T ax paid 795 792 648 Capital expenditure and financial investment Cash expenditure on tangible fixed assets 11 1340 1385 1347 Cash expenditure on intangible assets and goodwill 268 197 113 Cash expenditure on fixed asset investments 1 5 3 Disposals of fixed assets 66 44 37 1543 1543 1426 Acquisitions and disposals Acquisitions of subsidiaries and purchases of minority interests 26  44 167 Net repayment of debt by Zeneca Agrochemicals 27   909 Disposals of business operations 28 Disposals of investments in joint ventures and associates   2 Equity dividends paid to Shareholders 1234 1236 1220 Net cash inflow before management of liquid resources and financing 30 2056 303 1648 Management of liquid resources and financing Movement in short term investments and fixed deposits net 806 260 608 Financing 31 118 35 66 Net share repurchases 1154 994 334 Decreaseincrease in cash in the year 29 22 396 640 62 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Basis of Consolidation and Presentation of Financial Information The preparation of the Financial Statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the Financial Statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Actual results could differ from those estimates.
As part of AstraZeneca s objective to align with accounting best practice cash discounts arising from prompt payment of invoices have been reclassified from cost of sales to sales.
Comparatives have also been reclassified for consistency of presentation.
Both sales and cost of sales have been reduced by 287m in the current year 2001 258m 2000 221m.
The change has minimal impact on previously stated sales growth rates.
Furthermore neither profits nor net assets have been affected.
Discontinued operations Following the demerger of the Zeneca Agrochemicals business on 13 November 2000 and its subsequent merger with Novartis agribusiness to form Syngenta AG Zeneca Agrochemicals results have been reported as discontinued operations.
New accounting standards The following new accounting standard was adopted during the year UK Financial Reporting Standard 19 FRS 19 Deferred T ax is applicable for accounting periods ending on or after 23 January 2002.
It requires full provision to be made for deferred tax assets and liabilities arising from timing differences between the recognition of gains and losses in the Financial Statements and their recognition in a tax computation except for certain exemptions set out in the standard.
The impact of adoption in the year ended 31 December 2002 has been to reduce net profit by 19m.
Compliance with FRS 19 at 31 December 2001 reduced net assets by 193m being an increase in assets of 511m and an increase in liabilities of 704m.
The net profit for the year ended 31 December 2001 decreased by 61m 2000 261m resulting in an effective tax rate of 28.5% 2000 40.6% compared with the previously reported 27% 2000 33.8%.
The adjustments did not change the tax effects on exceptional items.
Basic earnings per share for the year ended 31 December 2001 have been restated from 1.69 to 1.65 2000 1.44 to 1.30 whilst earnings per share before exceptional items have fallen from 1.77 to 1.73 2000 1.76 to 1.62.
Comparative periods have been restated.
In addition the following new accounting standard had been issued but has not yet been fully adopted UK Financial Reporting Standard 17 FRS 17 Retirement Benefits becomes fully effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2005 with increasing levels of disclosure required for each accounting period ending on or after 22 June 2001.
It sets out the requirements for accounting for retirement benefits including the fair value of assets and liabilities arising from employers obligations the treatment of related costs and level of disclosure.
AstraZeneca has adopted FRS 17 to the extent of the mandated disclosure requirements for the year ended 31 December 2002 and these are included in Note 32 to the Financial Statements.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Accounting Policies Basis of accounting The Financial Statements are prepared under the historical cost convention modified to include the revaluation to market value of certain current asset investments held by Group subsidiaries as described below in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and UK generally accepted accounting principles UK GAAP.
Where there are significant differences to US GAAP these have been described in the US GAAP section on pages 113 to 122.
The following paragraphs describe the main accounting policies under UK GAAP .
The accounting policies of some overseas subsidiaries and associated undertakings do not conform with UK GAAP and where appropriate adjustments are made on consolidation in order to present the Group Financial Statements on a consistent basis.
On 13 November 2000 AstraZeneca demerged Zeneca Agrochemicals which was merged with the Novartis agribusiness to form Syngenta AG.
The impact of the demerger on the AstraZeneca Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2000 is shown in Note 27.
Critical accounting policies AstraZenecas management considers the following to be the most important accounting policies in the context of the Groups operations.
The impact of these policies and management judgements made when applying them are discussed in the
Financial Review.
Turnover
T urnover excludes intercompany turnover and value added taxes and represents net invoice value less estimated rebates returns and settlement discounts.
Revenue is recognised at the point at which title passes.
Research and development Research and development expenditure is charged to profit in the year in which it is incurred.
Goodwill
On the acquisition of a business fair values are attributed to the net assets acquired.
Goodwill arises where the fair value of the consideration given for a business exceeds the fair value of such net assets.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions since 1998 is capitalised and amortised over its estimated useful life generally not exceeding 20 years.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment when there are indications that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
The Group s policy up to and including 1997 was to eliminate goodwill arising upon acquisitions against reserves.
Such goodwill will remain eliminated against reserves until disposal or termination of the previously acquired business including the planned disposal or termination when there are indications that the value of the goodwill has been permanently impaired when the profit or loss on disposal or termination will be calculated after charging the gross amount at current exchange rates of any such goodwill.
Postretirement benefits The pension costs relating to UK retirement plans are assessed in accordance with the advice of independent qualified actuaries.
The amounts so determined include the regular cost of providing the benefits under the plans which it is intended should remain as a level percentage of current and expected future earnings of the employees covered under the plans.
Variations from the regular pension cost are spread on a systematic basis over the estimated average remaining service lives of current employees in the plans.
Retirement plans of nonUK subsidiaries are accounted for in accordance with local conditions and practice.
With minor exceptions these subsidiaries recognise the expected cost of providing pensions on a systematic basis over the average remaining service lives of employees in accordance with the advice of independent qualified actuaries.
The costs of providing postretirement benefits other than pensions principally healthcare are charged to the profit and loss account on a consistent basis over the average service lives of employees.
Such costs are assessed in accordance with the advice of independent qualified actuaries.
AstraZeneca has adopted the disclosure requirements of FRS 17.
Other accounting policies Foreign currencies Profit and loss accounts in foreign currencies are translated into US dollars at average rates for the relevant accounting periods.
Assets and liabilities are translated at exchange rates prevailing at the date of the Group balance sheet.
Exchange gains and losses on short term foreign currency borrowings and deposits are included within net interest payable.
Exchange differences on all other transactions except relevant foreign currency loans are taken to operating profit.
In the consolidated Financial Statements exchange differences arising on consolidation of the net investments in overseas subsidiaries joint ventures and associates together with those on relevant foreign currency loans are taken directly to reserves via the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
Taxation
The charge for taxation is based on the profits for the year and takes into account taxation deferred because of timing differences between the treatment of certain items for taxation and for accounting purposes.
Full provision is made for the tax effects of these differences.
No provision is made for unremitted earnings of foreign subsidiaries where there is no commitment to remit such earnings nor is provision made for rolled over capital gains.
The deferred tax balances are not discounted.
Fixed assets depreciation and amortisation AstraZeneca s policy is to write off the difference between the cost of each tangible fixed asset and its residual value evenly over its estimated remaining life.
Reviews are made periodically of the estimated remaining lives of individual productive assets taking account of commercial and technological obsolescence as well as normal wear and tear .
Under this policy it becomes impracticable to calculate average asset lives exactly .
However  the total lives range from approximately 13 to 50 years for buildings and 3 to 15 years for plant and equipment.
Intangible assets including patents acquired are capitalised and amortised over their estimated useful lives generally not exceeding 20 years in line with the benefits accruing.
If related products fail the remaining unamortised amounts are immediately written off to revenue expense.
Finance costs and internally developed intangible assets are not capitalised.
All fixed assets are reviewed for impairment when there are indications that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Leases
Assets held under finance leases are capitalised and included in tangible fixed assets at fair value.
Each asset is depreciated over the shorter of the lease term or its useful life.
The obligations related to finance leases net of finance charges in respect of future periods are included as appropriate under creditors due within or creditors due after  one year .
The interest element of the rental obligation is allocated to accounting periods during the lease term to reflect a constant rate of interest on the remaining balance of the obligation for each accounting period.
Rentals under operating leases are 64 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Accounting Policies continued charged to the profit and loss account as incurred.
Investments
An associate is an undertaking not being a subsidiary or joint venture in which AstraZeneca has a participating interest and over whose commercial and financial policy decisions AstraZeneca exercises significant influence.
A joint venture is an entity in which AstraZeneca holds an interest on a long term basis and which is jointly controlled by AstraZeneca and one or more other venturers under a contractual arrangement.
AstraZeneca s share of the profits less losses of all significant joint ventures and associates is included in the Group profit and loss account on the equity accounting basis or  in the case of joint ventures the gross equity accounting basis.
The holding value of significant associates and joint ventures in the Group balance sheet is calculated by reference to AstraZeneca s equity in the net assets of such associates and joint ventures as shown by the most recent accounts available adjusted where appropriate and including goodwill on acquisitions made since 1 January 1998.
Fixed asset investments are stated at cost and reviewed for impairment if there are indications that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Current asset investments held by the Group s insurance company subsidiaries to the extent that they are actively matched against insurance liabilities are valued at market value and unrealised gains and losses are taken directly to reserves via the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
Realised gains and losses are taken to the profit and loss account.
Contingent liabilities Through the normal course of business AstraZeneca is involved in legal disputes the settlement of which may involve cost to the
Provision is made where the outcome and associated costs can be estimated reliably.
AstraZeneca is exposed to environmental liabilities relating to its past operations principally in respect of soil and groundwater remediation costs.
Provisions for these costs are made when there is a present obligation it is probable that expenditure on remedial work will be required and a reliable estimate can be made of the cost.
Stock valuation Finished goods are stated at the lower of cost or net realisable value and raw materials and other stocks at the lower of cost or replacement price.
The first in first out or an average method of valuation is used.
In determining cost depreciation is included but selling expenses and certain overhead expenses principally central administration costs are excluded.
Net realisable value is determined as estimated selling price less costs of disposal.
Principal financial instruments Forward foreign exchange contracts for existing transactions are revalued to year end spot rates and the gainslosses arising are recognised in the Group profit and loss account.
Interest differentials are amortised on a straight line basis over the life of the contract.
The gainslosses on forward foreign exchange contracts and currency option contracts hedging anticipated exposures are deferred until the date the underlying transaction being hedged is completed.
Interest rate swaps are accounted for on an accruals basis.
Crosscurrency swaps are translated at year end exchange rates gainslosses arising are included in the measurement of the related liabilities and dealt with in the Group profit and loss account or reserves as appropriate.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements 1 Composition of the Group The Group Financial Statements consolidate the financial statements of AstraZeneca PLC and its subsidiaries of which there were 235 at 31 December 2002.
Owing to local conditions and to avoid undue delay in the presentation of the Group Financial Statements Salick Health Care prepares its financial statements to 30 November .
2 Note of historical cost profits and losses There were no material differences between reported profits and losses and historical cost profits and losses on ordinary activities before taxation.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 3 Group operating profit Continuing operations
Group turnover 17841  17841 Operating costs Cost of sales 4520  4520 Distribution costs 141  141 Research and development 3069  3069 Selling general and administrative expenses 5998 350 6348 13728 350 14078 Other operating income Royalties 113  113 Other income 130  130 Other income includes gains arising from disposals under ongoing product rationalisation programmes.
Group operating profit 4356 350 4006 Charges included above for depreciation 705  705 for amortisation 255  255 for impairment Gross profit as defined by the Companies Act 1985 13321  13321 4 Share of operating profitslosses of joint ventures and associates Continuing operations
Share of operating lossprofit of joint ventures Share of operating profit of associates AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Continuing operations Continuing operations Discontinued operations Pre Pre Pre exceptional Exceptional 2001 exceptional Exceptional exceptional Exceptional 2000 items items Total items items items items Total reclassified reclassified reclassified reclassified reclassified reclassified reclassified reclassified m m m m m m m m 16222  16222 15583  2299  17882 4198 34 4232 3960 11 1299  5270 2687 86 2773 2620 51 222  2893 5427 82 5509 5032 260 399  5691 12434 202 12636 11822 322 1996  14140 4156 202 3954 3984 322 346  4008 12024 34 11990 11623 11 1000  12612 Continuing operations Continuing operations Discontinued operations Pre Pre Pre exceptional Exceptional 2001 exceptional Exceptional exceptional Exceptional 2000 items items Total items items items items Total m m m m m m m m AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 5 Exceptional itemstel m m m Accrual related to Zoladex investigation 350 Integration and synergy costs  202 322 Exceptional items included in operating profits 350 202 322 Continuing operations Provision of impairment of investment in Advanta BV after charging 49m of goodwill previously written off to reserves   137 Share of operating losses of joint ventures and associates   137 Discontinued operations Costs related to the demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals and formation of Syngenta AG   150 Profits less losses on sale closure or demerger of operations   150 Profit on sale of fixed assets  10 T otal exceptional items before taxation 350 192 609 Net taxation credit  54 28 T otal exceptional items after taxation 350 138 581 The US Department of Justice has been conducting an investigation into the sale and marketing of Zoladex goserelin acetate implant.
This investigation was prompted by the filing of a qui tam complaint by a private party in 1997 and involves allegations of improper submissions of claims to the Medicare and Medicaid programmes.
The Company and federal and state authorities are in the process of negotiating a potential settlement of the civil and criminal claims at issue in the investigation.
As a result although no final agreement has been concluded the Company believes it appropriate to accrue 350m to cover estimated settlement costs.
The integration and synergy programme initiated in 1999 was completed during 2001 with further exceptional charges of 202m 2000 322m principally for manpower related costs IT costs and contractors.
The cumulative charges were 1388m.
The Group took an exceptional charge of 137m in 2000 to provide for impairment of its 50% interest in the seeds company Advanta BV including a write off of 49m of related goodwill previously taken to reserves.
The costs related to the demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals and formation of Syngenta AG included advisors fees the costs of separating computer systems employee related costs and environmental and occupational health provisions.
The exceptional charge was reduced by the gain on disposal of products whose sale was required by the competition authorities as a condition of the creation of Syngenta AG.
T ax relief on the net exceptional costs was more than offset by the provision for capital taxes arising out of the restructuring of the business in preparation for demerger  resulting in a net tax cost of 50m.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 6 Net interesttel m m m Interest receivable and similar income from investments Securities 21 19 30 Short term deposits 90 179 192 Exchange gain 6 146 Joint ventures   telInterest payable and similar charges Loan interest 10 32 50 Interest on short term borrowings and other financing costs 51 35 62 Discount on liability 10 15 19 Exchange losses 16 12 Joint ventures   3 Net interest receivable 30 105 135 The discounting charge above relates to amounts owed in respect of the reacquisition of certain distribution rights the final instalment of which is payable in 2003.
In prior years all interest has been classified within continuing operations as the management of the Group s liquidity and funding is carried out by the central treasury function and it is not practicable to allocate interest to the different reporting segments.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 7 Taxation Profit on ordinary activities before taxation as shown in the Group profit and loss account was as followstel restated restated m m m Overseas 3296 3459 3039 4037 4077 3847 T axes on profit on ordinary activities were as follows UK taxation Corporation tax 165 147 130 Double taxation relief 29 37 42 Deferred taxation 24 53 3 Overseas taxation Overseas taxes 929 739 1066 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 51 17 4 Deferred taxation 139 275 402 1017 997 1472 Share of taxation of joint ventures and associates   3 T ax on profit on ordinary activities 1177 1160 1560 In prior years the charge for taxation has been allocated between continuing operations and discontinued operations based on the effective tax rates for the Group in the territories in which these operations are based.
UK and overseas taxation has been provided at current rates on the profits earned for the periods covered by the Group financial statements.
T o the extent that dividends remitted from overseas subsidiaries joint ventures and associates are expected to result in additional taxes appropriate amounts have been provided.
No deferred tax has been provided for unremitted earnings of Group companies overseas as these are in the main considered permanently employed in the businesses of these companies and in the case of joint ventures and associates the taxes would not be material.
Cumulative unremitted earnings of overseas subsidiaries and related undertakings totalled approximately 9141m at 31 December 2002.
Unremitted earnings may be liable to overseas taxes andor UK taxation after allowing for double taxation relief if they were to be distributed as dividends.
Exceptional items included in tax on ordinary activitiestel m m m T ax credit on exceptional items  54 28 Includes deferred tax relief of nil 2001 23m 2000 66m.
Statement of total recognised gains and losses In certain circumstances tax charges or credits on currency differences on borrowings are taken to reserves via the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
The tax charge on such currency translation differences amounted to 2m in 2002 2001 6m 2000 42m and has been reported in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
Factors affecting future tax charges As a group involved in worldwide operations AstraZeneca is subject to several factors that may affect future tax charges principally the levels and mix of profitability in different jurisdictions transfer pricing policies and tax levels imposed.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 7 T axation continued T ax reconciliation to UK statutory rate The table shown below reconciles the UK statutory tax charge to the Group s current tax charge on profit on ordinary activities before taxation.
Profit on ordinary activities before taxation 4037 4077 3847 Notional taxation charge at UK corporation tax rate of 30% 30% for 2001 30% for 2000 1211 1223 1154 Differences in effective overseas tax rates 141 108 215 Capital allowancestax reliefs in excess of depreciation 291 401 235 Other timing differences 40 99 134 Items not deductible for tax purposes 49 48 37 Items not chargeable for tax purposes 110 58 54 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 51 17 4 Exceptional items 105 28 171 Current ordinary tax charge for the year 1014 832 1158 Balance sheettel m m m Deferred taxation liabilityasset movement At beginning of year 212 96 369 Prior year adjustment page 62   33 Profit and loss account 163 328 399 Statement of total recognised gains and losses 155 19 83 Exchange 139 39 76 At end of year 359 212 96 Debtors  amount due within one year Note 15 625 550 541 Debtors  amount due after more than one year Note 15 226 146 189 Provisions Note 21 1210 908 634 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 7 T axation continued Deferred taxation The amounts of deferred taxation accounted for in the Group balance sheet comprised the following deferred tax liabilities and assets 2002 2001 restated m m Deferred tax liabilities UK fixed assets 429 332 NonUK fixed assets 570 455 Interest accruals 13 72 Untaxed reserves 86 11 Pension and postretirement benefits 46 Other 53 150 1197 1020 Deferred tax assets Intercompany inventory transfers 496 413 Merger  integration and restructuring charges 16 121 Accrued expenses 243 161 Pension and postretirement benefits 26 91 Other Deferred tax liability 359 212 No provision has been made in accordance with FRS19 for rolled over gains amounting to 126m 2001 75m 2000 79m.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 8 Dividendsteltel Per Per Per Share Share Share m m m Interim paid on 7 October 2002 0.23 0.23 0.2telSecond interim to be confirmed as final payable 7 April 2003 0.47 0.47 0.4tel0.70 0.70 0.70 1206 1225 1236 Dividend in specie  demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals   1669 The demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals in 2000 was recorded in the Group accounts at the book value of the net assets which were deconsolidated 2059m net of minority interest together with 813m of related goodwill which had previously been written off to reserves less debt and liabilities assumed by Zeneca Agrochemicals 1203m giving a dividend in specie of 1669m.
9 Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Sharetel restated restated m m m Net profit for the financial year before exceptional items m 3186 3044 2858 Exceptional items after tax m see Note 5 350 138 581 Net profit for the financial year m 2836 2906 2277 Earnings per Ordinary Share before exceptional items  1.84 1.73 1.62 Loss per Ordinary Share on exceptional items  0.20 0.08 0.32 Earnings per Ordinary Share  1.64 1.65 1.30 Diluted earnings per Ordinary Share before exceptional items  1.84 1.73 1.62 Diluted loss per Ordinary Share on exceptional items  0.20 0.08 0.32 Diluted earnings per Ordinary Share  1.64 1.65 1.30 Weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue for basic earnings millions 1733 1758 1768 Dilutive impact of share options outstanding millions 2 32 Diluted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue millions 1735 1761 1770 There are no options warrants or rights outstanding in respect of unissued shares except for employee share option schemes.
The number of options outstanding and the weighted average exercise price of these options is shown in Note 33.
The earnings figures used in the calculations above are unchanged for diluted earnings per Ordinary Share.
Earnings per Ordinary Share before exceptional items have been calculated to eliminate the impact of exceptional items on the results of the business.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 10 Segment information Classes of Business
Continuing operations 17841 16222 15583 Discontinued operations  Agrochemicals   2299 Group turnover 17841 16222 17882 Share of joint venture turnover 191 183 195 Group turnover and share of joint venture turnover 18032 16405 18077 The Group s policy is to transfer products internally at external market prices.
Operating profit Profitloss before after exceptionals interest and taxationteltel m m m m m m Profit arising in Continuing operations 4006 3954 3662 4007 3972 3665 Discontinued operations  Agrochemicals   346   196 4006 3954 4008 4007 3972 3861 Share of operating loss of joint ventures and associates   149 4007 3972 3712 In prior years corporate overheads have been allocated to each business segment on a consistent basis.
The effect of these allocations was not material.
Net assetsliabilities T otal assetsteltel restated restated restated restated m m m m m m Continuing operations 9868 8808 7604 16212 14158 13658 Discontinued operations  Specialties   126   3 9868 8808 7478 16212 14158 13661 IntraGroup eliminations     12 Nonoperating assets 1358 821 1938 5364 4338 5208 Investments in joint ventures and associates 11226 9629 9416 21576 18496 18857 Nonoperating assets include short term investments and cash short term borrowings loans and nonoperating debtors and creditors not attributable to individual business segments.
Depreciation amortisation Capital expenditure and impairmentteltel m m m m m m Continuing operations 1463 1501 124telDiscontinued operations  Agrochemicals   153   121 1463 1501 1401 960 872 1011 Capital expenditure includes expenditure on goodwill and intangible assets.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 10 Segment information continued Geographic areas The tables below show information by geographic area and for turnover and tangible fixed assets material countries.
The figures for each area show the turnover  operating profit and profit on ordinary activities before interest and taxation made by companies located in that areacountry together with net operating assets and tangible fixed assets owned by the same companies export sales and the related profit are included in the areas from which those sales were made.
Turnovertel reclassified reclassified m m m
External 872 954 989 IntraGroup 3092 2449 2155 3964 3403 3144 Continental Europe France 1111 928 861 Germany 682 666 767 Netherlands 226 307 297 Sweden 619 559 601 Others 1253 1091 891 IntraGroup 1646 1494 1371 6674 5973 5722 The Americas Canada 570 525 479 United States 9325 8465 7935 North America 9895 8990 8414 Brazil 97 102 133 Others 237 213 185 IntraGroup 235 223 183 10464 9528 8915 Asia Africa and Australasia Others 752 654 698 IntraGroup 30 160 177 1742 1644 1688 Continuing operations 22844 20548 19469 Discontinued operations  Agrochemicals   3396 22844 20548 22865 IntraGroup eliminations 5003 4326 4983 17841 16222 17882 Export sales from the UK totalled 3368m for the year ended 31 December 2002 2001 2664m 2000 3429m.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 10 Segment information continued Operating profit Profit on ordinary activities after exceptional items before interest and taxationteltel Profit from m m m m m m Continental Europe 1689 1400 1084 1689 1405 943 The Americas 1473 1904 1740 1473 1914 1740 Asia Africa and Australasia 17tel130 172 Continuing operations 4006 3954 3662 4007 3972 3516 Discontinued operations  Agrochemicals   346   196 4006 3954 4008 4007 3972 3712 Net operating assetstel m m m UK 3101 2558 2037 Continental Europe 4805 4940 4649 The Americas 1004 614 184 Asia Africa and Australasia 958 696 734 Continuing operations 9868 8808 7604 Discontinued operations  Specialties   126 9868 8808 7478 T angible fixed assetstel m m m UK 2319 1881 1631 Sweden 1626 1251 1327 US 1031 895 818 Others 1621 1382 1181 Continuing operations 6597 5409 4957 6597 5409 4957
Average number of people employed by the Group in UK 10700 10200 10000 Continental Europe 22600 19900 20400 The Americas 17800 16700 14200 Asia Africa and Australasia 6400 5800 5500 Continuing operations 57500 52600 50100 Discontinued operations  Agrochemicals   6900 57500 52600 57000 The number of people employed by the Group at the end of 2002 was 58700 2001 54600 2000 52300.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 10 Segment information continuedtel reclassified reclassified m m m Geographic markets T urnover in each geographic market in which customers located Continental Europe 5072 4477 4359 The Americas 10287 9353 8799 Asia Africa and Australasia 1859 1633 1638 Continuing operations 17841 16222 15583 Discontinued operations  Agrochemicals   2299 17841 16222 17882 78 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 11 T angible fixed assets
Land and Plant and course of tangible buildings equipment construction assets m m m m
At beginning of year 2490 5295 1119 8904 Exchange adjustments 292 612 139 1043 Capital expenditure 48 212 1082 1342 T ransfer of assets into use 387 631 1018 Disposals and other movements 72 150 24 246 At end of year 3145 6600 1298 11043
At beginning of year 753 2742  3495 Exchange adjustments 87 354  441 Charge for year 104 601  705 Disposals and other movements 49 146  195 At end of year 895 3551  4446 Net book value at 31 December 2002 2250 3049 1298 6597 Net book value at 31 December 2001 1737 2553 1119 5409 Capital expenditure in the year of 1342m 2001 1393m did not include any capitalised finance leases 2001 nil.
Cash expenditure on tangible fixed assets was 1340m 2001 1385m 2000 1347m.
2002 2001 m m The net book value of land and buildings comprised Freeholds 2220 1690 Long leases over 50 years unexpired 29 45 Short leases 1 2 2250 1737 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 12 Goodwill and intangible assets
Goodwill assets Total m m m
At beginning of year 1000 2727 3727 Exchange adjustments 85 311 396 Additions 17 104 121 Disposals and other movements  25 25 At end of year 1102 3117 4219
At beginning of year 166 861 1027 Exchange adjustments 28 128 156 Charge for year 55 200 255 Disposals and other movements  26 26 At end of year 249 1163 1412 Net book value at 31 December 2002 853 1954 2807 Net book value at 31 December 2001 834 1866 2700 13 Fixed asset investments Joint Other ventures investments Total m m m
At beginning of year 134 23 157 Additions  25 25 Disposals and other movements including exchange  2 2 At end of year 134 46 180 Share of postacquisition reserves At beginning and end of year 134  134 Net book value at 31 December 2002  46 46 Net book value at 31 December 2001  23 23 The fair values of other investments are not materially different from their carrying values.
At 31 December 2002 the Company s share ownership trust held 885425 Ordinary Shares.
Share of joint venture assets and liabilities 2002 2001 m m Gross assets 107 99 Gross liabilities 107 99 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 14 Stocks 2002 2001 m m Raw materials and consumables 992 796 Stocks in process 1062 720 Finished goods and goods for resale 539 886 2593 2402 15 Debtors 2002 2001 restated m m Amounts due within one year T rade debtors 2701 2430 Less Amounts provided for doubtful debts 56 42 2645 2388 Deferred taxation Note 7 625 550 Other debtors 658 641 Prepayments and accrued income 519 274 4447 3853 Amounts due after more than one year Deferred taxation Note 7 226 146 Other debtors 16 23 Prepayments and accrued income 15tel4845 4139 Figures include prepaid pension costs Note 32.
Provisions for doubtful debtstel m m m Balance at beginning of year 42 39 118 Profit and loss account charge 11 434 Amounts utilised and other movements incl.
Agrochemicals demerger in 2000 3 1 113 Balance at end of year 56 42 39 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 16 Short term investments 2002 2001 m m Listed debt securities 144 288 Other listed investments 46 45 Investment securities 190 333 Fixed deposits 3772 2785 3962 3118 The Group s insurance subsidiaries hold cash and short term investments totalling 173m 2001 186m of which 120m 2001 105m is required to meet insurance solvency requirements and which as a result is not readily available for the general purposes of the Group.
In addition some 126m 2001 236m of short term investments shown above are committed as security against deferred payments due under a contractual obligation of the Group see Note 34.
The market value of other listed investments was 137m 2001 145m at the year end.
17 Short term borrowings 2002 2001 m m Bank borrowings Fixed securities 11 22 Secured by floating charge  8 Unsecured 19telOther borrowings unsecured  AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 18 Other creditors 2002 2001 m m Amounts due within one year T rade creditors 3171 2385 Corporate taxation 1191 1018 Value added and payroll taxes and social security 167 173 Other creditors 1507 1219 Accruals 855 544 Dividends to shareholders 808 820 7699 6159 Amounts due after more than one year Other creditors 34 152 Included in other creditors are amounts totalling 189m 2001 104m to meet insurance obligations of the Group s insurance subsidiaries.
Also included in other creditors are amounts due within one year in connection with the Group s exceptional charges as detailed in Note 5.
The amounts comprise 350m 2001 nil in respect of the accrual related to the Zoladex investigation in the US 36m 2001 116m in respect of synergy and integration costs 14m 2001 21m in respect of the Agrochemicals demerger and 48m 2001 64m in respect of the Specialties disposal and other minor restructurings.
19 Loans Repayment 2002 2001 Dates m m Secured loans Secured by fixed charge 20032007 19 48 T otal secured 19 48 Unsecured loans US dollars 6.3% Guaranteed notes tel7% Guaranteed debentures telOthers 20032013 44 115 T otal unsecured 623 694 T otal loans 642 742 Less current instalments of loans 314 107 Loans due after more than one year 328 635 In the above table loans are shown after taking account of associated crosscurrency swaps see Note 20.
Loans from banks included in the table above amounted to 61m 2001 156m of which 40m 2001 48m was secured.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 20 Financial instruments A discussion of the Group s objective policy and strategy in respect of risk management and the use of financial instruments is included in the Financial Review on pages 30 to 43.
The following disclosures exclude all short term trade related debtors and creditors.
Interest rate risks of financial assets and liabilities The interest rate profile after taking account of interest and currency swaps of the financial assets and liabilities of the Group as at 31 December 2002 was Financial Weighted Weighted assetsliabilities average average on which fixed period for Floating Fixed no interest is interest which rate rate rate paidreceived Total rate is fixed m m m m % Years Financial liabilities US dollar .8 9.6
Euro
Financial assets US dollar 4354  4354 Euro 71  71 Sterling 114  46 160 SEK 33  33 Other 70  22 92 4642  68 4710 Financial liabilities on which no interest is paid comprise deferred payments due relating to the reacquisition of certain marketing rights.
The floating rate financial liabilities comprise largely of fixed rate debt that has been swapped into floating rate debt.
One long dated 300m USD bond reverts back to a fixed rate in 2009.
The financial liabilities also include 202m of short term bank borrowings and overdrafts bearing interest at rates fixed by reference to local interbank rates.
Financial assets on which no interest is received comprise equity investments held by the Group.
The financial assets principally comprise cash on overnight deposit and short term investments with an average maturity of 67 days.
These include deposits where the interest rate is fixed until maturity but as the original maturity is less than one year  they are classified as floating rate financial instruments.
The benchmark rates for financial assets are the LIBID rate for euro and US dollar liquidity balances and the average Federal Funds effective rate for US dollar overnight balances.
Financial assets include 46m of other fixed asset investments on which no interest is received.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 20 Financial instruments continued Currency exposures 100% of the Group s transactional currency exposures on working capital balances which typically extend for up to three months are hedged using forward foreign exchange contracts.
As a result as at 31 December 2002 there were no material monetary assets or liabilities in currencies other than the functional currencies of the Group companies concerned having taken into account the effect of forward exchange currency contracts that have been utilised to match foreign currency exposures.
Additionally  approximately 50% of forecast future foreign currency transaction exposures extending for 12 months are selectively hedged.
The principal currency exposures sterling Swedish kronor  euro Australian dollars Canadian dollars and yen are hedged using a mixture of purchased currency options and forward foreign exchange contracts.
As at 31 December 2002 the Group held forward and option contracts to hedge the following forecast foreign currency transaction exposures 2002 2001 Hedged Hedged amount amount m m Sterling payables 1316 1324 SEK payables 503 401 Euro receivables 713 591 Y en receivables 153 89 AUD receivables 81 73 CAD receivables 168 128 Maturity of financial liabilities The maturity profile of the Group s financial liabilities other than short term creditors such as trade creditors and accruals at 31 December 2002 was as follows 2002 2001 Analysis by year of repayment Loans Other T otal Loans Other Total m m m m m m After five years 308  308 314  314 From five to four years 13  13 14  14 From four to three years  9  9 From three to two years  7  7 From two to one years 7  telDue after more than one year 328  32telDue within one year 31tel35tel970 742 476 1218 Other financial liabilities comprise deferred payments to reacquire certain distribution rights short term borrowings and finance leases.
Borrowing facilities The Group has various borrowing facilities available to it the majority of which offer a currency option of US dollars euros or sterling.
Unused short term credit facilities both committed and uncommitted totalled approximately 0.5bn at 31 December 2002.
Included in this were undrawn committed facilities in respect of which all conditions precedent had been met at that date as follows 2002 2001 m m Expiring in one year or less 75 375 Expiring in more than one year but not more than two years Expiring in more than two years 75 375 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 20 Financial instruments continued Fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities Set out below is a comparison by category of carrying values and fair values of all the Group s financial assets and financial liabilities as at 31 December 2002 and 2001.
Carrying Fair Carrying Fair value value value value m m m m Primary financial instruments Short term borrowings 202 202 214 214 Cash 72telShort term investments 3962 4067 3118 3192 Fixed asset investments Derivative financial instruments held to manage the interest rate and currency profile Crosscurrency swaps and interest rate swaps Derivative financial instruments held or issued to hedge the currency exposure on existing transactions Forward foreign exchange contracts 9 9 11 9 Foreign currency option contracts  1 Derivative financial instruments held or issued to hedge the currency exposure on expected future transactions Forward foreign exchange contracts   1 Foreign currency option contracts In addition to the primary financial instruments above the Group has financial liabilities of 126m comprising deferred payments due 129m before discounting.
The Group has a standby letter of credit covering these financial liabilities which is collateralised by high grade government securities.
The methods and assumptions used to estimate the fair values of financial instruments are as follows a.
Short term investments  the fair value of listed investments is based on year end quoted market prices.
For unlisted investments carrying values approximate fair value. b.
Fixed asset investments excluding equity investments in joint ventures and associates  the fair value of listed investments is based on year end quoted market prices.
For unlisted investments carrying values approximate fair value. c.
Loans  the fair value of publicly traded debt is based on year end quoted market prices the fair value of floating rate debt is nominal value as market to market differences would be minimal given frequency of resets the fair value of remaining debt is estimated using appropriate zero coupon valuation techniques based on rates current at year end. d.
Forward foreign exchange contracts  the Group has forward foreign exchange contracts to sell currency for the purpose of hedging non dollar commercial transaction exposures which existed at the date of the balance sheet and to hedge anticipated but not firmly committed nondollar commercial transactions for 2003.
The majority of the contracts for existing transactions had a maturity of six months or less from year end.
The fair value of forward foreign exchange contracts is based on market forward foreign exchange rates at year end. e.
Foreign currency option contracts  the Group has foreign currency option contracts to hedge anticipated but not firmly committed non dollar commercial transactions for 2003.
The fair value of option contracts is estimated using BlackScholes valuation techniques as adapted by Garman and Kohlhagen. f.
Interest rate and crosscurrency swaps  AstraZeneca uses interest rate and crosscurrency swaps to hedge the Group s exposure to fluctuations in interest rates and foreign exchange movements on borrowings in accordance with a formal risk management strategy .
The fair value is estimated using appropriate zero coupon valuation techniques based on rates current at year end.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 20 Financial instruments continued The above financial instruments are subject to credit and market risk.
AstraZeneca contains credit risk through the use of counterparty and product specific credit limits and by ongoing review procedures.
All financial instruments except the letter of credit are transacted with commercial banks and in line with standard market practice are not backed with cash collateral.
The notional principal values of off balance sheet financial instruments do not represent amounts exchanged by the parties and are not a measure of the credit risk to the Group of these instruments.
The credit risk of these instruments is limited to the positive fair values of such contracts.
Market risk is the sensitivity of the value of financial instruments to changes in related currency and interest rates.
The Group is not exposed to material market risk because gains and losses on the derivative financial instruments are largely offset by gains and losses on the underlying assets liabilities and transactions subject to hedge.
Hedges
The Group s policy is to hedge 100% of transactional currency exposures and 50% of forecast future transaction exposures using forward foreign exchange contracts and foreign currency option contracts.
It also uses crosscurrency and interest rate swaps to manage its borrowings profile.
Gains and losses on instruments used for hedging are not recognised until the exposure that is being hedged is itself recognised.
Unrecognised gains and losses on instruments used for hedging are as follows T otal net Gains Losses gains m m m Unrecognised gains and losses on hedges at 1 January 2002 54 4 50 Gains and losses arising in previous years that were recognised in 2002 31 4 27 Gains and losses arising in previous years that were not recognised in 2002 23  23 Unrecognised gains and losses on hedges at 31 December 2002 108  108 Gains and losses expected to be recognised in 2003 56  56 Gains and losses expected to be recognised in 2004 or later 52  52 21 Provisions for liabilities and charges
Integration Employee and other Deferred and synergies benefits provisions taxation T otal restated restated m m m m m At 1 January 2001 as previously reported 068 Prior year adjustment page 62  549 549 2tel1617 Profit and loss account Net amounts paid or becoming current 148 306 55  509 Acquisitions  1  1 Other movements including exchange 18 23 15 55 111 At 31 December 2001 restated 1tel1600 Profit and loss account  Net amounts paid or becoming current 11 279 31  321 Other movements including exchange 10 34 16 3 57 At 31 December 210 1773 Employee benefit provisions comprise pension postretirement and other employee benefit provisions.
These will crystallise in the main over the estimated working lives of the employees concerned.
The environmental provisions are principally in respect of sites in the US further details of which are given in Note 34.
No provision has been released or applied for any purpose other than that for which it was established.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 22 Reconciliation of movements in shareholders fundstel restated restated m m m Shareholders funds at beginning of year 9586 9389 10302 Prior year adjustment page 62   39 9586 9389 10263 Net profit for the financial year 2836 2906 2277
Cash 1206 1225 1236 Dividend in specie   1669 1630 1681 628 Issues of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares 36 86 19 Repurchase of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares 1190 1080 353 Astra AB minority interest buyout   8 Goodwill written back   862 Exchange adjustments on net assets 1106 502 870 T ranslation differences on foreign currency borrowings 6 18 154 T ax on translation differences on foreign currency borrowings 2 6 42 Other movements   8 Net addition toreduction in shareholders funds 1586 197 874 Shareholders funds at end of year 11172 9586 9389 Shareholders funds at the beginning of the year were originally 9786m before deducting the prior year adjustment of 200m in respect of deferred tax under FRS 19 2001 9521m before deduction of 132m.
23 Reserves Share Capital Joint Profit premium redemption Merger Other ventures and and loss account reserve reserve reserves associates account Total restated restated m m m m m m m At 31 December 1999 as previously reported 27 8538 9858 Prior year adjustment page 62  39 39 27 8499 9819 Loss retained for year 157 471 628 Share premiums 19 19 T ransfer between reserves 14 14 Repurchase of shares 2 353 351 Astra AB minority interest buyout 8 8 Goodwill written back 862 862 Exchange adjustments Goodwill 67 67 Net assets 1 871 870 On foreign currency borrowings 154 154 Foreign currency borrowings tax effect 42 42 Other movements 2 10 8 Net movements 33 2 8 931 156 1674 872 At 31 December 2000 restated 235 3 433 1634 183 6825 8947 88 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 23 Reserves continued Share Capital Joint Profit premium redemption Merger Other ventures and and loss account reserve reserve reserves associates account Total restated restated m m m m m m m At 31 December 2000 restated 235 3 433 1634 183 6825 8947 Profit retained for year 1681 1681 Share premiums 86 86 T ransfer between reserves 13 13 Repurchase of shares 6 1080 1074 Exchange adjustments Goodwill 19 19 Net assets 502 502 On foreign currency borrowings 18 18 Foreign currency borrowings tax effect 6 6 Net movements 99 6  19  79 203 At 31 December 2001 restated 334 9 433 1653 183 6904 9150 Profit retained for year 1630 1630 Share premiums 36 36 T ransfer between reserves 33 33 Repurchase of shares 7 1190 1183 Exchange adjustments Goodwill 30 30 Net assets 1106 1106 On foreign currency borrowings 66 Foreign currency borrowings tax effect 2 2 30 1140 1110 Net movements 69 7  30  1547 1593 At 31 December 623 183 8451 10743 The prior year adjustment arises as a result of the adoption of FRS19 Deferred Tax as explained in more detail on page 62.
The movement in other reserves in 2000 relates to the realisation of goodwill in respect of the demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals 813m and the impairment of the Advanta seeds business goodwill 49m.
The cumulative amount of goodwill resulting from acquisitions net of disposals prior to the adoption of FRS 10 in 1998 amounted to 617m 2001 587m 2000 606m using year end rates of exchange.
There are no significant statutory or contractual restrictions on the distribution of current profits of subsidiaries joint ventures or associates undistributed profits of prior years are in the main permanently employed in the businesses of these companies.
The undistributed income of AstraZeneca companies overseas may be liable to overseas taxes andor UK taxation after allowing for double taxation relief if they were to be distributed as dividends see Note 7.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 24 Net cash inflow from trading operationstel m m m Operating profit before exceptional items 4356 4156 4330 Depreciation and amortisation 960 860 988 Stocks decreaseincrease 101 417 670 Debtors increasedecrease 198 138 987 Creditors increasedecrease 402 727 1317 Other noncash movements 65 120 14 5686 4130 4992 25 Cash flows related to exceptional items Current period cash flow related to exceptional items and mergertel related payments before associated tax chargerelief m m m Merck trigger event payment   93 Merger  integration and synergy costs 68 312 532 Salick Health Care rationalisation   11 Agrochemicals restructuring   46 Costs relating to the disposal of Specialties business 21 22 62 Demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals and formation of Syngenta AG 4 34 65 Outflow related to exceptional charges 93 368 809 Repayment of debt by Zeneca Agrochemicals included in Acquisitions and disposals   909 Proceeds from disposal of fixed assets accounted for as exceptional  10 Exceptional item cash flow 93 358 100 90 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 26 Acquisitions of subsidiaries and purchases of minority interests There were no significant business acquisitions in any of the years presented.
All acquisitions have been accounted for by the acquisition method of accounting.
Total Total Total fair value fair value fair value m m m Fixed assets  4 Current assets  26 Creditors due within one year  16 Provisions for liabilities and charges  1 Fair value of net assets acquired  13 Goodwill acquired  41 32 Consideration for subsidiaries and operations acquired  54 32 Purchases of minority interests  7 135
Cash included in undertaking acquired  3 Net cash consideration  44 167 Assets and liabilities were adjusted to their fair values based on external valuations and internal assessments.
There were no significant differences between book and fair values in respect of the acquisitions made in any of the years presented.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 27 Zeneca Agrochemicals demerger On 13 November 2000 Zeneca Agrochemicals was demerged from the Group and merged with the agribusiness of Novartis to form Syngenta
The Zeneca Agrochemicals results for the period to 13 November 2000 have been reported as discontinued in the AstraZeneca accounts for the year ended 31 December 2000.
The demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals was accounted for as a dividend in specie.
The impact of the demerger on the year ended 31 December 2000 is set out below.
Fixed assets 1491 Current assets 2130 Creditors due within one year 1306 Creditors due after more than one year and provisions 246 Book value of Zeneca Agrochemicals net assets disposed 2069 Minority interest share of net assets 10 Goodwill previously charged to reserves written back 813 Repayment of debt by Zeneca Agrochemicals Net repayment of debt per Cash Flow Statement 909 Net financial liabilities demerged 294 Dividend in specie 1669 In the year ended 31 December 2000 prior to its demerger  the Agrochemicals business contributed 173m to operating cash flows before exceptional items and absorbed 78m in respect of exceptional items and 149m in respect of capital expenditure.
28 Disposals There were no significant disposals in any of the years presented.
29 Reconciliation of net cash flow to movement in net fundstel m m m Decreaseincrease in cash 22 396 640 Cash outflowinflow from decreaseincrease in loans and short term borrowings 118 35 66 Cash outflowinflow from increasedecrease in short term investments 806 260 608 Change in net funds resulting from cash flows 902 691 1314 Debt released on disposals   127 Other noncash changes   48 Exchange movements 75 47 53 Movement in net funds 977 738 1436 Net funds at 1 January 2867 3605 2169 Net funds at 31 December 3844 2867 3605 92 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 30 Analysis of net funds At 1 Jan Cash Other Exchange At 31 Dec 2002 flow noncash movements 2002 m m m m m Loans due after one year 635 28 279  328 Current instalments of loans 107 77 279 5 314 T otal loans 742 105  5 642 Short term investments 3118 806  38 3962 Overdrafts 195 4  3 202 Short term borrowings excluding overdrafts 19 13  6 3609 797  80 4486 Net funds 2867 902  75 3844 Financing items included in cash movements above Issue of shares 36 Repurchase of shares 1190 Net cash inflow before management of liquid resources and financing 2056 31 Financingtel Notes m m m Issues of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares Repurchase of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares 30 1190 1080 353 1154 994 334 Repayment of lease finance   2 New loans  220 39 Loans repaid 105 192 36 Net decreaseincrease in short term borrowings 30 13 7 67 Net cash outflow from financing 1272 959 400 There were no major noncash financing transactions in any year .
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 32 Postretirement benefits
Background
The Group continues to account for pension costs in its primary Financial Statements in accordance with the UK Statement of Standard Accounting Practice No.24 Pension Costs SSAP 24.
In addition disclosures have been presented below in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard No.17 Retirement Benefits FRS 17.
The Company and most of its subsidiaries offer retirement plans which cover the majority of employees in the Group.
Many of these plans are defined contribution where the company contribution and resulting profit and loss account charge is fixed at a set level or is a set percentage of employees pay .
However  several plans mainly in the UK US and Sweden are defined benefit where benefits are based on employees length of service and final pensionable pay .
All of the major plans are funded through legally separate trustee administered funds.
The major defined benefit plans apart from the Swedish plan have been closed to new entrants since 2000.
The cash funding of the plans which may from time to time involve special payments is designed in consultation with independent qualified actuaries to ensure that present and future contributions should be sufficient to meet future liabilities.
SSAP 24 The cost of defined benefit plan pensions in a year can notionally be divided into the regular cost and variations from the regular cost.
Under
SSAP 24 the regular cost is based on actuarial assumptions and charged to the profit and loss account in the year it is paid whilst any variations which arise where the experience of the scheme varies from the assumptions made by the actuary  are charged or credited over the estimated remaining service lives of the employees.
Costs of defined contribution plan pensions are charged to the profit and loss account immediately .
On these bases the total pension cost for the Group under SSAP 24 for 2002 was 220m 2001 194m 2000 184m.
In the Group balance sheet at 31 December 2002 accrued pension costs included in other creditors amounted to 53m 2001 76m prepaid pension costs of 114m 2001 47m are included in debtors.
Provisions for unfunded pension obligations included in provisions amounted to 235m 2001 357m.
With regard to the Group s main UK defined benefit fund the latest actuarial valuation was carried out at 31 March 2002 and the pension cost assessed using the projected unit credit method.
The key accounting assumptions for the purposes of SSAP 24 were that against a background long term UK price inflation averaging 2.5% pa investment returns would average 6.5% pa salary increases 4.3% pa and pension increases 2.5% pa.
The market value of the fund s assets at the valuation date was 2161m 3477m equivalent representing 94.6% of the liabilities using these assumptions.
The regular cost for accounting purposes equates to 18.8% of pensionable salaries.
At the same time the valuation was carried out for ongoing funding purposes with assumptions slightly more conservative than those used for SSAP 24 purposes.
The market value of the fund s assets at the valuation date represent 90.1% of the liabilities on a funding basis.
The Company has indicated to the trustee of the UK fund its intention to target a solvency ratio of 91% following the 2003 actuarial valuation with a longer term aim of restoring solvency over a period of around 15 years.
Any cash contributions made to the fund would be treated as a prepayment and taken into account in the actuarially assessed contributions to the fund charged to the profit and loss account.
The US defined benefits programme was actuarially revalued at 31 December 2002 when plan obligations were estimated to amount to 812m and plan assets were 665m.
The US typically makes contributions to provide for plan benefit deficits on a regular basis.
PRI Pensionstjnst AB a joint company for Swedish industry  administers the Swedish plan for salaried employees and Alecta establishes benefit levels and actuarial assumptions.
During 2002 AstraZeneca AB has established separate trustee administered funds to support its pension liabilities prior to 2002 the plan was unfunded.
Postretirement benefits other than pensions In the US and to a lesser extent in some other countries AstraZeneca s employment practices include the provision of healthcare and life insurance benefits for retired employees.
Some 6920 retired employees and covered dependants currently benefit from these provisions and some 13383 current employees will be eligible on retirement.
AstraZeneca accrues for the present value of such retiree obligations over the working life of the employee.
The cost of postretirement benefits other than pensions for the Group in 2002 was 22m 2001 16m 2000 25m.
Provisions and creditors set aside for the benefit obligations at 31 December 2002 amounted to 32m 2001 248m 2000 233m.
Other than this provision there were plan assets amounting to 133m in the US at 31 December 2002.
These benefit plans have been included in the disclosure of postretirement benefits under FRS17.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 32 Postretirement benefits continued FRS 17 Full implementation of FRS 17 had originally been intended for accounting periods ending on or after 22 June 2003 but has been deferred by the Accounting Standards Board until accounting periods commencing on or after 1 January 2005.
However  the requirements for disclosure under FRS 17 between its issue and full implementation dates remain and this information is set out below.
When fully adopted the objective of FRS 17 is to reflect the fair value of postretirement plan assets and liabilities and associated charges in the Financial Statements.
FRS 17 specifies how key assumptions should be formulated and applied these assumptions are often different to the funding bases established by the pension funds trustees or actuaries.
The accounting requirements of FRS 17 are broadly as follows Postretirement scheme assets are valued at market values at the balance sheet date Postretirement scheme liabilities are measured using a projected unit method and discounted at the current rate of return on high quality corporate bonds of equivalent term and currency to the liability and The movement in the scheme surplusdeficit will be split between operating charges and financing items in the profit and loss account and in the statement of total recognised gains and losses actuarial gains and losses.
Financial assumptions Qualified independent actuaries have updated the actuarial valuations of the major defined benefit schemes operated by the Group to 31 December 2002.
The assumptions used by the actuaries are the best estimates chosen from a range of possible actuarial assumptions which due to the long term nature of the scheme may not necessarily be borne out in practice.
These assumptions were as follows 2002 2001 Rest of Rest of UK Group UK Group Inflation assumption 2.2% 2.1% 2.5% 2.7% Rate of increase in salaries 4.0% 4.0% 4.3% 4.6% Rate of increase in pensions in payment 2.2% 0.5% 2.5% 0.5% Discount rate 5.6% 5.8% 5.8% 6.2% Long term rate of return expected at 31 December Equities 8.3% 8.4% 7.6% 9.7% Bonds 4.9% 6.1% 5.3% 6.1% Others 3.7% 3.6% 4.0% 8.7% AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 32 Postretirement benefits continued Postretirement scheme deficit The postretirement scheme deficit set out below under FRS 17 is as if this standard were fully applied.
However  under the current accounting methodology SSAP 24 there are prepayments and provisions including deferred tax within the balance sheet at 31 December 2002 that would offset the effect on net assets of this deficit in the event of a restatement under FRS 17.
The assets and liabilities of the major defined benefit schemes operated by the Group at 31 December 2002 as calculated in accordance with FRS 17 are shown below.
The fair values of the schemes assets are not intended to be realised in the short term and may be subject to significant change before they are realised.
The present value of the scheme s liabilities is derived from cash flow projections over long periods and are thus inherently uncertain.
If FRS 17 had been adopted for the year ended 31 December 2002 the Group s reported net assets see page 60 would be reduced by 637m 5.7% to 10589m.
Further explanation of this adjustment is included below Value at 31 December 2002 Value at 31 December 2001 Rest of Rest of UK Group Total UK Group Total m m m m m m Scheme assets Equities 1186 708 1894 1255 409 1664 Bonds 2097 464 2561 1831 214 2045 Others T otal fair value of assets 3358 1274 4632 3145 754 3899 Present value of scheme liabilities 4200 1665 5865 3569 1472 5041 Deficit in the scheme 842 391 1233 424 718 1142 Related deferred tax asset 25tel248 375 Net postretirement deficit under FRS 17 589 240 829 297 470 767 Adjustments for assets and provisions under SSAP 24 Prepayment net of related deferred tax 177 56 Accrual net of deferred tax 36 143 Provision net of deferred tax 333 296 Adjusted postretirement deficit net of related deferred tax 637 384 Net assets as currently disclosed restated see page 60 11226 9629 Net assets as adjusted if FRS 17 were fully adopted 10589 9245 Profit and loss account disclosures On full compliance with FRS 17 on the basis of the above assumptions the amounts that would have been charged to the consolidated profit and loss account and statement of total recognised gains and losses in respect of defined benefit schemes for the year ended 31 December 2002 are set out below Rest of UK Group Total m m m Operating profit Current service cost 100 69 169 Past service costs 2 8 6 Settlement and curtailment  24 24 T otal operating charge 102 37 139 Finance expense Expected return on postretirement scheme assets 197 52 249 Interest on postretirement scheme liabilities 210 98 308 Net return 13 46 59 Loss before taxation 115 83 198 Consolidated statement of total recognised gains and losses Actual return less expected return on the postretirement schemes assets 301 91 392 Experience lossesgains arising on the postretirement schemes liabilities 108 8 100 Changes in assumptions underlying the present value of the postretirement schemes liabilities 58 27 31 Actuarial loss recognised 351 110 461 96 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 32 Postretirement benefits continued Additional disclosures for the year ended 31 December 2002 Rest of UK Group Total m m m Difference between the expected and actual return on scheme assets Amount 301 91 392 Percentage of scheme assets 9.0% 7.1% 8.5% Experience gains and losses on scheme liabilities Amount 108 8 100 Percentage of the present value of scheme liabilities 2.6% 0.5% 1.7% T otal amount recognised in statement of total recognised gains and losses Amount 351 110 461 Percentage of the present value of scheme liabilities 8.4% 6.6% 7.9% Movement in postretirement deficit during the year ended 31 December 2002 Rest of UK Group Total m m m Deficits in schemes at beginning of the year 424 718 1142 Current service cost 100 69 169 Contributions 125 567 692 Past service costs 2 8 6 Settlement and curtailment  24 24 Other finance income 13 46 59 Actuarial loss 351 110 461 Exchange 77 47 124 Deficits in schemes at end of the year 842 391 1233 Adjusted postretirement deficit net of deferred tax 637 The increase in the deficit during 2002 is due principally to shortfalls on returns of postretirement scheme assets and exchange offset by funding of Sweden s pension scheme and the US s nonpension postretirement schemes for the first time in 2002.
Reserves note for the year ended 31 December 2002
Profit and loss reserve excluding postretirement liability 8451 Postretirement reserve 637 Profit and loss reserve under FRS17 7814 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 33 Employee costs and share option plans for employees Employee costs The average number of people employed by the Group in 2002 was 57500 2001 52600 2000 57000 and the costs incurred during the year in respect of these employees weretel m m m Salaries 3049 2701 2862 Social security costs 505 465 464 Pension costs 193 194 184 Other employment costs 246 182 170 3993 3542 3680 Employee costs above do not include severance costs.
The Directors believe that together with the basic salary system the Group s employee incentive schemes provide competitive and market related packages to motivate employees.
They should also align the interests of employees with those of shareholders as a whole through long term share ownership in the Company .
The Group s current UK Swedish and US schemes are described below other arrangements apply elsewhere.
The AstraZeneca UK Performance Bonus Plan Employees of participating AstraZeneca UK companies are invited to participate in this bonus plan which rewards good performance at corporate functionbusiness and individualteam levels.
Depending upon performance and upon which level it is measured bonuses may be paid partly in the form of free Ordinary Shares in the Company under the Inland Revenue approved AstraZeneca AllEmployee Share Plan and up to a maximum annual value of 3000 and partly in cash.
A tax efficient share retention scheme under which employees leave their bonus shares in trust for three to five years forms part of the AllEmployee Share Plan.
In 2002 for the first time the Company offered UK employees the opportunity to buy Partnership Shares Ordinary Shares under the AllEmployee Share Plan.
Employees may invest up to 125 per month over a 12 month accumulation period and purchase Partnership Shares in the Company with the total proceeds at the end of the period.
The purchase price for the shares is the lower of the price at the beginning or the end of the 12 month period.
A tax efficient share retention scheme is also available in respect of Partnership Shares.
At the Company s AGM in 2002 shareholders approved the issue of new shares for the purposes of the AllEmployee Share Plan.
The AstraZeneca Executive Annual Bonus Scheme This scheme is a performance bonus scheme for Directors and senior employees who do not participate in the AstraZeneca UK Performance Bonus Plan.
Annual bonuses are paid in cash and reflect both corporate and individual performance measures.
The Remuneration Committee has discretion to reduce or withhold bonuses if business performance falls sufficiently short of expectations in any year such as to make the payment of bonuses inappropriate.
The AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme UK employees may make regular monthly savings contributions over a three or five year period and may apply for options to acquire AstraZeneca shares.
Further details are set out below.
The AstraZeneca Share Option Plan This is a share option plan for employees of participating AstraZeneca Group companies which was approved by shareholders at the Company s AGM in 2000.
The first grant of options occurred in August 2000.
The main grant of options in 2002 under the plan was in March with a further  smaller grant in August.
The Remuneration Committee sets the policy for the Company s operation of the plan.
Further details are set out below.
Sweden
In Sweden an all employee performance bonus plan is in operation.
The plan rewards good performance at corporate function and individualteam level.
Bonuses for corporate and function performance are always paid in the form of AstraZeneca Ordinary Shares.
Bonuses for individualteam performance may be paid in Ordinary Shares or in cash at the employee s discretion.
Existing Ordinary Shares are used to pay bonuses awarded under the plan.
These are purchased in the market.
They must be left in trust for three years.
The AstraZeneca Executive Annual Bonus Scheme and the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan both operate in respect of relevant AstraZeneca employees in Sweden.
US
In the US there are four senior staff incentive schemes under which either AstraZeneca ADSs or stock appreciation rights related to AstraZeneca ADSs are awarded to participants.
There are currently approximately 146 participants in these schemes.
AstraZeneca ADSs necessary to satisfy the awards under these schemes are purchased in the market and no subscriptions for new Ordinary Shares have been involved.
The AstraZeneca Share Option Plan operates in respect of relevant AstraZeneca employees in the US.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 33 Employee costs and share option plans for employees continued Share Option Plans At 31 December 2002 there were options outstanding under the Zeneca 1993 Senior Staff Share Option Scheme the Zeneca 1994 Executive Share Option Scheme the Astra Shareholder Value Incentive Plan the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme and the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan.
1 Summary of the Zeneca 1993 Senior Staff Share Option Scheme The Zeneca 1993 Senior Staff Share Option Scheme was introduced at the time of the demerger of Zeneca from ICI in 1993.
The last date for the grant of options was 19 May 1994 and the scheme was replaced by the Zeneca 1994 Executive Share Option Scheme.
2 Summary of the Zeneca 1994 Executive Share Option Scheme The Zeneca 1994 Executive Share Option Scheme was introduced in 1994.
The last date for the grant of options was 16 March 2000 and the scheme has been replaced by the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan.
Options granted under the 1994 scheme will normally be exercisable between three and 10 years following grant provided the relevant performance condition has been satisfied.
Options may be satisfied by the issue of new shares or by existing shares purchased in the market.
Options will not normally be exercisable unless a performance condition set by the Remuneration Committee has been satisfied.
The performance condition is that earnings per share must grow by at least the increase in the UK Retail Price Index over three years plus 3% per annum.
Satisfaction of this condition is tested annually by reference to the audited financial statements.
Once the condition is satisfied in respect of any rolling three year period beginning no earlier than the end of the financial year prior to the grant of the option then it need not be satisfied again in respect of that option.
The Remuneration Committee reviews the performance conditions at intervals to ensure that they continue to be appropriate.
3 Summary of the Astra Shareholder Value Incentive Plan In 1996 Astra established a stock option plan for some 100 Astra employees in key senior positions.
The plan is no longer used for the grant of options and has been superseded by the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan.
On completion of the merger with Zeneca options in Astra shares granted under the plan were replaced by options to acquire a number of AstraZeneca shares based on the exchange ratio used in the exchange offers used to effect the AstraZeneca merger .
The ratio of AstraZeneca options granted in respect of former Astra options was 0.5045 AstraZeneca options for each Astra option held and the table shown on page 100 has been restated throughout accordingly .
4 Summary of the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme
UK resident employees of participating AstraZeneca companies are automatically eligible to participate.
Grant of options Invitations to apply for options may be issued within six weeks after the announcement by the Company of its results for any period and at other times in circumstances considered to be exceptional by the Directors.
No invitations may be issued later than 10 years after the approval of the scheme by shareholders.
Options may only be granted to employees who enter into UK Inland Revenue approved savings contracts with the savings body nominated by the Company  under which monthly savings of a fixed amount currently not less than 5 nor more than 250 are made over a period of three or five years.
The number of shares over which an option is granted will be such that the total amount payable on its exercise will be the proceeds on maturity of the related savings contract.
No payment will be required for the grant of an option.
Options are not transferable.
Individual participation Monthly savings by an employee under all savings contracts linked to options granted under any SAYE scheme may not exceed 250 or such lower amounts as may be determined by the Directors.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 33 Employee costs and share option plans for employees continued Acquisition price The price per Ordinary Share payable upon the exercise of an option will not normally be less than the higher of a 90% of the arithmetical average of the middlemarket quotations for an Ordinary Share on the London Stock Exchange on three consecutive dealing days shortly before the date on which invitations to apply for options are issued provided that no such day may fall before the Company last announced its results for any period or such other dealing day or days falling within the six week period for the issue of invitations as the Directors may decide and b the nominal value of an Ordinary Share unless the option is expressed to relate only to existing shares.
Exercise of options An option will normally be exercisable only for six months commencing on the third or fifth anniversary of the commencement of the related savings contract.
Options may be satisfied by the issue of new shares or by existing shares purchased in the market.
Options normally lapse on cessation of employment.
Exercise is however  permitted for a limited period irrespective of the period during which the option has been held following cessation of employment in certain compassionate circumstances or where an option has been held for more than three years except on dismissal for misconduct and on an amalgamation takeover or windingup of the Company .
AstraZeneca has chosen to avail itself of the exemption to application of UITF17 revised to its SAYE scheme.
5 Summary of the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan
Any AstraZeneca employee may be recommended from time to time for the grant of an option.
The Remuneration Committee sets the policy for the Company s operation of the plan including as regards which employees will be eligible to participate.
Grant of options Options may be granted at any time other than during a close period.
No options may be granted after the fifth anniversary of the approval of the plan by shareholders until the Remuneration Committee has reviewed the plan.
The grant of options is supervised by the Remuneration Committee which is comprised wholly of NonExecutive Directors.
No payment is required for the grant of an option.
Options are not transferable.
Options may be granted over Ordinary Shares in AstraZeneca PLC or over the Company s ADSs.
Acquisition price The price per Ordinary Share payable upon the exercise of an option will not be less than an amount equal to the average of the middlemarket closing price on the date of grant for an Ordinary Share of the Company on the London Stock Exchange on the three consecutive dealing days immediately before the date of grant or as otherwise agreed with the Inland Revenue.
Where the option is an option to subscribe the price payable upon exercise cannot be less than the nominal value of an Ordinary Share of the Company .
Exercise of options An option will normally be exercisable between three and 10 years following its grant provided any relevant performance condition has been satisfied.
Options may be satisfied by the issue of new shares or by existing shares purchased in the market.
The Remuneration Committee sets the policy for the Company s operation of the plan including as regards whether any performance targets will apply to the grant andor exercise of each eligible employee s option.
Options normally lapse on cessation of employment.
Exercise is however  permitted for a limited period following cessation of employment either for reasons of injury or disability  redundancy or retirement or at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee and on an amalgamation takeover or windingup of the Company .
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 33 Employee costs and share option plans for employees continued AstraZeneca Share Option Plan 1994 Scheme SAYE Scheme ASVIP
Options WAEP Options WAEP Options WAEP option WAEP 000 pence 000 pence 000 pence 000 SEK At 1 January 2000 Options outstanding Nil Nil 3001 1934 4388 1708 1249 361 Movements during 2000 Options granted 712 3093 8885tel Nil Options exercised Nil Nil 800 1525 1078 1117 159 303 Options forfeited Nil Nil 99 2675 207 1843 Nil Options lapsed Nil Nil Nil  Nil  Nil Weighted average fair value of options granted during the year 809 712 396 At 31 December 2000 Options outstanding 712 3093 10987 2588 3826 2074 1090 370 Movements during 2001 Options granted 10984 3245  649 2971 Options exercised 1 3093 592 1687 1125 1583 117 328 Options forfeited 296 3231 457 2709 551 2181 8 306 Options lapsed Weighted average fair value of options granted during the year 653 495 At 31 December 2001 Options outstanding 11399 3236 9938 2636 2799 telMovements during 2002 Options granted 10658 3462  2721 1756 Options exercised 22 3214 243 2175 469 1888 206 317 Options forfeited 637 3298 406 2654 986 2735 Options lapsed Weighted average fair value of options granted during the year 1186 559 At 31 December 2002 Options outstanding 21398 3347 9289 2647 4065 telRange of exercise prices 1913p to 826p to 1756p to 298SEK to 3487p 2749p 2971p 442SEK Weighted average remaining contractual life 3183 days 2542 days 1439 days 746 days Options exercisableteltel 759 391 Weighted Average Exercise Price In addition to the schemes disclosed above at 31 December 2002 there were 5000 options outstanding issued under the Zeneca 1993 Senior Staff Share Option Scheme with a weighted average exercise price of 717p.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 34 Assets pledged commitments and contingent liabilitiestel m m m Assets pledged Mortgages and other assets pledged 90 118 51
Contracts placed for future capital expenditure not provided for in these accounts 500 515 604 Included in the above total are contracts related to certain product purchase and licence agreements with deferred consideration obligations the amounts of which are variable depending upon particular milestone achievements.
Sales of the products to which these milestones relate could give rise to additional payments contingent upon the sales levels achieved.
Guarantees and contingencies arising in the ordinary course of business for which no security has been given are not expected to result in any material financial loss.
Commitments
AstraZeneca is required to pay approximately 800m over at least a fiveyear period which commenced in 1999 under the terms of an agreement with ScheringPlough.
With effect from 1 January 1999 in connection with this agreement AstraZeneca obtained a standby letter of credit in the amount of 608m.
This letter of credit is collateralised by highgrade government securities which are not available to AstraZeneca to the extent of the outstanding balance of the letter of credit.
The amount outstanding under the letter of credit is automatically reduced with each payment made by AstraZeneca to ScheringPlough.
Under the terms of this agreement AstraZeneca reacquired the rights to market omeprazole under the Losec trade mark and felodipine under the Prevex and Perfudal trade marks in Italy and Spain.
The total discounted liability and associated asset were recognised in 1999.
Payments under this agreement in 2002 totalled approximately 146m.
The final payment will be made in 2003.
In 1998 Astra and Merck and Co.
Inc restructured their joint venture the restructuring which had been established some years earlier for the purpose of selling and marketing certain Astra products in the US.
Under the terms of the 1998 restructuring the merger between Astra and Zeneca in 1999 triggered two onetime payments from AstraZeneca to Merck a Lump Sum Payment of 809m which was charged to profit and loss account as a result of which Merck relinquished any rights to Zeneca products and an Advance Payment of 967m.
This Advance Payment was calculated as the then net present value of 2.8bn discounted from 2008 to the date of payment at a rate of 13% per annum and led Merck to relinquish any rights to future Astra products with no existing or pending US patents at the time of the merger.
AstraZeneca makes ongoing payments to Merck based on sales of certain AstraZeneca products in the US the contingent payments on the agreement products as well as certain other partnership distributions the latter of which are not material to the Group.
As a result of the 1999 merger these contingent payments excluding those in respect of Prilosec and Nexium are subject to defined minimum amounts ranging from 125m to 225m between 2002 and 2007.
Payments under these arrangements have exceeded the minimum level in 2002.
The terms of the 1998 restructuring also provide for the following events Partial Redemption First Option Second Option Partial Redemption In 2008 there will be a partial redemption of Mercks limited partnership interest  which will end Mercks rights to contingent payments in respect of certain of the agreement products  by distribution to Merck of an amount calculated as a multiple of the previous three years contingent payments on the relevant products plus 750m.
First Option In 2008 a calculation will be made of the Appraised Value being the net present value of the future contingent payments in respect of all other agreement products not covered by the Partial Redemption other than Prilosec and Nexium.
Payment of this amount to Merck in 2008 is however contingent on Mercks exercise of the First Option.
Exercise of the First Option will require AstraZeneca to repurchase Mercks interest in these products.
Should Merck not exercise this option in 2008 AstraZeneca may exercise it in 2010 for a sum equal to the 2008 Appraised Value.
If neither Merck nor AstraZeneca exercise the option the contingent payment arrangements in respect of these agreement products will continue and the Appraised Value will not be paid.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 34 Assets pledged commitments and contingent liabilities continued In addition in 2008 there will be a true up of the Advance Payment.
The calculation of this will be based on a multiple of the previous three years contingent payments in respect of all the agreement products with the exception of Prilosec and Nexium plus other defined amounts which are then reduced by the Appraised Value whether paid or not the Partial Redemption and the Advance Payment.
This could result in a further payment by AstraZeneca to Merck or a payment by Merck to AstraZeneca.
The precise amount of settlements with Merck under the Partial Redemption and the First Option cannot be determined at this time as some of the payments are based on calculations based on sales between 2005 and 2007 and another is contingent upon Merck exercising the First Option.
However if Merck does exercise this option the combined effect will involve a minimum amount payable to Merck in 2008 of approximately 4.7bn.
If AstraZeneca exercises this option in 2010 the combined effect will involve a minimum aggregate payable to Merck in 2008 and 2010 of approximately 4.7bn.
Finally in 2008 Merck will repay to AstraZeneca a loan in the amount of 1.4bn made at the time of the restructuring.
Second Option A Second Option exists whereby AstraZeneca has the option to repurchase Mercks interests in Prilosec and Nexium in the US.
This option is exercisable by AstraZeneca two years after the exercise of the First Option in either 2008 or 2010.
Exercise of the Second Option by AstraZeneca at a later date is also provided for in 2017 or if combined annual sales of the two products fall below a minimum amount provided in each case only so long as the First Option has been exercised.
The exercise price for the Second Option is the fair value of these product rights as determined at the time of exercise.
If the Second Option is exercised Merck will have no further rights to contingent payments from AstraZeneca.
Environmental costs and liabilities The Groups expenditure on environmental protection including both capital and revenue items relates to costs which are necessary for meeting current good practice standards and regulatory requirements for processes and products.
They are an integral part of normal ongoing expenditure for maintaining the Groups manufacturing capacity and product ranges and are not separated from overall operating and development costs.
There are no known changes in environmental regulatory or other requirements resulting in material changes to the levels of expenditure for 2000 2001 or 2002.
In addition to expenditure for meeting current and foreseen environmental protection requirements the Group incurs substantial costs in investigating and cleaning up land and groundwater contamination.
In particular AstraZeneca has environmental liabilities at some currently or formerly owned leased and third party sites in the US and Europe.
AstraZeneca or its indemnitees have been named under US legislation the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 as amended as potentially responsible parties PRP in respect of 32 sites although AstraZeneca expects to be indemnified against liabilities associated with nine of these sites by the seller or owner of the businesses associated with such sites and where appropriate actively participates in or monitors the cleanup activities at sites in respect of which it is a PRP .
Stauffer Management Company a subsidiary of AstraZeneca established in 1987 to own and manage certain assets of Stauffer Chemical Company which was acquired that year has identified 28 sites including 18 for which an AstraZeneca indemnitee has been named a PRP for which it may have responsibility that will in aggregate require significant expenditure on cleanup and monitoring.
Liabilities are generally more likely to crystallise where a contaminated site is to be sold its use changed or where a regulatory authority imposes a particular remedial measure.
Costs of these liabilities may be offset by amounts recovered from third parties such as previous owners of the sites in question or through insurance.
The future level of investigation and clean up costs will depend on a number of factors including the nature and extent of any contamination that may ultimately be found to exist the need for and type of any remedial work to be undertaken and the standards required by applicable current and future environmental laws and regulations and the number and financial viability of other PRPs.
The relative importance of these factors varies significantly from site to site.
Many sites are at different stages in the regulatory process or at different stages in the process of evaluating environmental damage or alternative remediation methods.
It is therefore difficult to form meaningful ranges of estimates for such costs.
AstraZeneca had provisions at 31 December 2002 in respect of such costs in accordance with the accounting policies on page 64.
Although there can be no assurance management believes that taking account of these provisions the costs of addressing currently identified environmental obligations as AstraZeneca currently views those obligations is unlikely to impair materially AstraZenecas financial position.
Such contingent costs to the extent that they exceed applicable provisions could have a material adverse effect on AstraZenecas results of operations for the relevant period.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Legal proceedings LosecPrilosec omeprazole In June 1997 the German Federal Patent Court declared invalid a previously granted supplementary protection certificate which extended protection for omeprazole the active ingredient contained in Losec from 1999 to 2003.
The decision was appealed and on 1 February 2000 at AstraZenecas request the German Supreme Court decided to refer the case to the European Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling.
The court heard the case on 8 November 2001 and its decision is pending.
The case does not involve any financial claims.
In March 2000 the German Federal Patent Court declared that AstraZenecas formulation patent for omeprazole was invalid.
The decision has been appealed to the German Supreme Court.
As a consequence all pending infringement actions in Germany have been stayed awaiting the outcome of the appeal.
There is one interlocutory injunction in force against ratiopharm GmbH based on the formulation patent.
If the final decision on the validity of the formulation patent goes against AstraZeneca ratiopharm may claim damages for lost sales due to the interlocutory injunction.
In 1998 Astra filed suits in the US against Andrx Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Genpharm Inc.
This followed the filing of abbreviated new drug applications by Andrx and Genpharm with the US Food and Drug Administration FDA concerning the two companies intention to market generic omeprazole products in the US.
During 1999 Astra also filed suits against Kremers Urban Development Company and Schwarz Pharma Inc. and against Cheminor Drugs Ltd.
ReddyCheminor Inc. and Schein Pharmaceuticals Inc.
During 2000 AstraZeneca filed further suits against Lek Pharmaceutical and Chemical Company d.
Impax Laboratories Inc.
Eon Labs Manufacturing Inc.
Pharmaceuticals Inc.
During 2001 AstraZeneca filed further suits against Torpharm Inc. and Zenith Goldline Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Ivax.
The basis for the proceedings is that the actions of all the companies infringe several patents relating to omeprazole Prilosec in the US.
The cases are proceeding under the US HatchWaxman legislation.
AstraZeneca filed additional patent infringement suits during 2001 against Andrx and Genpharm in respect of one other omeprazole patent outside the HatchWaxman legislation.
The trial against Andrx Genpharm Kremers Urban Development Company and Cheminor started in December 2001 and ended in July 2002.
In October 2002 the US District Court for the Southern District of New York ruled that two AstraZeneca patents 230 and 505 relating to the formulation of omeprazole are valid until 2007 that Andrx Genpharm and Cheminor all infringed both patents but that Kremers Urban Development Company did not infringe either patent.
The court did not rule on the 281 patent relating to a manufacturing process for omeprazole formulations in respect of which AstraZeneca has sued Andrx only.
AstraZeneca has appealed the judgement with regard to noninfringement and Kremers Urban Development Company.
Andrx Genpharm and Cheminor have appealed the decision with regard to infringement and validity of the patents.
In April 2001 Andrx filed a case in the US District Court for the Southern District of New York against AstraZeneca Merck and Co.
Inc.
Andrx seeks injunctive relief compelling the parties to delist omeprazolerelated patents it claims were improperly listed in the Orange Book and prohibiting the defendants from using patents to delay the effective date of the FDAs approval of Andrxs ANDA for omeprazole.
AstraZeneca and Merck have filed motions to dismiss the case which are pending.
AstraZeneca and Merck and Co.
Inc.
The plaintiffs are consumers and third party payers who have alleged that they and others who are similarly situated have been forced to pay higher prices for omeprazole as a result of agreements that AstraZeneca and Merck entered into that resulted in unreasonable restraints of trade and competition.
Furthermore the plaintiffs have alleged that AstraZeneca and Merck engaged in conduct designed to extend their monopoly power beyond the lawful boundaries of their patents.
The plaintiffs are seeking declarative equitable and injunctive relief enjoining AstraZeneca and Merck from continuing their alleged illegal activities costs of suit reasonable attorneys fees and expenses and any other relief determined by the court.
AstraZeneca filed a motion in March 2002 to dismiss the two class actions before the US District Court for the Southern District of New York which was granted in June 2002.
The plaintiffs did not appeal.
The plaintiffs voluntarily dismissed the New Jersey case also in June 2002.
In October 2000 the Federal Court of Australia Full Court handed down a patent ruling pertaining to omeprazole in connection with a dispute between AstraZeneca and the generic company Alphapharm Pty Ltd.
The court declared that AstraZenecas formulation patent was invalid.
In November 2001 AstraZeneca applied for special leave to appeal the decision to the High Court of Australia and this application was granted in December 2001.
The appeal was heard by the High Court in May 2002 and in December 2002 the High Court reversed the judgement of the lower court.
The High Court ruled that AstraZenecas formulation patent is valid and that the case should be returned to the lower court for determination of the remaining issues.
During 2000 AstraZeneca was granted interlocutory injunctions based on certain of AstraZenecas omeprazole patents and supplementary protection certificates against the generic company Scandinavian PharmaceuticalsGenerics AB Scand Pharm in Sweden Denmark and
In October 2000 the District Court of Stockholm ruled that Scand Pharm had infringed one of AstraZenecas supplementary protection certificates for omeprazole.
Scand Pharm has appealed this decision.
In October 2001 Oslo City Court in Norway found that Scand Pharm had infringed AstraZenecas formulation patent for omeprazole.
At the same time the court declared AstraZenecas formulation patent valid.
As a result of the Norwegian case Scand Pharm cannot sell its omeprazole product in Norway nor can it do so in Sweden or Denmark pending the outcome of the main actions in the cases in these countries.
If the final decisions in these cases are against AstraZeneca Scand Pharm may claim damages for lost sales due to the interlocutory injunctions.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 34 Assets pledged commitments and contingent liabilities continued In March 2002 the Patents Court in the UK handed down a ruling invalidating certain of AstraZenecas formulation patents for omeprazole.
AstraZeneca applied for leave to appeal the decision to the Court of Appeal and this application was granted.
The appeal was heard by the Court of Appeal in October 2002 and the court affirmed the original decision of the Patents Court invalidating the formulation patents.
In the Netherlands Pharmachemie BV has filed a claim against two AstraZeneca companies alleging that AstraZeneca has misused its exclusive rights in the Netherlands in relation to the expiration date for AstraZenecas supplementary protection certificate for omeprazole.
AstraZeneca denies the allegations and is defending the case.
Other court cases relating to omeprazole patents are pending worldwide.
However the financial impact if AstraZeneca loses is not considered to be material.
In February 2000 the European Commission commenced an investigation relating to certain omeprazole intellectual property rights and associated regulatory and patent infringement litigation.
The investigation is pursuant to Article 82 of the EC Treaty which prohibits an abuse of a dominant position.
The investigation was precipitated by a complaint by a party to a number of patent and other proceedings involving AstraZeneca and relates to a limited number of European countries.
AstraZeneca has in accordance with its corporate policy cooperated with the Commission.
AstraZeneca remains of the view that the complaint is unfounded and that it has complied with all relevant competition laws.
In particular it considers that the matters raised by the complaint are more properly dealt with by the courts in the context of the litigation in which the complainant is involved.
The Commission has recently requested certain factual patent and regulatory information from AstraZeneca and AstraZeneca will continue to cooperate with the Commission.
Zoladex goserelin acetate implant investigation The US Department of Justice has been conducting a civil and criminal investigation into the sale and marketing of Zoladex goserelin acetate implant.
The investigation was prompted by the filing of a qui tam complaint by a private party in 1997 and involves allegations of improper submissions of claims to the Medicare and Medicaid programmes.
The Company and federal and state authorities are in the process of negotiating a potential settlement of the civil and criminal claims at issue in the investigation.
As a result although no final agreement has been concluded the Company believes it appropriate to accrue 350m to cover estimated settlement costs.
Plendil felodipine In August 2000 AstraZeneca LP received a letter from Mutual Pharmaceutical Co.
Inc.
AstraZeneca filed a patent infringement action against Mutual in the US District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.
Mutual responded and filed counterclaims alleging noninfringement and invalidity.
Expert discovery is due to close in March 2003.
A trial date has not yet been set.
In May 2001 AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP received a similar letter from Zenith Goldline Pharmaceuticals Inc.
AstraZeneca filed a patent infringement action against Zenith in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey.
Zenith responded and filed counterclaims alleging noninfringement.
Fact discovery is due to close in May 2003.
A trial date has not yet been set.
Nolvadex tamoxifen AstraZeneca is a codefendant with Barr Laboratories Inc. the US.
All of the state court actions were removed to federal court and have been consolidated along with all of the cases originally filed in federal court in a federal multidistrict litigation proceeding pending in the US District Court for the Eastern District of New York.
Some of the cases were filed by plaintiffs representing a putative class of consumers who purchased tamoxifen.
The other cases were filed on behalf of a putative class of third party payers including health maintenance organisations insurers and other managed care providers and health plans that have reimbursed or otherwise paid for prescriptions of tamoxifen.
The plaintiffs allege that they paid supracompetitive and monopolistic prices for tamoxifen as a result of the settlement of patent litigation between Zeneca and Barr in 1993.
The plaintiffs seek injunctive relief treble damages under the antitrust laws disgorgement and restitution.
In April 2002 AstraZeneca filed a motion to dismiss the cases for failure to state a cause of action.
The courts decision is awaited.
In August 2002 AstraZenecas US distribution agreement with Barr Laboratories Inc.
AstraZenecas patent for Nolvadex tamoxifen.
At the same time a six month period of market exclusivity awarded by the US Food and Drug Administration in connection with the successful completion of certain paediatric testing with the product commenced.
Barr thereafter commenced litigation against the FDA in the US District Court for the District of Columbia challenging the FDAs refusal to grant Barr final approval for its own generic tamoxifen prior to expiration of AstraZenecas exclusivity period.
Barr also declined AstraZenecas offer to extend the distribution agreement through the end of the exclusivity period.
Therefore in October 2002 AstraZeneca began shipping its own nonbranded tamoxifen to customers to ensure an uninterrupted supply to patients.
In December 2002 the Court held that Barr could not obtain final FDA approval for its own generic tamoxifen prior to the expiration of AstraZenecas paediatric exclusivity for Nolvadex.
In
January 2003 Barr made a claim that AstraZeneca improperly thwarted Barrs entry into the tamoxifen market and caused Barr monetary damages.
AstraZeneca disputes the claim.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Zestril lisinopril In 1986 AstraZenecas predecessor company and Merck and Co.
Inc.
In April 2002 AstraZeneca commenced arbitration proceedings against Merck under one of the licence agreements.
In the arbitration AstraZeneca is seeking repayment of approximately 38m of prior royalty amounts and a prospective reduction in the royalty rate going forward based on a provision of the licence agreement which reduces the royalty rate if sales of lisinopril by third parties exceed a certain level.
The case is currently progressing under the arbitration rules of the International Chamber of Commerce.
Retail pharmaciesdrug purchasers actions Since October 1993 several thousand retail pharmacies and certain retail drug purchasers have commenced purported class actions and individual actions in various federal and state courts throughout the US alleging that with respect to brand name prescription drugs manufacturers and wholesalers engaged in discriminatory pricing practices discriminatory discounting and rebate practices andor conspired with one another to fix prices and artificially maintain high prices to the plaintiffs in restraint of trade and commerce.
More than 20 brand name prescription drug manufacturers and eight wholesalers have been named defendants in some or all of these suits.
AstraZeneca entered into a settlement agreement with the retail class plaintiffs whose antitrust claims were consolidated in a federal multi district litigation proceeding pending in the US District Court for the Northern District of Illinois.
AstraZeneca also reached settlements with numerous independent and chain pharmacies that opted out of the federal class action although there are still actions brought by certain chain and independent pharmacies pending in federal court.
AstraZeneca has settled or been dismissed from all of the state cases except for a consumer case pending in state court in Alabama.
AstraZeneca has consistently denied liability and continues to believe it has meritorious defences to all of these claims.
However it believes that entering into these settlements is the prudent course of action given the inherent risks and costs of litigation and to avoid further business disruption.
Average wholesale price class action litigation In January 2002 AstraZeneca was named as a defendant along with 24 other pharmaceutical manufacturers in a class action suit in Massachusetts brought on behalf of a putative class of plaintiffs alleged to have overpaid for prescription drugs as a result of inflated wholesale list prices.
The suit seeks to recover unspecified damages.
AstraZeneca has also been named as a codefendant with various other pharmaceutical manufacturers in similar class action suits filed in five other states.
Most of these suits have been consolidated with the Massachusetts action for pretrial purposes pursuant to federal multidistrict litigation procedures.
AstraZeneca believes that it has meritorious defences to all of these claims.
Additional government investigations into drug marketing practices As is true for most if not all major prescription pharmaceutical companies operating in the US AstraZeneca is currently involved in multiple additional US federal and state criminal and civil investigations into drug marketing and pricing practices.
AstraZeneca has received subpoenas from the US Attorney s Office in Boston requesting production of documents relating to the sale and promotion of Prilosec to the New England Medical Center in Boston.
A separate subpoena from the same office requests documents relating to Prilosec purchasing and services agreements with AdvancePCS the pharmacy benefits management company .
AstraZeneca has also received a subpoena from the Massachusetts Attorney General s Office seeking documents relating to the sale and promotion of five products Prilosec Seroquel Rhinocort Aqua ToprolXL and Zestril within Massachusetts.
AstraZeneca has received an investigative demand from the Missouri Attorney Generals Office seeking documents and information relating to agreements with drug retailers doing business within Missouri.
Most recently AstraZeneca has received a Civil Investigative Demand from the US Federal T rade Commission for certain information concerning AstraZenecas advertising and marketing of Nexium.
AstraZeneca is cooperating with these investigations.
It is not possible to predict the outcome of any of these investigations which could include the payment of damages and the imposition of fines penalties and administrative remedies.
General
AstraZeneca is also involved in various other legal proceedings considered typical to its businesses including some remaining US retail pharmacy antitrust class and individual actions outside the scope of the settlements described above and litigation relating to employment product liability commercial disputes infringement of intellectual property rights and the validity of certain patents.
Although there can be no assurance regarding the outcome of any of the legal proceedings or investigations referred to in this Note 34 to the Financial Statements AstraZeneca does not expect them to have a materially adverse effect on AstraZenecas financial position or profitability.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 35 Leases T otal rentals under operating leases charged to profit and loss account were as followstel m m m Hire of plant and machinery 23 25 15 Other Commitments under operating leases to pay rentals during the year following the year of these Financial Statements analysed according to the period in which each lease expires were as follows Land and buildings Other assetstel 2001 m m m m Expiring within one year Expiring in years two to five Expiring thereafter The future minimum lease payments under operating leases that have initial or remaining terms in excess of one year at 31 December 2002 were as follows Operating leases 2002 2001 m m Obligations under leases comprise Rentals due within one year 90 94 Rentals due after more than one year After five years from balance sheet date 94 97 From four to five years 21 20 From three to four years 27 21 From two to three years 38 25 From one to two years 47 3tel292 The Group had no commitments 2001 nil under finance leases at the balance sheet date which were due to commence thereafter .
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 36 Statutory and other informationtel m m m Statutory audit fees KPMG Audit Plc 3.5 2.5 3.2 Others 0.1 0.1 Fees for other services KPMG Audit Plc and associates  UK 0.4 3.2 8.9 Worldwide 3.1 2.0 5.0 Non statutory audit fees paid to KPMG Audit Plc and its associates were in relation to other assurance services 1.5m 2001 1.8m taxation 1.8m 2001 2.1m and other non audit services 0.2m 2001 1.3m.
In addition to the above in 2000 KPMG Audit Plc and its associates charged fees for other services of 8.0m that were borne by Syngenta AG in relation to its demerger from AstraZeneca.
The charge for the statutory audit of the Company  AstraZeneca PLC was 1600 2001 1600 2000 1600.
KPMG Audit Plc were sole auditors to AstraZeneca in 2002 and 2001.
The bulk of fees for other services charged by KPMG Audit Plc and its associates aside from the Zeneca Agrochemicals demerger and associated restructuring work were incurred in the early months of 2000 completing 1999 integration projects.
Related party transactions The Group had no material related party transactions which might reasonably be expected to influence decisions made by the users of these Financial Statements.
Subsequent events No significant change has occurred since the date of the annual Financial Statements.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 37 Company information Company Balance Sheet At 31 December 2002 2001 Notes m m Fixed assets Fixed asset investments 37 7236 6736 7236 6736 Current assets Debtors  amounts owed by subsidiaries 27104 27998 T otal assets 34340 34734 Creditors due within one year Nontrade creditors 37 2961 835 2961 835 Net current assets 24143 27163 T otal assets less current liabilities 31379 33899 Creditors due after more than one year Loans  owed to subsidiaries 37 295 590 Net assets 31084 33309 Capital and reserves Calledup share capital 38 429 436 Share premium account 37 403 334 Capital redemption reserve 37 16 9 Other reserves 37 1841 2239 Profit and loss account 37 28395 30291 Shareholders funds  equity interests 31084 33309 The financial statements on pages 58 to 122 were approved by the Board of Directors on 30 January 2003 and were signed on its behalf by Sir T om McKillop Jonathan Symonds Director Director AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 37 Company information continued Deferred taxation The parent company had no deferred tax assets or liabilities actual or potential at 31 December 2002.
Investments in subsidiaries Fixed asset investments Shares Loans Total m m m Cost at beginning of year 6145 591 6736 Additions 500  500 Net book value at 31 December 2002 6645 591 7236 Net book value at 31 December 2001 6145 591 6736 Nontrade creditors 2002 2001 m m Amounts due within one year Short term borrowings unsecured 3 3 Other creditors 50 4 Amounts owed to subsidiaries 2100 8 Dividends to Shareholders 808 820 2961 835 Loans  owed to subsidiaries Repayment 2002 2001 Dates m m Loans unsecured US dollars 6.58% loan tel7.2% loan telT otal loans 590 590 Loans or instalments thereof are repayable After five years from balance sheet date 295 295 From two to five years From one to two years  295 T otal unsecured 295 590 T otal due within one year 295 T otal loans 590 590 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements continued 37 Company information continued Share Capital Profit premium redemption Other and loss 2002 2001 Reserves account reserve reserves account Total Total m m m m m m At beginning of year 334 9 2239 30291 32873 32759 Net profit for the year  102 102 2314 Dividends  398 808 1206 1225 Share repurchase  7  1190 1183 1074 Share premiums 69  69 99 At end of year 403 16 1841 28395 30655 32873 Distributable reserves at end of year  443 1614 2057 1623 As permitted by section 230 of the Companies Act 1985 the Company has not presented its profit and loss account.
At 31 December 2002 26781m 31 December 2001 29440m of the profit and loss account reserve was not available for distribution.
The majority of this nondistributable amount relates to profit arising on the sale of Astra AB to a subsidiary in 1999 which becomes distributable as the underlying receivable is settled in cash.
During 2002 2659m of the profit was realised by repayment.
Subsequent to the year end a further 825m was repaid on 23 January 2003 resulting in additional distributable reserves not included in the figures above.
Included in other reserves is a special reserve of 157m arising on the redenomination of share capital in 1999.
2002 2001 Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds m m Shareholders funds at beginning of year 33309 33201 Net profit for the financial year 102 2314 Dividends 1206 1225 Issues of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares 69 99 Repurchase of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares 1190 1080 Net reduction inaddition to shareholders funds 2225 108 Shareholders funds at end of year 31084 33309 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements 38 Calledup share capital of parent company Allotted calledup Authorised and fully paidtel m m m Ordinary Shares 0.25 each 429 429 436 Unissued Ordinary Shares 0.25 each 171 Redeemable Preference Shares 50000 The Redeemable Preference Shares carry limited class voting rights and no dividend rights.
This class of shares is capable of redemption at par at the option of the Company on the giving of seven days written notice to the registered holder of the shares.
The movements in share capital during the year can be summarised as follows
At beginning of year 1745 436 Issues of shares 2 Repurchase of shares 28 7 At 31 December 2002 1719 429 Share buyback During the year the Company purchased and subsequently cancelled 28386560 Ordinary Shares at an average price of 2785 pence per share for a consideration including expenses of 1190m.
The excess of the consideration over the nominal value has been charged against the profit and loss account reserve.
Share schemes A total of 1737401 shares were issued during the year in respect of share schemes.
Details of movements in the number of shares under option are shown in Note 33 details of options granted to Directors are shown in the Directors Remuneration Report.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Financial Statements Principal Subsidiaries Joint Ventures and Associates Percentage of voting At 31 December 2002 Country share capital held Principal activity
AstraZeneca UK Limited England 100 Research production marketing AstraZeneca Insurance Company Limited England 100 Insurance and reinsurance underwriting AstraZeneca T reasury Limited England 100 T reasury Continental Europe NV AstraZeneca SA Belgium 100 Marketing ASP SA France 100 Production AstraZeneca Pharma SA France 100 Research production marketing AstraZeneca GmbH Germany 100 Development production marketing AstraZeneca Holding GmbH Germany 100 Production marketing AstraZeneca SpA Italy 100 Production marketing AstraZeneca Farmaceutica Spain SA Spain 100 Production marketing AstraZeneca AB Sweden 100 Research and development production marketing Astra T ech AB Sweden 100 Research and development production marketing AstraZeneca BV The Netherlands 100 Marketing The Americas AstraZeneca do Brasil Ltda.
Brazil 100 Production marketing AstraZeneca Canada Inc.
Canada 100 Research production marketing IPR Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Puerto Rico 100 Development production marketing AstraZeneca LP US 99 Development production marketing AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP US 100 Development production marketing Salick Health Care Inc.
US 100 Provision of diseasespecific healthcare services Zeneca Holdings Inc.
US 100 Production marketing Asia Africa and Australasia AstraZeneca Pty Limited Australia 100 Research production marketing AstraZeneca Pharmaceutical Co.
Limited China 100 Production marketing AstraZeneca Hong Kong Limited Hong Kong 100 Production AstraZeneca KK Japan 80 Production marketing shares held directly The companies and other entities listed above are those whose results or financial position principally affected the figures shown in the Groups annual financial statements.
A full list of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates will be annexed to the Company s next annual return filed with the Registrar of Companies.
The country of registration or incorporation is stated alongside each company .
The accounting dates of principal subsidiaries and associates are 31 December  except for Salick Health Care Inc. which is 30 November .
AstraZeneca operates through 235 subsidiary companies worldwide.
Products are manufactured in some 20 countries worldwide and are sold in over 100 countries.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Additional Information for US Investors Additional Information for US Investors Differences between UK and US accounting principles The accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report are prepared in accordance with UK GAAP .
Certain significant differences between UK GAAP and US GAAP which affect AstraZeneca s net income and shareholders equity are set out below.
Purchase accounting adjustments Under UK GAAP the merger of Astra and Zeneca was accounted for as a merger of equals poolingofinterests.
Under US GAAP the merger was accounted for as the acquisition of Astra by Zeneca using purchase accounting.
Under purchase accounting the cost of the investment is calculated at the market value of the shares issued together with other incidental costs and the assets and liabilities of the acquired entity are recorded at fair value.
As a result of the fair value exercise increases in the values of Astra s tangible fixed assets and inventory were recognised and values attributed to their inprocess research and development existing products and assembled work force together with appropriate deferred taxation effects.
The difference between the cost of investment and the fair value of the assets and liabilities of Astra was recorded as goodwill.
The amount allocated to inprocess research and development was as required by US GAAP  expensed immediately in the first reporting period after the business combination.
Fair value adjustments to the recorded amount of inventory were expensed in the period the inventory was utilised.
Additional amortisation and depreciation have also been recorded in respect of the fair value adjustments to tangible and intangible assets and the resulting goodwill.
In the consolidated financial statements prepared under UK GAAP  goodwill arising on acquisitions made prior to 1 January 1998 accounted for under the purchase method has been eliminated against shareholders equity.
Under the requirements of UK Financial Reporting Standard 10 Goodwill and Intangible Assets goodwill on acquisitions made after 1 January 1998 is capitalised and amortised over its estimated useful life which is generally presumed not to exceed 20 years.
UK GAAP requires that on subsequent disposal or termination of a previously acquired business any goodwill previously taken directly to shareholders equity is then charged in the income statement against the profit or loss on disposal or termination.
Up until 1 January 2002 under US GAAP  goodwill was required to be capitalised and amortised.
Now instead of being amortised goodwill is tested annually for impairment.
Amortisation charged under UK GAAP is added back in the reconciliation of net income.
The intangible recognised as assembled workforce has been reclassified as goodwill.
Identifiable intangible assets which principally include patents knowhow and product registrations are amortised over their estimated useful lives which vary between 5 years and 20 years with a weighted average life of approximately 13 years.
At 31 December 2002 and 2001 shareholders equity includes capitalised goodwill of 13600m and 12169m respectively net of amortisation and impairment of 2383m and 2180m and capitalised identifiable intangible assets of 9433m and 9789m respectively net of amortisation and impairment of 4566m and 3475m.
Goodwill on businesses disposed of is charged to the gain or loss on disposal.
On disposal of a business the gain or loss under US GAAP may differ from that under UK GAAP due principally to goodwill capitalised and amortised together with the appropriate share of other differences between UK and US accounting principles recognised previously .
Capitalisation of interest AstraZeneca does not capitalise interest in its financial statements.
US GAAP requires interest incurred as part of the cost of constructing fixed assets to be capitalised and amortised over the life of the asset.
Dividends
Under UK GAAP Ordinary Share dividends proposed are provided for in the year in respect of which they are recommended by the Board of Directors for approval by the shareholders.
Under US GAAP such dividends are not provided for until declared by the Board.
Deferred taxation Deferred taxation is provided on a full liability basis under US GAAP  which permits deferred tax assets to be recognised if their realisation is considered to be more likely than not.
Under current UK GAAP  full provision is also made although there are a number of different bases on which this calculation is made eg rolled over capital gains.
Pension and postretirement benefits There are four main differences between current UK GAAP and US GAAP in accounting for pension costs i US GAAP requires measurements of plan assets and obligations to be made as at the date of the financial statements or a date not more than three months prior to that date.
Under UK GAAP  calculations may be based on the results of the latest actuarial valuation ii US GAAP mandates a particular actuarial method  the projected unit credit method  and requires that each significant assumption necessary to determine annual pension cost reflects best estimates solely with regard to that individual assumption.
UK GAAP does not mandate a particular method but requires that the method and assumptions taken as a whole should be compatible and lead to the actuary s best estimate of the cost of providing the benefits promised iii under US GAAP  a negative pension cost may arise where a significant unrecognised net asset or gain exists at the time of implementation.
This is required to be amortised on a straightline basis over the average remaining service period of employees.
Under UK GAAP AstraZeneca s policy is not to recognise pension credits in its financial statements unless a refund of or reduction in contributions is likely and iv under US GAAP  a minimum pension liability is recognised through other comprehensive income in certain circumstances when there is a deficit of plan assets relative to the projected benefits obligation.
Under UK GAAP there is no such requirement.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Additional Information for US Investors Additional Information for US Investors continued Differences between UK and US accounting principles continued Restructuring costs Under UK GAAP  provisions are made for restructuring costs once a detailed formal plan is in place and valid expectations have been raised in those affected that the restructuring will be carried out.
US GAAP requires a number of specific criteria to be met before such costs can be recognised as an expense.
Among these are the requirements that the costs incurred are incremental to other costs incurred by the company  or represent amounts to be incurred under contractual obligations which are not associated with or do not benefit activities that will be continued.
Also all significant actions arising from a restructuring and their completion dates must be identified by the balance sheet date.
T o the extent that restructuring costs are related to the activities of the acquired company  US GAAP allows them to be recognised as a liability upon acquisition.
Software costs Under UK GAAP  AstraZeneca capitalises certain defined software costs.
Under US GAAP software costs are generally capitalised and amortised over three to five years.
Foreign exchange Under UK GAAP  unrealised gains and losses on foreign currency transactions to hedge anticipated but not firmly committed foreign currency transactions may be deferred and accounted for at the same time as the anticipated transactions.
Under US GAAP such deferral is not permitted except in certain defined circumstances.
Derivative instruments and hedging activities Under US GAAP  all derivative instruments should be recognised as assets or liabilities in the balance sheet at fair value.
Gains and losses are recognised in net income unless they are regarded as hedges.
Under UK GAAP  these instruments are measured at cost and gains or losses deferred until the underlying transactions occur .
Deferred income Under UK GAAP  profits or losses from the sale of product related intangible assets are classified in other operating income and are stated after taking account of product disposal costs and costs of minor outstanding obligations.
Under US GAAP such profits are deferred and recognised in the income statement in subsequent periods until all disposal obligations and commitments have been completed.
Current assets and liabilities In the Group s financial statements prepared under UK GAAP  no cost is accrued for the share options awarded to employees under the Zeneca 1994 Executive Share Option Scheme the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan and the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme as the exercise price is equivalent to the market value at the date of grant.
Under US GAAP the cost is calculated as the difference between the option price and the market price at the date of grant or for variable plans at the end of the reporting period until measurement date.
Under the requirements of APB Opinion No.
25 any compensation cost would be amortised over the period from the date the options are granted to the date they are first exercisable.
Under US GAAP in the net income reconciliation the Group has adjusted for stock compensation costs and calculated under APB Opinion No.
Statement of cash flows Basis of preparation AstraZeneca s Statement of Group Cash Flow is prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Financial Reporting Standard 1 Revised 1996 FRS 1 whose objective and principles are similar to those set out in SFAS No.
95 Statement of Cash Flows.
The principal differences between the standards relate to classification.
Under FRS 1 the Company presents its cash flows for a operating activities b dividends received from joint ventures and associates c returns on investments and servicing of finance d tax paid e capital expenditure and financial investment f acquisitions and disposals g dividends paid to shareholders h management of liquid resources and i financing.
SFAS No.
95 requires only three categories of cash flow activity being a operating b investing and c financing.
Cash flows from taxation returns on investments and servicing of finance and dividends received from joint ventures and associates under FRS 1 would be included as operating activities under SFAS No. activity under SFAS No.
Under FRS 1 cash comprises cash in hand and deposits repayable on demand less overdrafts repayable on demand and liquid resources comprise current asset investments held as readily disposable stores of value.
Under
SFAS No.
95 cash equivalents comprising short term highly liquid investments generally with original maturities of three months or less are grouped together with cash short term borrowings repayable on demand would not be included within cash and cash equivalents and movements on those borrowings would be included in financing activities.
New accounting standards adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards SFAS No.
141 Business Combinations and SFAS No.
142 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets were issued in July 2001 and are effective for accounting periods commencing on or after 15 December 2001.
Under SFAS
141 all business combinations initiated after 30 June 2001 must be accounted for using the purchase method.
The pooling of interest method is no longer permitted.
Intangible assets arising on acquisitions are required to be amortised to residual values over their estimated useful lives unless they are regarded as having indefinite useful lives in which case they are tested annually for impairment.
Goodwill arising on a combination of business is tested for impairment annually in lieu of amortisation.
SFAS No.
142 requires that goodwill and intangible assets acquired prior to 1 July 2001 should continue to be amortised and tested for impairment until the adoption of the standard.
Upon adoption of SFAS No.
142 an impairment test must be carried out on all intangible assets with indefinite useful lives and goodwill.
Any impairment loss identified on the date of adoption of SFAS No. effect of a change in accounting principle.
At the same time the estimated useful lives of amortised intangible assets must be reviewed.
Adoption of these new accounting standards has resulted in an estimated increase in net income of 755m including amortisation charged under UK GAAP of 55m.
Initial
142 did not result in an impairment charge nor was there any impairment at the subsequent annual test.
Had goodwill not been amortised in 2001 net income would have increased from 1397m to 2125m 2000 865m to 1716m with a corresponding increase in basic and diluted earnings per share from 0.77 to 1.21 2000 No changes were made to estimated useful lives of intangible assets.
SFAS No.
144 Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of LongLived Assets AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Additional Information for US Investors addresses financial accounting and reporting for the impairment or disposal of longlived assets and supersedes SFAS No.
Accounting for the Impairment of LongLived Assets and for LongLived Assets to be Disposed of and the accounting and reporting provisions of APB Opinion No.
Reporting the Results of Operations Reporting the Effects of Disposal of a Segment of a Business and Extraordinary Unusual and Infrequently Occurring Events and T ransactions for the disposal of a segment of a business.
It is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 15 December 2001.
The adoption of SFAS No.
144 did not have a material effect.
New accounting standards not yet adopted SFAS No.
143 Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligation addresses the accounting and reporting for obligations associated with the retirement of longlived assets and the associated asset retirement costs.
It is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 15 June 2002.
The adoption of SFAS No.
143 is not expected to have a material effect.
SFAS No.146 Accounting for Costs Associated with Exit or Disposal Activities issued on 30 July 2002 requires costs associated with exit or disposal activities to be recognised when the costs are incurred rather than at the date of commitment to an exit or disposal plan.
The provisions are effective for disposals initialised after 31 December 2002 and restatement of prior periods is not required.
As SFAS No.
146 may apply to future activities which are not currently envisaged it is not possible to assess the impact of SFAS
SFAS No.
148 Accounting for Stock Based Compensation  T ransition and Disclosure an amendment of FASB Statement No. employee compensation.
The Statement also requires new disclosures about the rampup effect of stockbased employee compensation on reported results and that those effects be disclosed more prominently by specifying the form content and location of those disclosures.
The transition guidance and annual disclosure provisions of SFAS No.
148 are effective for fiscal years ending after 15 December 2002.
AstraZeneca has not yet determined whether it will adopt the transition provisions of SFAS No.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Additional Information for US Investors Additional Information for US Investors continued Differences between UK and US accounting principles continued
As a result of the significant difference between the UK GAAP and US GAAP treatment of the combination of Astra and Zeneca in the year of acquisition and in the results of preceding periods condensed statements of operations and cash flow under US GAAP have been prepared for the benefit of US investors.
The following is a summary of the material adjustments to net income and shareholders equity which would have been required if US GAAP had been applied instead of UK GAAP .
As noted on page 62 2001 and 2000 net income and shareholders equity under UK GAAP have been restated under FRS19  Deferred T ax.
On this basis the deferred tax adjustment below as been restated for those years.
Net incometel m m m Net income as shown in the consolidated statements of income before exceptional items restated 3186 3044 2858 Exceptional items after tax 350 138 581 Net income for the period under UK GAAP restated 2836 2906 2277 Adjustments to conform to US GAAP Purchase accounting adjustments including goodwill and intangibles Deemed acquisition of Astra Amortisation and other acquisition adjustments 864 1514 1756 Others 55  20 Capitalisation less disposals and amortisation of interest 46 57 45 Deferred taxation On fair values of Astra 239 249 284 Others restated 99 198 115 Pension expense 50 33 50 Postretirement benefitsplan amendment 4 44 Software costs 46 10 98 Restructuring costs  22 97 Share based compensation 33 7 33 Fair value of derivative financial instruments 93 18 Deferred income recognition 61 75 Unrealised losses on foreign exchange and others 1 10 2 Net income before cumulative effect of change in accounting policy 2307 1365 865 Cumulative effect of change in accounting policy  net of tax on adoption of SFAS No 133  32 Net income in accordance with US GAAP 2307 1397 865 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Additional Information for US Investors Differences between UK and US accounting principles continued US GAAP Condensed Consolidated Statement of Operationstel For the years ended 31 December m m m Sales 17841 16222 15583 Cost of sales 4520 4198 3960 Distribution costs 141 122 210 Research and development 3069 2687 2620 Selling general and administrative expenses 6165 5219 4861 Acquisition related costs  224 419 Amortisation of intangibles and goodwill 1052 1769 2043 Other income 308 283 223 Operating income 3202 2286 1693 Net interest income 140 188 183 Income from continuing operations before taxation 3342 2474 1876 T axes on income from continuing operations 1035 1109 969 Net income from continuing operations 2307 1365 907 Discontinued operations Net income from discontinued operations   42 Net income before cumulative effect of change in accounting policy 2307 1365 865 Cumulative effect of change in accounting policy on adoption of SFAS No 133  32 Net income for the year 2307 1397 865 Weighted average number of 0.25 Ordinary Shares in issue millions of shares 1733 1758 1768 Dilutive impact of share options outstanding millions of shares 2 32 Diluted weighted average number of 0.25 Ordinary Shares in accordance with US GAAP millions of shares 1735 1761 1770 Net income per 0.25 Ordinary Share and ADS before change in accounting policy in accordance with US GAAP  basic and diluted  1.33 0.77 0.49 Net income per 0.25 Ordinary Share and ADS after change in accounting policy in accordance with US GAAP  basic and diluted  1.33 0.79 0.
Net income from continuing operations per 0.25 Ordinary Share and ADS in accordance with US GAAP basic and diluted  1.33 0.79 0.51 Net loss from discontinued operations per 0.25 Ordinary Share and ADS in accordance with US GAAP basic and diluted    0.02 The dividend in specie in 2000 in respect of the demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals under US GAAP amounted to 836m after realised exchange gains on the translation of foreign currency financial statements of 297m.
As noted on page 62 cash settlement discounts have been reclassified from cost of sales to sales.
Comparative information for 2001 and 2000 has also been reclassified for consistency of presentation.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Additional Information for US Investors Additional Information for US Investors continued Differences between UK and US accounting principles continued US GAAP Statement of Comprehensive Incometel For the years ended 31 December m m m Net income for the year 2307 1397 865 Exchange gainslosses net of tax 2919 1473 2184 Exchange realised on demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals   297 Other movements 73  2 T otal Comprehensive Income 5153 76 1618 Other movements in 2002 include the recognition of a minimum liability under SFAS 87 of 45m.
The cumulative exchange gains and losses net of tax on the translation of foreign currency financial statements under US GAAP are set out in the following notetel For the years ended 31 December m m m Balance at 1 January 4318 2845 364 Movement in year 2919 1473 2481 Balance at 31 December 1399 4318 2845 Stock compensation In the Group s financial statements prepared under UK GAAP  no cost is accrued for the share options awarded to employees under the Zeneca 1994 Executive Share Option Scheme the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan and the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme as the exercise price is equivalent to the market value at the date of grant.
Under US GAAP the cost is calculated as the difference between the option price and the market price at the date of grant or  for variable plans at the end of the reporting period until measurement date.
Under the requirements of APB Opinion No.
25 any compensation cost would be amortised over the period from the date the options are granted to the date they are first exercisable.
Under US GAAP in the net income reconciliation the Group has adjusted for stock compensation costs as calculated under APB Opinion No 25 SFAS No.123 sets out an alternative methodology for recognising the compensation cost based on the fair value at grant date.
Had the Group adopted this methodology  the incremental effect on net income under US GAAP is shown belowtel m m m Net income under US GAAP as reported 2307 1397 865 Compensation cost after adjusting for APB 25 credit of 33m 155 76 46 Pro forma net income 2152 1321 819 Pro forma net income per 0.25 Ordinary Share and ADS in accordance with US GAAP basic and diluted As reported  1.33 0.79 0.49 Pro forma  1.24 0.75 0.46 The fair value of options granted is estimated based on the stock price at the grant date using the BlackScholes option pricing model with the following assumptionstel Dividend yield 1.6% 1.5% 2.0% Expected volatility 30.0% 20.0% 20.0% Riskfree interest rate 5.2% 4.2% 5.9% Expected lives 1994 Scheme   6.0 years Expected lives AstraZeneca Share Option Plan 6.0 years 6.0 years 6.0 years Expected lives SAYE Scheme 4.3 years 4.3 years 4.6 years In the initial phasein period the effects of applying SFAS No.123 for disclosing compensation cost may not be representative of the effects on pro forma net income and earnings per share for future years.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Additional Information for US Investors Differences between UK and US accounting principles continued Pension and postretirement benefits For the purposes of US GAAP  the pension costs of the major UK retirement plan and of the retirement plans of the major nonUK subsidiaries have been restated in the following tables in accordance with the requirements of SFAS No.
These plans comprise a substantial portion of the actuarial liabilities of all AstraZeneca retirement plans.
The changes in projected benefit obligations plan assets and details of the funded status of these retirement plans together with the changes in the accumulated other postretirement benefit obligations under SFAS No.
Other postretirement Pension benefits benefits Change in projected benefit obligationtel 2001 m m m m Benefit obligation at beginning of year 4337 4188 205 197 Service cost Interest cost Participant contributions 18 17 Plan amendments  11 Actuarial gainloss 80 75 23 1 Special termination benefits 12 19 Settlement and curtailment   24 Benefits paid 206 198 19 14 Exchange 408 98 3 2 Benefit obligation at end of year 5026 4337 210 205 Other postretirement Pension benefits benefits Change in plan assetstel 2001 m m m m Fair value at 1 January 3753 3803 Actual return on plan assets 142 45 16 Group contribution 284 170 161 Participant contributions 18 17 Settlement and curtailment Benefits paid 205 198 12 Exchange 330 84 Fair value of plan assets at end of year 4038 3753 133 Funded status of plans 988 584 77 205 Unrecognised net lossprofit 938 396 Prior service cost not recognised 29 35 Unrecognised net obligation on implementation 3 6 Adjustments to recognise minimum liability Intangible assets 45 Accumulated other comprehensive income 45 Accrued benefit liability 108 147 77 205 120 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Additional Information for US Investors Additional Information for US Investors continued Differences between UK and US accounting principles continued At 31 December 2002 the projected benefit obligation accumulated benefit obligation and fair value of the plan assets in respect of the retirement plans above with accumulated benefit obligations in excess of plan assets were 4249m 3557m and 3296m 2001 97m 73m and nil respectively .
Assumed discount rates and rates of increase in remuneration used in calculating the projected benefit obligations together with long term rates of return on plan assets vary according to the economic conditions of the country in which the retirement plans are situated.
The weighted average rates used for calculation of year end benefit obligations and forecast benefit cost in the main retirement plans and other benefit obligations for SFAS No.
132 purposes were as follows Pension benefits Other postretirement benefitsteltel % %% % %% Discount rate 5.8 6.0 5.6 6.6 7.1 7.1 Long term rate of increase in remuneration 4.1 4.4 4.4 4.8 na na Expected long term return on assets 6.4 6.5 6.2 7.8 na na The Group has assumed a long term rate of increase in healthcare costs of 11.0% reducing to 5.0%.
Pension benefits Other postretirement benefitsteltel m m m m m m Net periodic cost Service cost  present value of benefits accruing during the year Interest cost on projected benefit obligations Expected return on assets 263 242 322 Net amortisation and deferral 28 39 46 1 2 1 Net periodic cost for the year It is estimated that a 1 percentage point change in the weighted average healthcare costs trend would have the following effects on the accumulated benefit obligation and net periodic cost at 31 December 2002 1 percentage point increase decrease m m Accumulated benefit obligation 10 9 Net periodic cost 2 1
Y ears ended 31 December m m m T axes on income from continuing operations UK taxation Corporation tax 165 147 79 Double taxation relief 7 4 42 Deferred 40 10 27 Overseas taxation Overseas taxes 921 831 956 Deferred taxation 84 125 Share of taxation of joint ventures and associates   3 T axes on income from continuing operations 1035 1109 969 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Additional Information for US Investors Differences between UK and US accounting principles continued The table below reconciles the UK statutory tax charge to the Group s actual charge on income from continuing operations.
Y ears ended 31 December m m m Income on continuing operations 3342 2506 1876 T axation charge at UK corporation tax rate of 30% for 2002 30% for 2001 30% for 2000 1002 751 563 Acquisition related items  429 Goodwill Advanta and Salick Health Care impairment  190 576 Net effect of different rates and eligible costs in other jurisdictions 21 43 86 Exceptional items 105 419 T ax on income from continuing operations 1035 1109 969 In 2002 claims amounting to 43m 2001 109m for tax relief arising as a result of a restructuring of the AMI joint venture in 1998 were made.
Under US GAAP  these reliefs are adjusted against the goodwill arising on the restructuring and included in other adjustments.
Shareholders equity 2002 2001 m m T otal shareholders equity under UK GAAP restated 11172 9586 Adjustments to conform to US GAAP Purchase accounting adjustments including goodwill and intangibles Deemed acquisition of Astra Goodwill 12692 11062 T angible and intangible fixed assets 7707 8139 Others 86 31 Capitalisation less disposals and amortisation of interest 238 192 Deferred taxation On fair value of Astra 2305 2313 Others restated 159 68 Dividend 808 820 Pension expense 271 162 Postretirement benefitsplan amendment 24 28 Software costs capitalised 64 110 Fair value of derivative financial instruments 99 50 Deferred income recognition 14 75 Others 90 58 Shareholders equity in accordance with US GAAP 30183 27402 122 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Additional Information for US Investors Additional Information for US Investors continued Differences between UK and US accounting principles continued US GAAP Condensed Consolidated Statement of Cash Flowstel For the years ended 31 December m m m Cash flows from operating activities 4833 3126 3554 Cash flows from investing activities Movement in short term investments and fixed deposits 806 260 608 New fixed asset investments 1 5 3 Disposal of fixed assets 66 44 37 Acquisitions and disposals  44 740 Capital expenditure 1608 1582 1460 Net cash outflows from investing activities 2349 1327 1294 Net cash flow before financing 2484 1799 2260 Cash flows from financing activities Equity dividends paid 1234 1236 1220 Repurchase of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares 1154 994 334 Net decreaseincrease in short term borrowings 13 7 67 Loans repaidnew loans 105 28 3 Repayment of lease finance   2 Net cash outflows from financing activities 2506 2195 1620 Decreaseincrease in cash 22 396 640
At 1 January 510 908 262 Decreaseincrease in cash 22 396 640 Exchange movements 36 2 6 At 31 December 524 510 908 1 Interest paid was 96m in 2002 84m in 2001 145m in 2000.
Interest received was 142m in 2002 232m in 2001 180m in 2000.
2 T ax paid was 795m in 2002 792m in 2001 648m in 2000.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Group Financial Record  UK GAAP Group Financial Record  UK GAAP For the years ended 31 Decemberteltel 2001 2002 restated restated restated restated restated restated restated m m m m m m m m T urnover and profits Group turnover 12007 13106 13055 15260 18257 17882 16222 17841 Cost of sales 4018 4225 3952 4819 5849 5270 4232 4520 Distribution costs 374 385 364 367 343 286 122 141 Research and development 1671 1961 2170 2473 2923 2893 2773 3069 Selling general and administrative expenses 3566 3751 3838 4812 6585 5691 5509 6348 Other income 18tel18telGroup operating profit 2567 2977 2857 3142 2746 4008 3954 4006 Group operating profit before exceptional items 2670 2977 2857 3051 3908 4330 4156 4356 Exceptional items charged to operating profit 103  91 1162 322 202 350 Share of operating profit of joint ventures and associates 35tel7 149 Exceptional items 306 56  29 776 150 Profits on sale of fixed assets  10 Dividend income  38 1 Net interest 4 135 105 30 Profit on ordinary activities before taxation 2690 3543 3660 3699 1959 3847 4077 4037 Taxation 802 1087 1081 1118 661 1560 1160 1177 Profit on ordinary activities after taxation 1888 2456 2579 2581 1298 2287 2917 2860 Attributable to minorities 25 19 9 2 1 10 11 24 Net profit for the financial year 1863 2437 2570 2579 1297 2277 2906 2836 Return on sales Group operating profit before exceptional items as a percentage of sales 22.2% 22.7% 21.9% 20.0% 21.4% 24.2% 25.6% 24.9% Ratio of earnings to fixed charges At 31 Decemberteltel 2001 2002 restated restated restated restated restated restated restated m m m m m m m m Balance sheets Fixed assets tangible and intangible and goodwill 5251 5661 5894 8721 9717 7908 8109 9404 Fixed asset investments 834 1005 1Current assets 8343 9387 9355 9630 10393 10938 10364 12126 T otal assets 14428 16053 16276 18704 20295 18857 18496 21576 Creditors due within one year 4540 4599 4459 5650 7019 6897 6480 8215 T otal assets less current liabilities 9888 11454 11817 13054 13276 11960 12016 13361 Creditors due after more than one year 917 912 902 801 1202 927 787 362 Provisions for liabilities and charges 1452 1511 1478 1472 1765 1617 1600 1773 Minority equity interests Shareholders funds  equity interests 7350 8847 9377 10722 10263 9389 9586 11172 Shareholders funds and minority interests 7519 9031 9437 10781 10309 9416 9629 11226 Net profit and shareholders funds have been restated under FRS19  Deferred T ax for the years 1995 to 2001.
In addition the information under sales and costs of sales has been reclassified for cash settlement discounts which are now deducted from sales as opposed to being included in cost of sales.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Group Financial Record  UK GAAP Group Financial Record  UK GAAP continued For the years ended 31 Decemberteltel 2001 2002 m m m m m m m m Cash flow Net cash inflow from operating activities 3005 3198 3355 3832 3113 4183 3762 5593 Dividends received from joint ventures and associates 24tel3 Returns on investments and servicing of finance 65 98 31 Capital expenditure and financial investment 918 1182 1292 1369 2731 1426 1543 1543 Acquisitions and disposals 531 227 321 2013 1978 740 44 Equity dividends paid to Shareholders 628 750 882 995 1216 1220 1236 1234 Net cash flow before management of liquid resources and financing 448 1200 448 955 156 1648 303 2056 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Group Financial Record  US GAAP Group Financial Record  US GAAP Group Financial Record  US GAAP The selected financial data set out below for each of the years in the five year period ended 31 December 2002 has been extracted or derived from audited Financial Statements.
The selected financial data should be read in conjunction with and are qualified in their entirety by reference to the Financial Statements of AstraZeneca and the notes thereto which are included elsewhere in this document.
Consolidated income statement data For the years ended 31 Decembertel 2001 2002 Net incomeloss from operations  million 1036 3539 865 1397 2307 Net incomeloss from operations per Ordinary Share 1.09 2.26 0.49 0.79 1.33 Diluted incomeloss from operations per Ordinary Share 1.09 2.26 0.49 0.79 1.33 Net incomeloss from operations had SFAS No 141 been adopted 1129 2833 1716 2125 Net and diluted incomeloss per Ordinary Share from operations had SFAS No 141 been adopted 1.19 1.81 0.97 1.21 Ratio of earnings to fixed charges For the Group with estimated material adjustments to accord with US GAAP 11.7 19.3 15.5 25.0 36.7 Consolidated balance sheet data At 31 Decembertel 2001 2002 m m m m m T otal assets 10675 46640 41500 38081 42578 Shareholders equity 5558 33735 29707 27402 30183 Merger accounting For the purpose of US GAAP  the merger has been regarded as a purchase accounting acquisition of Astra by Zeneca.
Accordingly the US GAAP results above for 1998 are not restated for the merger with Astra and represent the previously reported results of Zeneca Group PLC.
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges UK and US GAAP For the purpose of computing these ratios earnings consist of the income from continuing ordinary activities before taxation of Group companies and income received from companies owned 50% or less plus fixed charges excluding capitalised interest.
Fixed charges consist of interest including capitalised interest on all indebtedness amortisation of debt discount and expense and that portion of rental expense representative of the interest factor .
The comparative figures have been restated from those previously disclosed to reflect the reclassification of the operations of Specialties and Agrochemicals as discontinued.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Shareholder Information Shareholder Information AstraZeneca 1999tel Ordinary Shares in issue  millions At year end 1775 1766 1745 1719 Weighted average for year 1776 1768 1758 1733 Stock Market price  per 0.25 Ordinary Share Highest pencetel 3625 Lowest pencetel 1799 At year end pencetel 2220 Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share before exceptional items Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share basic Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share diluted Dividends 0.70 0.70 For the period 1 January 1999 to 31 December 1999 except for Stock Market prices which are for the period from 6 April 1999 to 31 December 1999.
In addition shareholders received a distribution of shares in Syngenta AG as a dividend in specie in respect of the demerger of Zeneca Agrochemicals.
Earnings per share have been restated for the effect of the adoption of FRS19  Deferred Tax Zeneca 1999 Ordinary Shares in issue  millions At period end 953 Weighted average for period 951 Stock Market price  per 25 pence Ordinary Share Highest pence 3037 Lowest pence 2406 At period end pence 3037 For the period from 1 January 1999 to 6 April 1999 Astra 1999 Ordinary Shares in issue  millions At period end 1643 Weighted average for period 1643 Stock Market price  per Astra A Share Highest SEK 190 Lowest SEK 154 At period end SEK 190 Stock Market price  per Astra B Share Highest SEK 190 Lowest SEK 154 At period end SEK 190 For the period from 1 January 1999 to 6 April 1999 Percentage analysis at 31 December 2002 of issued share capital By size of account
501  1000 1.1 1001  5000 1.7 5001  10000 0.3 10001  50000 1.4 50001  1000000 12.2 over 1000000 Issued share capital 100.0 includes VPC and ADR holdings At 31 December 2002 AstraZeneca PLC had 177573 registered holders of 1718666329 Ordinary Shares of 0.25 each.
In addition there were approximately 46000 holders of American Depositary Receipts ADRs representing 5.31% of the issued share capital and 156000 holders of shares held under the VPC Services Agreement representing 23.56% of the issued share capital.
The ADRs each of which is equivalent to one Ordinary Share are issued by JPMorgan Chase Bank.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Shareholder Information AstraZeneca PLC Since April 1999 following the AstraZeneca merger  the principal markets for trading in the shares of AstraZeneca PLC are the London Stockholm and New Y ork Stock Exchanges.
The table below sets forth for the four quarters of 2001 and for the first two quarters and last six months of 2002 the reported high and low share prices of AstraZeneca PLC on the following bases for shares listed on the London Stock Exchange LSE the reported high and low middle market closing quotations are derived from The Daily Official List for shares listed on the Stockholm Stock Exchange SSE the high and low closing sales prices are as stated in the Official List for American Depositary Shares ADS listed on the New Y ork Stock Exchange the reported high and low sales prices are as reported by Dow Jones ADR quotations.
AstraZeneca
Ordinary LSE ADS Ordinary SSE High Low High Low High Low pence pence US US SEK SEK 2001  Quarter 1 3385 2880 50.88 42.70 501 400 Quarter 2 3555 3149 50.40 45.68 540 460.5 Quarter 3 3512 2913 51.11 42.60 534 431 Quarter 4 3285 3012 48.14 44.01 507 458.5 2002  Quarter 1 3625 3051 52.00 43.72 541 455.5 Quarter 2 3574 2634 52.04 39.12 536 366 July 2680 2002 41.30 29.90 392 286 August 2406 1822 38.00 28.30 360.5 264 September 2067 1799 32.15 28.00 305 255 October 2400 1947 38.15 30.16 351.5 279 November 2540 2259 40.48 34.19 365 316.5 December 2430 2194 38.47 34.82 350 304 Principally held in bearer form During 2002 AstraZeneca s share repurchase programme which was introduced in 1999 continued with the repurchase and subsequent cancellation of 28.4 million shares at a total cost of 1190m representing 1.6 per cent of the total issued share capital of the Company .
The average price paid per share in 2002 was 2818 pence.
Between 1999 and 2001 a total of 37.1 million Ordinary Shares were repurchased and subsequently cancelled at an average price of 2910 pence per share for a consideration including expenses of 1615m.
The excess of the consideration over the nominal value was charged against the profit and loss account reserve.
Shares issued in respect of share schemes totalled 1.7 million.
In 1999 in connection with the merger  AstraZeneca s share capital was redenominated into US dollars.
On 6 April 1999 Zeneca shares were cancelled and US dollar shares issued credited as fully paid on the basis of one dollar share for each Zeneca share then held.
This was achieved by a reduction of capital under section 135 of the Companies Act 1985.
Upon the reduction of capital becoming effective all issued and unissued Zeneca shares were cancelled and the sum arising as a result thereof credited to a special reserve which was converted into US dollars at the rate of exchange prevailing on the record date.
This US dollar reserve was then applied in paying up at par newly created US dollar shares.
At the same time as the US dollar shares were issued the Company issued 50000 Redeemable Preference Shares for cash at par .
The
Redeemable Preference Shares carry limited class voting rights and no dividend rights.
This class of shares is also capable of redemption at par at the option of the Company on the giving of seven days written notice to the registered holder of the shares.
A total of 826 million AstraZeneca shares were issued to Astra shareholders who accepted the merger offer before the final closing date 21 May 1999.
AstraZeneca received acceptances from Astra shareholders representing 99.6 per cent of Astra s shares and the remaining 0.4 per cent was acquired in 2000 for cash.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Shareholder Information Shareholder Information continued Major shareholdings On 29 January 2003 not more than one month prior to the date of the Notice of Annual General Meeting the following had disclosed an interest in the issued Ordinary Share capital of the Company in accordance with the requirements of Sections 198208 of the Companies Act 1985 Date of disclosure Percentage of issued Shareholder Number of shares to Company share capital The Capital Group Companies Inc.
204812653 14 Jan 2003 11.92% Investor AB 91545308 16 Apr 1999 5.33% Putnam Investment Management LLC and The Putnam Advisory Company  LLC 52643485 8 Feb 2002 3.06% Legal and General Investment Management Limited 52518020 13 Jun 2002 3.06% No other person held a notifiable interest in shares comprising 3% or more of the issued Ordinary Share capital of the Company  appearing in the register of interests in shares maintained under the provisions of Section 211 of the Companies Act 1985.
Significant changes in the percentage ownership held by major shareholders during the past three years are set out below.
Major shareholders do not have different voting rights.
Since the date of disclosure to the Company the interest of any person listed above in the Ordinary Shares of the Company may have increased or decreased.
No requirement to notify the Company of any increase or decrease would have arisen unless the holding moved up or down through a whole number percentage level.
Percentage of issued share capital Shareholder 29 Jan 2003 17 Feb 2002 9 Feb 2001 14 Mar 2000 In AstraZeneca In AstraZeneca In AstraZeneca In AstraZeneca The Capital Group Companies Inc.
11.92% 11.09% 10.02% 7.80% Investor AB 5.33% 5.25% 5.18% 5.20% Putnam Investment Management LLC and The Putnam Advisory Company  LLC 3.06% 3.02% 3.00% 3.00% Legal and General Investment Management Limited 3.06% 3.00% 3.00% 3.00% AstraZeneca PLC American Depositary Shares each representing one Ordinary Share evidenced by American Depositary Receipts issued by JPMorgan Chase Bank as depositary  are listed on the New Y ork Stock Exchange.
As of 29 January 2003 the proportion of Ordinary Shares represented by American Depositary Shares was 5.32% of the Ordinary Shares outstanding.
Number of registered holders of Ordinary Shares as of 29 January 2003 In the US 804 T otal 176842 Number of record holders of American Depositary Receipts as of 29 January 2003 In the US 3133 T otal 3167 So far as the Company is aware it is neither directly nor indirectly owned nor controlled by one or more corporations or by any government.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Shareholder Information As of 29 January 2003 the total amount of the Company s voting securities owned by Directors and Officers of the Company was Title of class Amount owned Per cent of class 0.25 shares Ordinary Shares 508201 0.03% The Company does not know of any arrangements the operation of which might result in a change in the control of the Company .
Related party transactions During the period 1 January 2003 to 29 January 2003 there were no transactions loans or proposed transactions between the Company and any related parties which were material to either the Company or the related party  or which were unusual in their nature or conditions.
See also Note 36 Statutory and other information.
Options to purchase securities from registrant or subsidiaries a As of 29 January 2003 options outstanding to subscribe for Ordinary Shares of 0.25 of the Company were Number of shares Subscription price Normal expiry date 34608810 630p3487p 20032012 The weighted average subscription price of options outstanding at 29 January 2003 was 3000p.
All options were granted under Company employee schemes.
Number of shares Subscription price Normal expiry date 1562652 748p3487p 20042012 c Included in paragraph b are options granted to individually named Directors.
Details of these option holdings as at 31 December 2002 are shown in the Directors Remuneration Report.
During the period 1 January 2003 to 29 January 2003 no Director exercised any options.
Dividend payments The record date for the second interim dividend for 2002 payable on 7 April 2003 in the UK US and Sweden is 21 February 2003.
Shares trade exdividend on the London and Stockholm Stock Exchanges from 19 February 2003 and ADRs trade exdividend on the New Y ork Stock Exchange from the same date.
Future dividends will normally be paid as follows The record date for the first interim dividend for 2003 payable on 6 October 2003 in the UK US and Sweden is 22 August 2003.
First interim Announced end of July and paid in October Second interim Announced end of January and paid in April Registrar and T ransfer Office The AstraZeneca Registrar Lloyds TSB Registrars The Causeway
West Sussex BN99 6DA T elephonetel
AstraZeneca s shareholders with internet access may visit site and register their details to create a portfolio.
Shareview is a free and secure online service from Lloyds TSB Registrars that gives access to shareholdings including balance movements indicative share prices and information about recent dividends.
Results
Unaudited trading results of AstraZeneca in respect of the first three months of 2003 will be published on 30 April 2003 and results in respect of the first six months of 2003 will be published on 24 July 2003.
Documents on display The Memorandum and Articles of Association of the Company and other documents concerning the Company which are referred to in this document may be inspected at the Company s registered office at 15 Stanhope Gate London W1K 1LN.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Shareholder Information Shareholder Information continued T axation for US residents The following summary of the principal UK and certain US tax consequences of ownership of Ordinary Shares or ADRs held as capital assets by US resident shareholders is based on current UK and US federal income tax law and practice and in part on representations of JPMorgan Chase Bank as Depositary for ADRs and assumes that each obligation in the deposit agreement among the Company  the Depositary and the holders from time to time of ADRs and any related agreement will be performed in accordance with its terms.
The US T reasury has expressed concerns that parties to whom ADRs are prereleased may be taking actions that are inconsistent with the claiming by US holders of ADRs of foreign tax credits for US federal income tax purposes.
Accordingly  the analysis of the creditability of UK taxes described below could be affected by future actions that may be taken by the US T reasury .
UK and US income taxes and tax treaties affecting remittance of dividends Under the current Double T axation Income Convention the Convention between the UK and the US US resident individuals who are the beneficial owners of dividends on Ordinary Shares or ADRs representing Ordinary Shares in UK corporations are generally entitled to a tax credit payment in respect of dividends equal to oneninth 19th of the dividend paid the T ax Credit
This tax credit payment is reduced by a UK withholding the UK withholding of up to 15% of the gross dividend paid.
Therefore a US holder will not actually receive any payment of this credit.
US resident corporate shareholders are generally treated in the same way as individuals provided that either alone or together with associated corporations they do not control directly or indirectly 10% or more of the voting shares of the Company and do not constitute investment or holding companies 25% or more of the capital of which is owned directly or indirectly  by persons that are not individuals resident in and are not nationals of the US.
The UK and the US have signed a new double taxation convention the New Convention which must be ratified by the UK Parliament and the US Senate before its provisions enter into force.
No assurance can be provided as to when the New Convention will enter into force.
When the Convention ceases to apply  US resident shareholders will no longer be entitled to the T ax Credit Amount because the New Convention does not provide for that entitlement.
For US federal income tax purposes the dividend paid and if a US resident shareholder elects under the Convention to claim a foreign tax credit with respect to the UK withholding the associated T ax Credit Amount are includible in gross income by US resident shareholders and for foreign tax credit limitation purposes are foreign source income treated separately  together with other items of passive income or  in the case of certain holders financial services income.
The UK withholding is treated as a foreign income tax which may  subject to certain limitations and restrictions be eligible for credit against a US resident shareholder s US federal income tax liability or deductible by such shareholders in computing their taxable income for a US resident shareholder who elects to include the associated T ax Credit Amount in income.
The election described in the preceding paragraph will not be available under the New Convention and accordingly  no foreign tax credit for the related UK withholding will be available under the New Convention with respect to dividends paid to US resident shareholders.
Shareholders whose holdings are effectively connected with a permanent establishment or fixed base in the UK or who are corporations also resident in the UK for the purpose of the Convention are not entitled to payment of the T ax Credit Amount nor are they subject to any deductions from the dividend.
T axation on capital gains Under the Convention and the New Convention each contracting state may in general tax capital gains in accordance with the provisions of its domestic law.
Under present UK law individuals who are neither resident nor ordinarily resident in the UK and companies which are not resident in the UK will not be liable to UK tax on capital gains made on the disposal of their Ordinary Shares or ADRs unless such Ordinary Shares or ADRs are held in connection with a trade profession or vocation carried on in the UK through a branch or agency .
A US resident shareholder will recognise capital gain or loss for US federal income tax purposes on the sale or exchange of the Ordinary Shares or ADRs in the same manner as such holder would on the sale or exchange of any other shares held as capital assets.
As a result a US resident shareholder will generally recognise capital gain or loss for US federal income tax purposes equal to the difference between the amount realised and such holder s adjusted basis in the Ordinary Shares or ADRs.
The gain or loss will generally be US source income or loss.
US resident shareholders should consult their own tax advisors about the treatment of capital gains which may be taxed at lower rates than ordinary income for noncorporate taxpayers and capital losses the deductibility of which may be limited.
UK inheritance tax Under the current Double T axation Estates Convention the Estate T ax Convention between the US and the UK Ordinary Shares or ADRs held by an individual shareholder who is domiciled for the purposes of the Estate T ax Convention in the US and is not for the purposes of the Estate T ax Convention a national of the UK will generally not be subject to the UK inheritance tax on the individual s death or on a chargeable gift of the Ordinary Shares or ADRs during the individual s lifetime provided that any applicable US federal gift or estate tax liability is paid unless the Ordinary Shares or ADRs are part of the business property of a permanent establishment of the individual in the UK or  in the case of a shareholder who performs independent personal services pertain to a fixed base situated in the UK.
Where the ADRs or Ordinary Shares have been placed in trust by a settlor who at the time of settlement was a US resident shareholder  the ADRs or Ordinary Shares will generally not be subject to UK inheritance tax unless the settlor  at the time of settlement was not domiciled in the US and was a UK national.
In the exceptional case where the Ordinary Shares or ADRs are subject both to UK inheritance tax and to US federal gift or estate tax the Estate T ax Convention generally provides for double taxation to be relieved by means of credit relief.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Shareholder Information T axation for US residents continued Exchange controls and other limitations affecting security holders a There are no governmental laws decrees or regulations in the UK restricting the import or export of capital or affecting the remittance of dividends interest or other payments to nonresident holders of Ordinary Shares or ADRs.
However  a 1.5% stamp duty reserve tax is payable upon the deposit of Ordinary Shares in connection with the creation of but not subsequent dealing in ADRs.
This is in lieu of the normal 0.5% stamp duty on all purchases of Ordinary Shares.
Wilmington Inc.
Exchange rates For the periods up to April 1999 Astra accounted for and reported its results in Swedish kronor  whereas Zeneca accounted for and reported its results in sterling.
Consistent with AstraZeneca s decision to publish its Financial Statements in US dollars the financial information in this document has been translated from kronor and sterling into US dollars at the following applicable exchange rates SEKUSD USDGBP Average rates profit and loss account cash flow 1995 7.1100 1.5796 1996 6.7000 1.5525 1997 7.6225 1.6386 1998 7.9384 1.6603 1999 8.2189 1.6247 End of year spot rates balance sheet 1995 6.6500 1.5500 1996 6.8400 1.6900 1997 7.8500 1.6600 1998 8.0400 1.6600 1999 8.5130 1.6185 The following information relating to average and spot exchange rates used by AstraZeneca is provided for convenience SEKUSD USDGBP Average rates profit and loss account cash flow 2000 8.9103 1.5341 2001 10.3235 1.4447 2002 9.8558 1.4817 End of year spot rates balance sheet 2000 9.5390 1.4925 2001 10.5420 1.4501 2002 8.7700 1.6093 132 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Shareholder Information Shareholder Information continued
In this Annual Report and Form 20F the following words and expressions shall unless the context otherwise requires have the following meanings ADR American Depositary Receipt evidencing title to an ADS ADS American Depositary Share representing one underlying Ordinary Share Depositary JPMorgan Chase Bank as depositary under the deposit agreement pursuant to which the ADRs are issued Directors The Directors of the Company Company AstraZeneca PLC AstraZeneca AstraZeneca Group or the Group The Company and its subsidiaries Ordinary Shares Ordinary Shares of 0.25 each in the capital of the Company LSE London Stock Exchange Limited NYSE New Y ork Stock Exchange Inc.
SSE Stockholm Stock Exchange Pound sterling  GBP  pence or p References to UK currency SEK kronor References to Swedish currency UK United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland US dollar  US USD or  References to US currency US United States of America FDA Food and Drug Administration of the US Figures in parentheses in tables and financial statements are used to represent negative numbers.
Except where otherwise indicated figures included in this report relating to pharmaceutical product market sizes and market shares are obtained from syndicated industry sources primarily IMS Health IMS a market research firm internationally recognised by the pharmaceutical industry .
The 2002 market share figures included in this report are based primarily on data obtained from an online IMS database.
IMS data may differ from that compiled by the Group with respect to its own products.
Of particular significance in this regard are the following 1 AstraZeneca publishes its financial results on a financial year and quarterly interim basis whereas IMS issues its data on a monthly and quarterly basis 2 the online IMS database is updated quarterly and uses the average exchange rates for the relevant quarter 3 IMS data from the US is not adjusted for Medicaid and similar state rebates and 4 IMS sales data is compiled using actual wholesaler data and data from statistically representative panels of retail and hospital pharmacies which data are then projected by IMS to give figures for national markets.
References to prevalence of disease have been derived from a variety of sources and are not intended to be indicative of the current market or any potential market for AstraZeneca s pharmaceutical products since among other things there may be no correlation between the prevalence of a disease and the number of individuals who are treated for such disease.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Shareholder Information T erms used in the Annual Report and Form 20F US equivalent or brief description Accruals Accrued expenses Allotted Issued Bank borrowings Payable to banks Calledup share capital Issued share capital Capital allowances T ax term equivalent to US tax depreciation allowances Creditors Liabilitiespayables Current instalments of loans Long term debt due within one year Debtors Receivables and prepaid expenses Earnings Net income Finance lease Capital lease Fixed asset investments Noncurrent investments Freehold Ownership with absolute rights in perpetuity Interest receivable Interest income Interest payable Interest expense Loans Long term debt Prepayments Prepaid expenses Profit Income Profit and loss account Income statementconsolidated statement of income Reserves Retained earnings Short term investments Redeemable securities and short term deposits Share premium account Premiums paid in excess of par value of Ordinary Shares Statement of T otal Recognised Statement of Comprehensive Income Gains and Losses Stocks Inventories T angible fixed assets Property  plant and equipment Turnover Salesrevenues 134 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Risk Factors Risk Factors Risk of loss or expiration of patents marketing exclusivity or trade marks Scientific development and technological innovation is crucial if AstraZeneca is to deliver long term market success.
In the pharmaceutical market a drug diagnostic or medical device is normally only subject to competition from alternative products in the same therapy area during the period of patent protection or other types of marketing exclusivity  but once patent protection or other types of marketing exclusivity has expired the product is generally open to competition from generic copy products.
Products under patent protection or other types of marketing exclusivity usually generate significantly higher revenues than those not protected by patents or other types of marketing exclusivity.
We believe that we have patent protection for many of our most important products.
For example lisinopril the active ingredient in Zestril lost protection in the US in June 2002 and in Japan the UK and most other major markets during 2002.
As anticipated a major erosion of our sales of lisinopril products occurred during the second half of 2002.
Also Nolvadex patent protection in the US expired in August 2002 although the FDA requested and we submitted paediatric data for Nolvadex which resulted in Nolvadex being granted six months marketing exclusivity until February 2003.
Increasingly  manufacturers of generic pharmaceutical products whether based in developing countries such as those in Asia or elsewhere in the world seek to challenge our patents or other types of marketing exclusivity in order to allow access to the market for their own generic products.
For example AstraZeneca was involved in litigation in the US during 2002 relating to omeprazole the active ingredient in Losec Prilosec concerning the infringement of certain patents including formulation patents by four generic manufacturers.
The US Court for the Southern District of New Y ork upheld the validity of two of these patents ruled that three generic companies infringed the patents but that one did not.
The infringement and noninfringement decisions are all under appeal but in the meantime the fourth generic company launched its generic omeprazole in the US market in December 2002.
Other patent litigation relating to omeprazole is proceeding or pending in several countries.
T rade mark protection for our products is also an important element of our overall product marketing programmes.
Combined with patent protection or other types of marketing exclusivity products protected by a valid trade mark usually generate significantly higher revenues than those not protected by a trade mark.
We believe that we have trade mark protection for many of our most important products.
However  trade mark protection may expire or be challenged by third parties.
The expiration or loss of certain patents marketing exclusivity or trade marks could have an adverse effect on pricing and sales with respect to these products and consequently  could result in a material adverse effect on AstraZeneca s financial condition and results of operations.
Impact of fluctuations in exchange rates The results of AstraZeneca s operations are accounted for in US dollars.
Approximately
57% of our 2002 sales were in the Americas comprised of the US Canada and Latin America with a significant proportion of that figure being in respect of US sales.
The US is and is expected to remain our largest and potentially fastest growing major market.
Sales in certain other countries are also in US dollars or in currencies whose exchange rates are linked to the US dollar .
Major components of our cost base are however located in Europe where an aggregate of approximately 60% of our employees are based.
Movements in the exchange rates used to translate foreign currencies into US dollars may therefore have a material adverse effect on AstraZeneca s financial condition and results of operations.
Certain subsidiaries of AstraZeneca import and export goods and services in currencies other than their own functional currency although we minimise this practice.
The results of such subsidiaries could therefore be affected by currency fluctuations arising between the transaction dates and the settlement dates for those transactions.
We hedge these exposures through financial instruments in the form of forward contracts and currency swaps.
The notional principal amount of financial instruments used to hedge these exposures principally forward foreign exchange contracts and purchased currency options at 31 December 2002 was 47 million.
We have policies that seek to mitigate the effect of exchange rate fluctuations on the value of foreign currency cash flows and in turn their effects on the results of the various subsidiaries but do not seek to remove all such risks.
In general a unilateral strengthening of the US dollar adversely affects our results whereas a weakening of the US dollar is generally favourable.
We cannot ensure that exchange rate fluctuations will not have a material adverse effect on AstraZenecas financial condition and results of operations in the future.
Risk that RandD will not yield new products that achieve commercial success As a result of the complexities and uncertainties associated with pharmaceutical research it cannot be ensured that compounds currently under development will achieve success in laboratory  animal or clinical trials and ultimately be granted the regulatory approvals needed to market such products successfully .
For example in 2002 our anticancer drug Iressa unexpectedly failed in clinical trials to show any benefit when used in combination with the most common chemotherapy treatments and we discontinued our development of AZD7545 a potential antidiabetic due to failure to meet our target profile.
Development of a number of other drugs was also discontinued during 2002 for the same reason these included ZD9331 a direct acting antifolate for potential treatment of cancers D5522 an intranasal steroid for the potential treatment of rhinitis and NAD299 a potential treatment for anxiety and depression.
There can be no absolute assurances regarding the development and commercial success of any of the products in our current pipeline.
The commercial success of pipeline products is of particular importance to us in view of the recent and anticipated expiry of patent protection in major markets for a number of our key current products in the 20022003 period.
Competition price controls and price reductions The principal markets for our pharmaceutical products are the Americas the countries of the European Union and Japan.
These markets are highly competitive.
We compete in all of them and elsewhere in the world against major prescription pharmaceutical companies which in many cases are able to match or exceed the resources which we have available to us particularly in the areas of RandD and marketing investment.
Recent industry consolidation has resulted in the formation of a small number of very large companies with which we compete as well.
Some of our most important products for future growth such as Crestor will compete directly with similar products marketed by AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Risk Factors some of these companies.
Increasingly  we also compete directly with biotechnology companies and companies which manufacture generic versions of our products following the expiry or loss of patent or other marketing exclusivity.
In most of the principal markets in which we sell our products there is continued economic regulatory and political pressure to limit the cost of pharmaceutical products.
Certain groups have been involved in exerting price pressure on pharmaceutical companies to ensure medicines are affordable to those who need them.
Currently there is no direct government control of prices for nongovernment sales in the US.
In 1990 however  federal legislation was enacted which required drug manufacturers to agree to substantial rebates in order for the manufacturer s drugs to be reimbursed by state Medicaid programmes and an additional rebate if manufacturer price increases after 1990 exceed the increase in inflation.
In addition certain states have taken action to require further manufacturer rebates on Medicaid drug utilisation and for other state pharmaceutical assistance programmes.
Congress also has enacted statutes that place a ceiling on the price manufacturers may charge US government agencies thereby causing a substantial discount as well as establishing a minimum discount comparable to the Medicaid rebate on manufacturers sales to certain clinics and hospitals that serve the poor and other populations with special needs.
These government initiatives together with competitive market pressures have contributed to restraints on realised prices.
Pending legislation in the US may also affect the pricing of and access to pharmaceutical products.
If drug importation into the US market from other countries with lower prices becomes a reality  parallel import activity will affect realised prices.
On the other hand outpatient prescription drug coverage could improve access to pharmaceutical products for senior citizens albeit at potentially lower realised prices.
In addition realised prices are being depressed by pressure from managed care and institutional purchasers who use cost considerations to restrict the sale of preferred drugs that their physicians may prescribe as well as other competitive activity .
Such limited lists or formularies may force manufacturers either to reduce prices or be excluded from the list thereby losing all the sales revenue from patients covered by that formulary .
The use of strict formularies by institutional customers is increasing rapidly in response to the current cost containment environment resulting in lower margins on such sales.
Some governments in Europe notably Italy and Spain set price controls having regard to the medical economic and social impact of the product.
In other European countries primarily Germany  the UK the Netherlands and more recently  France governments are exerting a strong downward pressure on prices by incentives and sanctions to encourage doctors to prescribe cost effectively .
Efforts by the European Commission to harmonise the disparate national systems have met with little immediate success leaving the industry exposed to ad hoc national cost containment measures on prices and the consequent parallel trading of products from markets with prices depressed by governments into those where higher prices prevail.
There is formal central government control of prices in Japan.
New product prices are determined primarily by comparison with existing products for the same medical condition.
All existing products are subject to a price review at least every two years.
Regulations introduced in 2000 included provisions allowing a drug s price to be set according to the average price of the product in four major countries the US the UK Germany and France.
Taxation
The UK is party to various double tax treaties with foreign jurisdictions which enable AstraZeneca s revenues and capital gains to escape a double tax charge to both UK and foreign jurisdiction tax.
If any of these double tax treaties should be withdrawn or amended or should any member of the AstraZeneca Group become involved in taxation disputes with any tax authority  such withdrawal amendment or a negative outcome of such disputes could have a material adverse effect on AstraZenecas financial condition and results of operations.
Risk of substantial product liability claims Given the widespread impact ethical prescription drugs may have on the health of large patient populations pharmaceutical and medical device companies have historically  been subject to large product liability damages claims settlements and awards for injuries allegedly caused by the use of their products.
Substantial product liability claims that are not covered by insurance could have a material adverse effect on AstraZeneca s financial condition and results of operations.
Risk of reliance on third parties for supplies of materials and services Like most if not all major prescription pharmaceutical companies in some of its key business operations such as the manufacture formulation and packaging of products AstraZeneca relies on third parties for the timely supply of specified raw materials equipment contract manufacturing formulation or packaging services and maintenance services.
Although we actively manage these third party relationships to ensure continuity of supplies on time and to our required specifications some events beyond our control could result in the complete or partial failure of supplies or in supplies not being delivered on time.
Any such failure could have a material adverse effect on AstraZenecas financial condition and results of operations.
Risk of delay to new product launches AstraZeneca s continued success depends on the development and successful launch of innovative new drugs.
The anticipated launch dates of major new products have a significant impact on a number of areas of our business including investment in large clinical trials the manufacture of prelaunch stocks of the products and the timing of anticipated future revenue streams from commercial sales of the products.
Any delay to the anticipated launch dates may therefore impact AstraZeneca s business and operations in a number of ways.
For example we had expected our new statin for the treatment of lipid disorders Crestor to be launched in the US in the second half of 2002.
However  the approval of products in this class has been subject to additional regulatory scrutiny partly as a result of the previous withdrawal from the market of cerivastatin.
Although Crestor received marketing approval in the Netherlands in November 2002 launch in the US is now expected in the latter part of 2003 subject to the FDA being satisfied by additional trial data to be submitted by AstraZeneca in Q1 of 2003.
Significant delay to the anticipated launch dates of new products could have a material adverse effect on AstraZenecas financial condition and results of operations.
Difficulties of obtaining government regulatory approvals for new products AstraZeneca is subject to strict controls on the manufacture labelling distribution and marketing of pharmaceutical products.
The 136 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Risk Factors Risk Factors continued requirement to obtain regulatory approval based on safety efficacy and quality before such products may be marketed in a particular country and to maintain and to comply with licences and other regulations relating to their manufacture are particularly important.
The submission of an application to a regulatory authority does not guarantee that approval to market the products will be granted.
The countries that constitute material markets for our pharmaceutical products include the US the countries of the European Union and Japan.
Approval of such products is required by the relevant regulatory authority in each country  although in Europe single marketing authorisation can govern the approval of products throughout the European Union through a centralised procedure.
In addition each jurisdiction has very high standards of regulatory approval and consequently in most cases a lengthy approval process.
Furthermore each regulatory authority may impose its own requirements and may refuse to grant or may require additional data before granting an approval even though the relevant product has been approved in another country .
Risk of failure to observe ongoing regulatory oversight AstraZeneca s products are only licenced following exhaustive regulatory approval processes.
Once a product is licenced it is subject to ongoing control and regulation such as the manner of its manufacture distribution and marketing.
Regulatory authorities have wideranging administrative powers to deal with any failure to comply with their ongoing regulatory oversight.
These powers include withdrawal of a licence approval previously granted product recalls seizure of products and other sanctions for noncompliance.
Regulatory sanction following a failure to comply with such ongoing regulatory oversight could have a material adverse effect on AstraZenecas financial condition and results of operations.
Environmental liabilities AstraZeneca has environmental liabilities at some currently or formerly owned leased and third party sites in the US as described in more detail on page 102.
There is no reason for us to believe that current and expected expenditure and risks occasioned by these circumstances are likely to have a material adverse effect on AstraZenecas financial position and results of operations although they could to the extent that they exceed applicable provisions have a material adverse effect on AstraZenecas financial position and results of operations for the relevant period.
In addition a change in circumstances including a change in applicable laws or regulations may result in such a material adverse effect.
Although we take great care to ensure that we operate our business at all of our sites within all applicable environmental laws regulations licences and permits a significant environmental incident for which we were responsible could result in AstraZeneca being liable to pay compensation fines or remediation costs.
In some circumstances such liability could have a material adverse effect on AstraZenecas financial position and results of operations.
Risks associated with forwardlooking statements This report contains certain forwardlooking statements about AstraZeneca.
Although we believe our expectations are based on reasonable assumptions any forward looking statements may be influenced by factors that could cause actual outcomes and results to be materially different from those predicted.
Forwardlooking statements are identified in this report by using the words anticipates believes expects intends and similar expressions in such statements.
These forwardlooking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties.
Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in forwardlooking statements certain of which are beyond our control include among other things the loss or expiration of patents marketing exclusivity or trade marks exchange rate fluctuations the risk that RandD will not yield new products that achieve commercial success the impact of competition price controls and price reductions taxation risks the risk of substantial product liability claims the impact of any failure by third parties to supply materials or services the risk of delay to new product launches the difficulties of obtaining and maintaining governmental approvals for products and the risk of environmental liabilities.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site AstraZeneca Code of Conduct AstraZeneca Code of Conduct Introductory Message from the Chief
The reputation of the AstraZeneca Group and the trust and confidence of those with whom it deals are of great importance to its business.
It is essential that AstraZeneca maintains high ethical standards in its dealings with all those with whom it is involved.
All employees are required to comply with the letter and spirit of the Code of Conduct and with the detailed standards issued in support of it.
T aken together  the policy and standards comprise the Groups Code of Conduct which was approved by the Board of Directors in April 2000.
T om McKillop
The Group requires its companies and their employees to observe high standards of integrity and honesty and act with due skill care diligence and fairness in the conduct of business.
T o this end all Group companies and their employees are required to comply with the laws of all countries in which they operate and with the high ethical standards detailed by the Group in support of this policy.
Compliance
It is the responsibility of management to ensure that the Group Code of Conduct and standards are communicated understood and acted upon.
They must positively promote them by personal example and are not entitled to permit exceptions to the required behaviour .
All employees should familiarise themselves with the Code of Conduct and must comply with it.
Failure to act in compliance with the Code is likely to result in disciplinary action against both the employee committing the breach and others who condone it.
The Standards set out in the Code are general and do not address each and every situation that may confront employees in markets around the world.
Guidance on the application of the Code to particular situations should be sought from management.
In addition Legal Department and Group Internal Audit are available on a confidential basis as independent sources of advice.
Where confidential phone lines are available these should be used to raise issues of concern.
So long as this is done in good faith the Group assures individual employees who raise issues that they will be protected from any adverse impact on their employment as a result.
Standards of Conduct Business practices Group companies and their employees should comply with the laws of all countries in which they operate with appropriate international and national industry codes of practice and with the high ethical standards specified by the Group.
It is the responsibility of all employees to ensure by taking advice where appropriate that they are fully aware of all relevant laws practices and codes of practice.
While this standard applies without exception particular areas where compliance must be ensured are laws concerned with competition employment new product research and development manufacturing marketing and selling and safety  health and the environment.
Employees should ensure that within their sphere of business activity  Group companies carry out their contractual obligations in a proper and timely manner and are not in breach of contract.
Business practice and what amounts to improper conduct varies from country to country and from industry to industry .
All employees will comply with a the high ethical standards specified by the Group b any overall AstraZeneca Code published relating to business practices and c any international and national codes of practice applicable to the conduct of business in each environment.
Gifts entertainment and personal favours may only be offered to a third party if they are consistent with customary business practice and not in contravention of any applicable law or code of practice.
No employee should seek or accept a gift entertainment or personal favour which might reasonably be believed to have a significant influence on business transactions.
An offer of entertainment must not be accepted unless the offer is within the bounds of accepted business hospitality .
Gifts which do not meet the above criteria should be reported to management who shall determine how they shall be dealt with.
Group funds should not be used in payments direct or indirect to government officials people participating in government bodies employees of state organisations or representatives of political parties for unlawful or improper purposes.
Equal opportunities All employees should be treated with equal respect and dignity and should be provided with equality of opportunity to develop themselves and their careers.
AstraZeneca values the individuality  diversity and creative potential that every employee brings to its business and supports the continuous development of their skills and abilities.
Judgements about people for the purpose of recruitment development or promotion should be made solely on the basis of a person s ability and potential in relation to the needs of the job and should take no account of any matter not relevant to the performance of that job.
Overall success and advancement within the Group should depend solely on personal ability and work performance.
In some countries these principles may be modified by national legal requirements for positive discrimination.
Personal harassment Conduct involving the harassment of any employee of the Group its suppliers or customers is unacceptable.
In particular sexual harassment will not be tolerated.
Any person who believes they have been personally harassed should report the incident and circumstances to their immediate manager or personnel manager or other senior manager who will arrange for it to be investigated impartially and confidentially .
AstraZeneca is fully supportive of the principles set forth in the UN Declaration of Human Rights.
These include freedom from torture and arbitrary arrest the right to a fair trial and equality before the law.
Political contributions Any political contributions by Group companies must be lawful and approved under procedures laid down by the board or governing body of the company concerned.
Approval should not be given to any political contributions which by their scale or affiliation might embarrass the Group.
The
Group s accounting procedures require any 138 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site AstraZeneca Code of Conduct AstraZeneca Code of Conduct continued political contributions to be reported to Group headquarters as part of the annual consolidation of results.
Conflicts of interest Employees dealing with the Groups business must act in the best interests of the Group and must disregard any personal preference or advantage.
Employees should avoid entering into situations in which their personal family or financial interests may conflict with those of the AstraZeneca Group.
Where any potential conflict of interest may arise the employee should declare that interest and seek advice from senior management.
Examples of conflict that must be declared and resolved include having a family interest in a transaction with AstraZeneca or one of its subsidiaries the Company or any supplier or customer hiring of a family member in any capacity having an interest in a competitor supplier or customer of the Company having an interest in an organisation that has or seeks to do business with the an interest.
These examples do not extend to normal financial investments in publicly quoted companies.
Insider information Employees must not use confidential information obtained through their employment for personal gain.
It is AstraZeneca policy  and in certain countries a legal requirement carrying criminal sanctions that employees in possession of confidential price sensitive information in relation to securities must not make use of such information to deal in securities of AstraZeneca or provide such information to third parties for that purpose.
The same considerations apply in relation to confidential price sensitive information relating to other companies and dealing in their securities.
Group property and resources Group resources should be kept securely and should only be applied for the proper advancement of its business and not for personal gain.
Individuals expending Group resources should recognise that they owe a duty of care to the shareholders of the Group who are its ultimate owners.
Commitments and expenditure should only be such as could be justified to shareholders if the facts were known.
Group resources include not only tangible assets such as materials equipment and cash but also intangible assets such as computer systems trade secrets and confidential information.
Employees must observe Group and local guidelines concerning the classifying and handling of documents and electronic data.
The storage of personal data in an electronic medium may be governed by laws with which relevant employees should familiarise themselves.
Information generated within the Group including research and development and manufacturing data costs prices sales profits markets customers and methods of doing business is the property of the Group and should not unless legally required be disclosed outside the Group without proper authority.
Group policies delegated authorities and reserved powers Group employees are expected to make themselves aware of and comply with the letter and spirit of all Group policies and with the reserved powers and delegated authorities established by the Board from time to time.
Copies of these are available on the Companys intranet site.
The freedoms which individuals have to carry out their jobs should be exercised within both the letter and spirit of Group policies and procedures reserved powers and delegated authorities.
These are designed to empower people to carry out their responsibilities within a necessary framework of corporate control and legal responsibility but are not so voluminous as to prescribe appropriate action in every circumstance.
In the exercise of their authorities individuals must bear Group and legal entity requirements in mind and must surface problems and consult on issues which have significant Group implications.
When considering whether an issue does require reference to another authority  the overall substance of the issue must be considered and when sharing an issue with another authority all facts relevant to a decision must be fully and fairly presented.
June 2000 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Additional Information Additional Information History and development of the Company AstraZeneca PLC was incorporated in England and Wales on 17 June 1992 under the Companies Act 1985.
It is a public limited company domiciled in the UK.
The
Company s registered number is and its registered office is at 15 Stanhope Gate London W1K 1LN telephone  44 0tel.
From February 1993 until April 1999 the Company was called Zeneca Group PLC.
On 6 April 1999 the Company changed its name to AstraZeneca PLC.
The Company was formed when the pharmaceutical agrochemical and specialty chemical businesses of Imperial Chemical Industries PLC were demerged in 1993.
In
1999 the Company sold the specialty chemical business.
Also in 1999 the Company merged with Astra AB of Sweden.
In 2000 it demerged the agrochemical business and merged it with the similar agribusiness of Novartis AG to form a new company called Syngenta AG.
The Company owns and operates numerous RandD production and marketing facilities worldwide.
Its corporate headquarters are at 15 Stanhope Gate London W1K 1LN and its RandD headquarters are at SE151 85 Sdertlje Sweden.
Memorandum and Articles of Association
As is typical of companies registered in England and Wales the Company s objects which are detailed in the Memorandum of Association are broad and wideranging and include manufacturing distributing and trading pharmaceutical products.
Directors
Subject to certain exceptions Directors do not have power to vote at Board Meetings on matters in which they have a material interest.
The quorum for meetings of the Board of Directors is a majority of the full Board of whom at least four must be NonExecutive
In the absence of a quorum the Directors do not have power to determine compensation arrangements for themselves or any member of the Board.
The Board of Directors may exercise all the powers of the Company to borrow money .
Variation of these borrowing powers would require the passing of a special resolution of the Company s shareholders.
Directors are not required to retire at a particular age.
Directors are required to beneficially own Ordinary Shares in the Company of an aggregate nominal amount of 125.
At present this means they must own at least 500 shares.
Rights preferences and restrictions attaching to shares The share capital of the Company is divided into 2400000000 Ordinary Shares with a nominal value of 0.25 each and 50000 Redeemable Preference Shares with a nominal value of 1.00 each.
The rights and restrictions attaching to the Redeemable Preference Shares differ from those attaching to Ordinary Shares as follows the Redeemable Preference Shares carry no rights to receive dividends the holders of Redeemable Preference Shares have no rights to receive notices of attend or vote at general meetings except in certain limited circumstances they have one vote for every 50000 Redeemable Preference Shares held on a distribution of assets of the Company on a windingup or other return of capital subject to certain exceptions the holders of Redeemable Preference Shares have priority over the holders of Ordinary Shares to receive the capital paid up on those shares and subject to the provisions of the Companies Act 1985 the Company has the right to redeem the Redeemable Preference Shares at any time on giving not less than seven days written notice.
Action necessary to change the rights of shareholders In order to vary the rights attached to any class of shares the consent in writing of the holders of three quarters in nominal value of the issued shares of that class or the sanction of an extraordinary resolution passed at a general meeting of such holders is required.
Annual general meetings and extraordinary general meetings Annual general meetings and extraordinary general meetings where a special resolution is to be passed or a Director is to be appointed require 21 clear days notice to shareholders.
All other extraordinary general meetings require 14 clear days notice.
For all general meetings a quorum of two shareholders present in person or by proxy is required.
Shareholders and their duly appointed proxies and corporate representatives are entitled to be admitted to general meetings.
Limitations on the rights to own shares There are no limitations on the rights to own shares.
ShareGift
AstraZeneca welcomes and values all its shareholders no matter how many or how few shares they own.
However  shareholders who have only a small number of shares whose value makes it uneconomic to sell them either now or at some stage in the future may wish to consider donating them to charity through ShareGift an independent charity share donation scheme.
One of the advantages of the scheme is that there is no gain or loss for capital gains tax purposes on gifts of shares through ShareGift and it may now also be possible to obtain income tax relief on the donation.
Further information about ShareGift can be found on its website www. haregift.
ShareGift ontel or at 46 Grosvenor Street London W1K 3HN.
More information about the tax position on gifts of shares to ShareGift can be obtained from the Inland Revenue whose website address is www. nlandrevenue.
Lloyds TSB Registrars whose address can be found on page 129.
ShareGift is administered by The Orr Mackintosh Foundation registered charity number .
The Unclaimed Assets Register AstraZeneca supplies unclaimed dividend data to the Unclaimed Assets Register UAR which provides investors who have lost track of shareholdings with an opportunity to search the UAR s database of unclaimed financial assets on payment of a small fixed fee. to charity .
The UAR can be contacted at Leconfield House Curzon Street London W1J 5JA and at site 140 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Cross Reference to Form 20F Cross Reference to Form 20F Item Page 3 Key Information
Selected financial data Financial Highlights 2 Group Financial Record 123 Shareholder Information 126
Risk factors 134 4 Information on the Company
History and development of the Company 139 Note 11  Tangible fixed assets 78 Note 26  Acquisitions of subsidiaries and purchases of minority interests 90 Note 28  Disposals 91
Business overview Operational Review 8
Organisational structure Directors Report  Principal activities 44 Note 1  Composition of the Group 65 Principal Subsidiaries Joint Ventures and Associates 112
Property  plants and equipment Operational Review  Main Facilities 26 5 Operating and Financial Review and Prospects
Financial Review 30
6 Directors Senior Management and Employees
Directors and senior management Board of Directors and Officers of the Company 6
Compensation
Directors Remuneration Report 49
C.
Board practices Board of Directors and Officers of the Company 6
Directors Remuneration Report 49
Directors Report 44
Employees
Note 10  Segment information employees 76 Directors Report  Employees 47
Share ownership Directors Remuneration Report  Directors Interests in Shares 53 7 Major Shareholders and Related Party T ransactions
Major shareholders Shareholder Information  Major shareholdings 128
Related party transactions Shareholder Information  Related party transactions 129 Note 36  Statutory and other information 107 8 Financial Information
Consolidated statements and other financial information Financial Statements excluding Directors responsibilities on page 56 and Auditor s opinion on page 57 58
Significant changes na 9 The Offer and Listing
Price history of stock listed Shareholder Information 126
Markets
Shareholder Information 127 10 Additional Information
Memorandum and Articles of Association 139
Material contracts na
Exchange controls 131
Taxation 130
Documents on display 129
Subsidiary information 112 11 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk Financial Policies  Treasury 35 13 Defaults Dividend Arrearages and Delinquencies na 14 Material Modifications to the Rights of Security Holders and Use of Proceeds na 15 Controls and Procedures Directors Report  Audit Committee Internal Controls and Management of Risk 46 18 Financial Statements Financial Statements excluding Directors responsibilities on page 56 and Auditor s opinion on page 57 58 The information in this document that is referenced on this page is included in the Annual Report on Form 20F for 2002 2002 Form 20F and is filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission SEC.
The 2002 Form 20F is the only document intended to be incorporated by reference into any filings by AstraZeneca under the Securities Act of 1933 as amended.
References to major headings include all information under such major headings including subheadings.
References to subheadings include only the information contained under such subheadings.
Graphs are not included unless specifically identified opposite.
The 2002 Form 20F has not been approved or disapproved by the SEC nor has the SEC passed comment upon the accuracy or adequacy of the 2002 Form 20F .
The
2002 Form 20F filed with the SEC may contain modified information and may be updated from time to time.
Contents
Key Achievements 01 Financial Highlights 02 Chairman s Statement 04
Chief Executive s Review 05
Board of Directors 06 Operational Review Strategy 08 Key Product Summary 09 Global Market Overview 10 Gastrointestinal 11 Cardiovascular 12 Oncology 13 Infection 14 Respiratory and Inflammation 15 Central Nervous System 16 Pain Control 17 Geographic Review 18 Research and Development 21 Development Pipeline 22 Commercialisation and Portfolio Management 24 Supply and Manufacturing 25 Other Businesses 26 Main Facilities 26 Intellectual Property 27 Industry Regulation 27 Corporate Responsibility 29
Financial Review 30
Directors Report 44
Directors Remuneration Report 49
Financial Statements Contents 55 Financial Statements and Notes Relating to the Financial Statements 56 Principal Subsidiaries Joint Ventures and Associates 112 Additional Information for US Investors 113 Group Financial Record  UK GAAP 123 Group Financial Record  US GAAP 125 Shareholder Information 126 Risk Factors 134 AstraZeneca Code of Conduct 137 Additional Information 139 Cross Reference to Form 20F 140 Trade marks Trade marks of the AstraZeneca group of companies appear throughout this document in italics.
AstraZeneca the AstraZeneca logotype and the AstraZeneca symbol are all trade marks of the AstraZeneca group of companies.
Use of terms In this Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 unless the context otherwise requires AstraZeneca the Group the Company we us and our refer to AstraZeneca PLC and its consolidated entities.
Cautionary statement regarding forward looking statements In order to utilise the safe harbour provisions of the US Private Securities Litigation Reform Act 1995 we are providing the following cautionary statement This Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 contains certain forwardlooking statements about AstraZeneca.
Although we believe our expectations are based on reasonable assumptions any forwardlooking statements may be influenced by factors that could cause actual outcomes and results to be materially different from those predicted.
We identify the forwardlooking statements by using the words anticipates believes expects intends and similar expressions in such statements.
These forwardlooking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties.
Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in forwardlooking statements certain of which are beyond our control include among other things the loss or expiration of patents marketing exclusivity or trade marks exchange rate fluctuations the risk that RandD will not yield new products that achieve commercial success the impact of competition price controls and price reductions taxation risks the risk of substantial product liability claims the impact of any failure by third parties to supply materials or services the risk of delay to new product launches the difficulties of obtaining and maintaining governmental approvals for products and the risk of environmental liabilities.
Statements of competitive position Except as otherwise stated market information in this Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 regarding the position of our business or products relative to its or their competition is based upon published statistical data for the 12 months ended 30 September 2002 or the month of November 2002 obtained from IMS Health a leading supplier of statistical data to the pharmaceutical industry.
Except as otherwise stated this market share and industry data from IMS Health has been derived by comparing our sales revenue to competitors and total market sales revenues for that period.
Statements of growth rates Except as otherwise stated growth rates in this Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 are given at constant exchange rates CER.
AstraZeneca website Information on our website site does not form part of this document.
AstraZeneca PLC 2003 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F 2002 site Inner Covers 251 pm Page 1 We re reporting Registered office and corporate headquarters AstraZeneca PLC 15 Stanhope Gate London W1K 1LN
AstraZeneca RandD Sdertlje SE151 85 Sdertlje
Tel 46 0Fax 46 0Investor relations contacts UK and Sweden As above or email investoremail
Investor Relations AstraZeneca LP 1800 Concord Pike PO Box 15438
DE 198505438
Tel telFax telRegistrar and transfer office Lloyds TSB Registrars The Causeway
West Sussex BN99 6DA
Tel in the UKtel Tel outside the UK 44 0tel Swedish securities registration centre VPC AB PO Box 7822 SE103 97 Stockholm
Tel 46 08 402 9000 US depositary JPMorgan Chase Bank PO Box 43013
RI 029403013
