Delivering value through innovation AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012
Welcome to the AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 Annual Report.
You will nd this Annual Report on our websitesite annualreport2012
To compete as a global biopharmaceutical business delivering great medicines to patients through innovative science and excellence in development and commercialisation
2012 nancial performance was dened by signicant revenue decline associated with the loss of exclusivity for several products
Governance
In addition to the regular programme of meetings for the Board and its Committees 2012 was a busy year with new appointments a record number of business development deals and our strategic review
Statements
Met or exceeded nancial targets as a result of disciplined nancial management and lower Reported tax rate
Information
More information about our business and about being an AstraZeneca shareholder Innovation is at the core of everything we do at AstraZeneca  from our research into effective new medicines to how we run our business.
Our goal is to improve health for patients bring benets for stakeholders and deliver longterm shareholder value through continued successful innovation.
Our innovation Improves health outcomes for patients Delivers economic benets for healthcare systems Adds value beyond the medicines Contributes to our local communities In a world where the demand for healthcare continues to grow the advances made through innovation are vital to address unmet medical need and deliver sustained improvement in healthcare worldwide.
Important information for readers of this Annual Report For further information in relation to the inclusion of reported performance Core nancial measures and constant exchange rate CER growth rates as used in this Overview from page 2 and throughout the Performance and Corporate Governance sections from pages 24 and 106 respectively please refer to the Financial Review on page 88.
Throughout this Annual Report growth rates are expressed at CER unless otherwise stated.
Denitions The Glossary and the Market denitions table from page 209 are intended to provide a useful guide to terms and AstraZenecas denitions of markets as well as to acronyms and abbreviations used in this section and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Use of terms In this Annual Report unless the context otherwise requires AstraZeneca the Group we us and our refer to AstraZeneca PLC and its consolidated entities.
Statements of dates Except as otherwise stated references to days andor months in this Annual Report are references to days andor months in 2012.
Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements A cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements and other essential information relating to this Annual Report can be found on the inside back cover.
Directors Report The following sections make up the Directors Report which has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006
Performance
Corporate Governance Development Pipeline Shareholder Information Corporate Information This Annual Report is also available on our websitesite annualreport201 2 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 1 Overview Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Introduction and overview AstraZeneca at a glance
Chairman s Statement
Chief Executive Ofcers
Strategy
Our business model Lifecycle of a medicine Our industr y 20 Our strategy
Key Performance Indicators
30 Business Review
50 Therapy Area Review 70 Geographical Review
86 Financial Review
Financial Statements
Auditors Report
142 Consolidated Statements Notes to the Group Financial Statements Additional Information 199 Development Pipeline 203 Shareholder Information 206 Corporate Information 209 Glossary 212 Index How does the way we are managed and paid support the delivery of our strategy The Board sets our strategy and monitors progress towards delivering our strategic priorities and meeting our annual plans.
In our Corporate Governance Report introduced by the Chairman we review the work of the Board and its Committees in 2012 and how we maintain good governance across the Group.
The principal role of our Remuneration Committee is to develop remuneration policies and practices that support the implementation of our business strategy and help create shareholder value over time.
The Committee led by its Chairman Non Executive Director John Varley reports on how it discharged its responsibilities in 2012.
Board and Senior Executive Team Corporate Governance Report Directors Remuneration Report Corporate Governance Board of Directors and Senior Executive Team Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration
How did we do in delivering our strategy in 2012
Measuring our performance against the Key Performance Indicators for each of our priorities
Business Review
How the business performed in 2012 Our resources skills and capabilities Our Therapy Areas Markets around the world in which we operate Our nances
The risks that might stop us achieving our strategy and how we manage them Product pipeline Commercialisation and business execution Supply chain and delivery Legal regulatory and compliance Economic and nancial How do we create sustainable value The lifecycle of a medicine and our business model How does our strategy help us deliver our aims Our business model Our industry Our strategy Investment period Returns period A year in review The Chairman and Chief Executive Ofcer review how we did in 2012 and consider the prospects for 2013 and beyond Who are we An introduction to AstraZeneca what we do and where we do it and an overview of our nancial and operational performance in 2012 P2 P6 P106 Overview  AstraZeneca at a glance AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 2 We are a global innovationdriven biopharmaceutical business Financial summary Sales down 15% at CER to 27 973 million 33591 million in 2011 1 0.4bn Core operating prot down 18% at CER to 10430 million 13167 million in 2011 1bn Reported operating prot down 34% at CER to 8148 million 12795 million in 2011 Core EPS for the full year decreased by 9% at CER to 6.41 7 .28 in 2011 Reported EPS for the full year decreased by 29% at CER to 4.99 7 .33 in 2011 5.9bn Net cash shareholder distributions decreased by 37% to 5871 million including net share repurchases of 2206 million 9370 million net cash shareholder distributions including 5606 million net share repurchases in 2011 10655m Regional sales US 21% employees in the Americas 27 .9% Sales and Marketing employees numbers in Established Markets such as the US have fallen whereas the numbers in Emerging Markets have increased and now represent 53% of the total Our medicines Our 10 leading medicines by sales value are
2010 1483m 2011 1450m
2010 5691m 2011 6622m
2010 1210m 2011 986m
2010 1038m 2011 975m 27% 6253m 4% 4% 3944m 10% 6% Cardiovascular Infection Gastrointestinal Our primary focus is the discovery development and commercialisation of prescription medicines for six important areas of healthcare Cardiovascular Gastrointestinal Infection Neuroscience Oncology and Respiratory and Inammation.
We operate in over 100 countries and our innovative medicines are used by millions of patients worldwide.
We are one of only a handful of companies to span the entire lifecycle of a medicine from discovery early and latestage development to the global commercialisation of primary care specialty careled and specialty care medicines.
Using these skills and capabilities we can make a real difference to the health of a broad range of patients by delivering great medicines in disease areas where there is unmet medical need.
We want AstraZeneca to be valued as a source of great medicines and trusted as a company that delivers business success responsibly.
Our Responsible Business Plan provides the framework for ensuring that we operate with integrity and high ethical standards across all our activities.
Nexium for acidreux 2010 4969m 2011 4429m 3944m 10% AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 3 Overview Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 6486m Regional sales Western Europe 19% employees worldwide 5080m Regional sales Established ROW  14% employees work in our RandD organisation and we have 10 principal RandD centres in six countries 5752m Regional sales Emerging Markets 4% employees in Asia Pacic 26.5% employees work at our 22 Supply and Manufacturing sites in 16 countries Seroquel IR for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder 2010 4148m 2011 4338m Seroquel XR for schizophrenia bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder 2010 1154m 2011 1490m
2010 1115m 2011 1179m
2010 872m 2011 892m 1294m 70% 4% 1093m 5% 1% Neuroscience Oncology
2010 2746m 2011 3148m 5% Respiratory and Inammation employees in EMEA 45.6% All gures are approximate.
Overview  AstraZeneca at a glance AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 4 Financial overview 12 27973 11 33591 10 33269
12 6948 11 7821 10 10680 Net cash ow from operating activities m 12 8148 11 12795 10 11494 Reported operating prot m 34% 12 14882 11 18200 10 17822 Core preRandD operating prot m 16% 12 13391 11 18318 10 16812 Reported preRandD operating prot m 25% pipeline projects countries 11% reduction in RandD expense 15% reduction in revenue 4.5bn loss of exclusivity reduction Pipeline Deliver the business 84 pipeline projects including 71 in clinical development of which 11 are in Phase III or under regulatory review 19 withdrawn during the year BrilintaBrilique has been approved in 88 countries launched in 82 countries and remains under review in 23 countries.
Global sales of 89 million in 2012 Core RandD expense for the full year was down 11% despite absorbing higher costs from spending on inlicensed acquired or partnered projects as these were more than offset by restructuring benets and lower intangible impairments than in 2011 Revenue fell by 21% in the US 19% in Western Europe and 14% in Established Rest of
Revenue rose by 4% in Emerging Markets Some 4.5 billion of revenue decline was related to loss of exclusivity on several brands in the portfolio.
Seroquel IR declined by more than 3 billion regional losses of exclusivity for Atacand Nexium and Crestor had a further negative impact of more than 1 billion Operational overview Our year in brief 2012 M A M J J March  AstraZeneca receives approval from the FDA for FluMist Quadrivalent for the prevention of inuenza.
This marked the rst fourstrain inuenza vaccine and the only intranasal fourstrain vaccine approved by the FDA April  Entered into agreement to acquire Ardea and its Phase III development product candidate lesinurad as a potential treatment for the chronic management of hyperuricaemia in patients with gout June  David Brennan retires as CEO Louis Schweitzer retires as Chairman of the Board and Leif Johansson starts as the new Chairman June  AstraZeneca enhances its presence in Asia with the opening of the Zhangjiang Park Regional Hub Headquarters in Shanghai April  AstraZeneca agrees with Amgen to jointly develop and commercialise ve monoclonal antibodies from Amgens clinical inammation portfolio February  AstraZeneca announces an accelerated RandD transformation programme and the end of RandD activity at sites in Sweden Sdertlje and Canada Montreal March  AstraZeneca and Targacept decide not to pursue regulatory ling on TC5214 due to inconclusive Phase III results As anticipated the Seroquel IR patent in the US expired a number of generic products entered the market and our sales declined 12 10430 11 13167 10 13603 Core operating prot m 18% AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 5 Overview Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Shareholder distributions Core earnings per Ordinary Share  9% Reported earnings per Ordinary Share  29% Distributions to shareholders mtel Dividends 3665 3764 3361 Share repurchases Total 6300 9779 5965 Dividend for 2012 Pence SEK Payment date First interim dividend 0.90 58.1 6.26 10 September 2012 Second interim dividend 1.90 120.5 12.08 18 March 2013 The share repurchase programme was suspended effective 1 October 2012.
Share repurchases in 2012 net of proceeds from the issue of share capital equal to 429 million were 2206 million.
Share repurchases in 2011 net of proceeds from the issue of share capital equal to 409 million were 5606 million.
Share repurchases in 2010 net of proceeds from the issue of share capital equal to 494 million were 2110 million.
1.85bn in benefits 12% reduction in SGandA 81% score reduction in employees Business shape People Symbicort Faslodex Onglyza Iressa Brilinta Brilique and Seroquel XR combined to deliver 600 million of revenue growth By the end of 2012 annual benets of 1.85 billion had been realised from the phases of our restructuring programme announced in 2010 and 2012 Expenditures in Core SGandA were 12% lower than 2011 a result of restructuring benets and spending discipline partially offset by inclusion of amortisation expense related to the expansion of the diabetes alliance with BMS and increased promotional cost in Emerging Markets Our employee engagement score in our annual FOCUS survey among all employees decreased by three percentage points compared with 2011 Net reduction of some 5500 employees since 201 1 included recruitment of approximately 5700 employees to drive our expansion in Emerging Markets build new capabilities and replace leavers 2012 A S O N D 2013 J August  Expansion of BMS diabetes alliance through inclusion of the Amylin product portfolio EU gives marketing authorisation for Zinforo October  Pascal Soriot starts as CEO Suspension of share repurchase programme November  Forxiga approved in Europe for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes January 2013  Changes to the Senior Executive Team announced September  AstraZeneca ranks in the top 7% in the sector in the Dow Jones Sustainability World and European Indexes with a score of 83% October  Collaboration with Ironwood in China to codevelop and co commercialise linaclotide Overview  Chairmans Statement AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 6 NonExecutive changes Part of the strength of any board comes from refreshing and renewing the mix of people sitting around the boardroom table.
When I joined the Board I was pleased that both Graham Chipchase and Genevive Berger also became NonExecutive
They bring respectively indepth nancial and scientic expertise as well as signicant international business experience to our discussions.
Also in April 2012 we said farewell to Michele Hooper who stood down from the Board.
We are all grateful for her distinguished contribution to our work and her dedicated service as Chairman of the Audit Committee and senior independent NonExecutive Director.
In her place John Varley took over as senior independent NonExecutive Director and Rudy Markham became Chairman of the Audit Committee.
A new Chief Executive Ofcer Upon my election to the Board I was also appointed Chairman of the Nomination
This enabled me to lead the important process of selecting David Brennans successor.
This was a process that included both internal and external candidates and culminated in the appointment of Pascal Soriot to the Board as the Companys Chief Executive Ofcer on 1 October.
Pascal joined us from Roche where he had been serving as Chief Operating Ofcer of the companys pharmaceuticals division.
His was a key appointment at an important time for AstraZeneca.
The Board is certain that Pascals leadership qualities combined with his strategic thinking and extensive Dear Shareholder I am glad I was able to meet a number of you in April 2012 when AstraZeneca held its Annual General Meeting in London.
At that meeting you elected me as a Director and it is my privilege to have served as your Chairman since June.
Louis Schweitzer and David Brennan The day of the AGM was by any measure an historic one for your Company.
It was the day on which David Brennan announced his decision to retire from AstraZeneca as your Chief Executive Ofcer.
It was also the day on which your previous Chairman Louis Schweitzer brought forward the date of his intended retirement to 1 June to coincide with that of David.
Louis had been a Director since 2004 and your Chairman for seven years.
During that time he worked tirelessly to ensure that the Board was effective in its task of setting our strategy and overseeing its implementation.
We are grateful to him for his efforts on your behalf.
As Chief Executive Ofcer David led AstraZeneca with skill integrity and courage during a period of enormous change for the industry and for the Company in particular.
I would like to thank David for his seless leadership during his six years at the helm. to success over the coming years.
I am condent that Pascals approach and his track record of delivering results in innovationdriven businesses will be valued by shareholders and employees alike.
Following Davids departure Simon Lowth acted as Interim Chief Executive Ofcer.
The Board and I would like to record our appreciation for his impressive leadership in this period.
Supported by a highly capable and committed executive team Simon maintained the organisations focus on key business priorities during a period of signicant change.
Sound governance All the changes I have outlined took place at the same time as AstraZeneca completed a record number of business development deals.
We also undertook our annual strategic review in which Pascal has been fully involved as well as our regular programme of meetings and business activity.
That we have been able to do all this is a tribute both to the sound corporate governance processes we have in place and to the dedication and hard work of my fellow Directors.
I am grateful to all of them for the contribution they made in 2012.
Challenging times We will need to harness all our skills capabilities and experience if we are to successfully navigate the current harsh climate for the pharmaceutical sector.
The world pharmaceutical market is still growing and underlying demographic trends remain favourable to longterm industry growth.
However many of the drivers of demand and supply in the industry are under pressure.
Chairmans
Statement AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 7 Overview Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information On the demand side we face increased competition from generic medicines as some of the worlds most successful drugs come off patent.
In addition securing recognition through reimbursement approval and reward through favourable pricing and sales for innovation is becoming more difcult in the face of intensifying pricing pressures particularly in Established Markets facing rising healthcare costs.
On the supply side the industry faces an ongoing RandD productivity challenge.
RandD costs have risen signicantly over the past decade while industrywide probability of success continues to decline.
Strategic focus It is for the reasons outlined above that the outcome of our current strategic review is so important.
Our strategy is rooted in our heritage as a company focused on innovative science to deliver great medicines to patients.
I rmly believe that it is the path we need to take if we are to remain competitive and return to growth.
That path must also include a commitment to the responsible and sustainable development of our business.
That is why I was so pleased that we were once again listed in the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index in 2012 and retained our listing on the European Index for the fth year running.
Financial performance We cannot hope to secure our longterm success if we do not meet our nancial targets and deliver acceptable levels of return to our owners.
Group sales in 2012 were down 15% to 27 973 million 2011 33591 million and Reported operating prot was down 34% at 8148 million 2011 12795 million.
Revenue in the US was down 21% while revenue outside the US was down 11%.
More than 13 percentage points of the revenue decline approximately 4.5 billion was related to loss of exclusivity on several brands in the portfolio.
Seroquel IR alone declined by more than 3 billion while regional losses of exclusivity for Atacand Nexium and Crestor accounted for more than 1 billion.
Additionally the disposals of Astra Tech and Aptium accounted for around 1.7 percentage points of the decline.
On the other hand taken together Symbicort Faslodex Onglyza Iressa BrilintaBrilique and Seroquel XR accounted for more than 600 million of revenue growth.
Additionally our diabetes alliance with BMS is strengthened by the inclusion of the Amylin portfolio and the approval of Forxiga in Europe.
Reported earnings per share were down 29% to 4.99.
The decline reects the 1.08 per share benet in 2011 from the sale of Astra Tech and higher restructuring costs in 2012.
Returns to shareholders Consistent with our progressive dividend policy the Board has recommended a second interim dividend of 1.90.
This brings the dividend for the full year to 2.80 178.6 pence SEK 18.34.
In 2012 cash distributions to shareholders through dividends totalled 3665 million and net share repurchases totalled 2206 million.
In October we announced the suspension of our share repurchase programme for 2012 and the Board has decided that no share repurchases will take place in 2013 in order to maintain the exibility to invest in the business.
Outlook
We believe challenging market conditions will persist in 2013 including continued government interventions in price.
The revenue impact from the loss of exclusivity will also continue to affect our performance.
In the context of the ongoing update to our strategy we have withdrawn the planning assumptions for revenue and margin evolution for the period 2010 to 2014 we outlined in January 2010.
We plan to hold a Capital Markets Day in March 2013 to provide a more detailed exposition of our strategic priorities.
Leif Johansson
2012 financial performance was defined by significant revenue decline associated with the loss of exclusivity for several products.
For 2013 challenging market conditions will persist.
Overview  Chief Executive Ofcers Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 8 In the Strategy section from page 12 of this Annual Report we talk more about the background to our strategy and the review we are undertaking.
For the rest of my Review I want to look at the progress we made towards our goals in 2012 as well as consider some of the setbacks we encountered.
Scientic leadership In a research and developmentbased business such as AstraZeneca I believe that everything starts with a focus on patients and great science.
It is our rst priority.
AstraZeneca has a unique combination of scientic capabilities in small molecules biologics immunotherapies and antibody engineering.
This puts us in a strong position to develop the targeted novel medicines and combinations such as drugantibody conjugates required to meet patient needs in the future.
Reviews that we have held with scientic experts outside AstraZeneca have further reinforced my condence in our underlying science base.
We have much to do to realise our full scientic potential but made some progress in 2012.
On the regulatory front we received approvals in Europe for Zinforo our intravenous antibiotic Caprelsa our thyroid cancer treatment and Forxiga a product of our diabetes alliance with BMS.
In the US FluMist Quadrivalent was approved the rst fourstrain inuenza vaccine to be approved by the FDA.
I am both excited and honoured to have been asked to lead AstraZeneca.
Throughout my career I have had enormous respect for its people and what they have achieved.
Since joining in October I have seen for myself the passion and commitment that exists within the Group to improve the lives of patients around the world.
This level of energy should come as no surprise as our innovative medicines mean that more people than ever before are able to lead longer and healthier lives.
As we seek to show throughout this Annual Report successful pharmaceutical innovation delivered responsibly adds value not only for patients and shareholders but also for healthcare systems and the communities in which we work.
The challenge Leif has already described in his Chairmans Statement how in addition to the wellknown challenges that confront the pharmaceutical sector the loss of exclusivity of several of our major brands largely dened AstraZenecas nancial performance in 2012.
I believe that our ability to provide an acceptable level of return to you in the years ahead will come from an undiluted focus on delivering great medicines to patients through innovative science and global excellence in development and commercialisation.
Underpinning that focus are three priorities achieving scientic leadership returning AstraZeneca to growth and making it a great place to work.
Across the entire pipeline of 84 projects 39 successfully progressed to the next stage of testing in 2012 including 12 projects into rst human testing.
Nineteen projects were withdrawn.
While we met our target for Phase III investment decisions for the year we did not meet our value targets for those projects.
To increase the value of our pipeline we aim to access the best science and molecules regardless of origin.
Our portfolio was strengthened during the year by a number of successful business development initiatives.
Our collaboration with Amgen encompasses ve clinical stage projects in inammation including brodalumab which has already entered Phase III development.
In April 2012 we entered into an agreement to acquire Ardea which added lesinurad a Phase III project for the treatment of gout to our portfolio.
We also signicantly expanded our diabetes alliance with BMS through its acquisition of Amylin.
Overall we completed a record number of more than 60 important business development deals in 2012 that helped us to strengthen our scientic leadership in key therapeutic areas expand our pipeline and improve our capabilities.
They also helped underpin business growth in both Established and Emerging Markets.
Return to growth Our second priority must be to return AstraZeneca to growth.
Our performance in 2012 reected a period of signicant patent expiry and tough market conditions globally.
Despite the challenges we face I am excited about AstraZenecas fundamental strengths which will be key in returning AstraZeneca to growth.
Chief Executive Ofcers Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 9 Overview Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information BrilintaBrilique our treatment for acute coronary syndromes is now approved in 88 countries and launched in 82.
I believe that while performance since its launch has been disappointing especially in the US BrilintaBrilique has the potential to become a major product for AstraZeneca given its signicant mortality benets relative to the standard of care.
We have moved quickly to improve our sales marketing and medical support to this important medicine.
Early indications from some markets combined with the favourable prole of this medicine suggest that we are on the right path.
Taking full advantage of our expanded diabetes alliance with BMS also presents a signicant opportunity.
With the addition of Amylin products such as Byetta and Bydureon we now have treatment options for patients from early stages of Type 2 diabetes to the preinsulin stage.
The launch of the extended portfolio in the US only a few weeks after we concluded the deal demonstrates how swiftly we can move to bring a range of treatment options to physicians and their patients.
With our wellestablished commercial strength we are in a strong position to bring our medicines to patients in Emerging
Conditions have been tough in Mexico Brazil and some other markets but strong growth in countries such as Russia and China shows how much our products are valued in these markets.
A great place to work Skilled committed employees are essential if AstraZeneca is to realise its full potential.
Unfortunately the 2012 global employee survey showed a reduction in the scores in the majority of categories.
These scores were disappointing.
While they might be regarded as understandable given our challenging environment and the ongoing transformation of the business my SET colleagues and I are committed to working harder to ensure employees have an improved understanding and condence in our future direction.
More positively it was encouraging to see the high level of motivation that exists across AstraZeneca to help us succeed.
This was something I witnessed at rst hand as I spent time with colleagues on site in the weeks after I joined the organisation.
I want to build on this and make AstraZeneca a great place to work  a simplied business that comprises a diverse and talented workforce operating in a high performance culture which enables us to bring great medicines to patients.
Senior Executive Team In January 2013 we announced changes to our Senior Executive Team which were designed to provide sharper management focus as well as devolving and accelerating decision making.
Changes include increased representation of the Companys scientic expertise product portfolio and key regions.
Members of the new SET are shown on pages 108 and 109 and I look forward to working with them all on delivering our strategic goals.
As a result of the changes two senior roles were eliminated  President of RandD held by Martin Mackay and Executive Vice President Global Commercial held by Tony Zook.
Both Martin and Tony left their respective roles in January 2013 and I would like to thank them for their contribution and the exemplary leadership they have shown.
Innovation and growth In closing I would like to thank everyone in AstraZeneca for their support and making me feel so welcome.
My rst three months as Chief Executive Ofcer conrmed the nature and scale of the challenges we face.
Those months also conrmed my view that within the organisation we have both the capabilities and skills necessary to achieve scientic leadership return to growth and be a great place to work.
I am sure that by being true to our mission of bringing innovative medicines to patients we can meet our short and mediumterm goals and thereby deliver our longer term aspirations for the business.
Pascal Soriot Chief Executive Ofcer We must focus on delivering great medicines to patients through innovative science and global excellence in development and commercialisation.
Strategy  The value of innovation AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 10 Innovation means better health outcomes for patients Our innovative medicines are playing a part in increasing survival rates and improving quality of life for patients in important areas of medical need.
For example BrilintaBrilique our treatment for acute coronary syndromes shows a 21% relative reduction in cardiovascular mortality against the current standard of care over a 12 month duration of therapy.
In the UK the government has announced it is to extend the inuenza vaccination programme to all children recommending use of our nasal spray vaccine Fluenz.
Even with moderate vaccination uptake the UK alone could see around a 40% drop in the number of people affected.
That would mean at least 11000 fewer hospitalisations as a result of inuenza and around 2000 fewer deaths a year.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 11 Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Strategy Overview Innovation is not always about breakthrough discoveries  medical progress can often be delivered just as effectively through incremental improvements.
Strategy  Our business model AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 12 Our strategic context AstraZeneca competes as a global biopharmaceutical business delivering great medicines to patients through innovative science and excellence in development and commercialisation. respiratory and inammatory conditions.
This is the core of our commitment to our stakeholders and society.
Successful pharmaceutical innovation delivered responsibly improves health for patients brings benets to stakeholders and delivers longterm shareholder value.
The process of getting a medicine to market from initial discovery through development to approval and launch is risky costly and time consuming.
Of the many thousands of compounds initially analysed only a few make it through all stages of development.
The gure overleaf illustrates the process we follow.
Our activities cover the entire lifecycle of a medicine and start with the identication of an unmet medical need and the scientic search for a potential medicine.
The process continues through the phases of clinical trials and drug development regulatory submission and a medicines launch.
After launch our lifecycle management process including line extensions is designed to ensure a medicines continued safe use and to explore its potential for treating other diseases or extending its use into additional patient populations.
As the gure overleaf shows we work in partnership with others to deliver the highest quality new medicines to market rapidly.
For example we work with those who pay for our medicines and health technology appraisers early on and throughout a In this section we describe our business model and review the key growth drivers and challenges that the pharmaceutical sector faces.
We then describe AstraZenecas response to these factors and the ongoing update to our strategy  a strategy that seeks to make a real difference to patient health deliver longterm value for our shareholders and add value for our other stakeholders and wider society.
Our business model Improving health is one of the toughest challenges facing the world today.
Despite all the advances in recent decades the prevalence of major diseases is on the increase.
The worlds population is growing and ageing.
Health awareness and patients expectations are rising while healthcare systems everywhere are under pressure.
It will take a sustained and signicant effort to drive continued progress in healthcare.
As a global biopharmaceutical company AstraZeneca has a key contribution to make.
Our skills and resources are focused on the discovery development manufacturing and commercialisation of patentprotected medicines that make a meaningful difference to patients facing some of the worlds most serious health challenges heart disease diabetes gastrointestinal disorders infection medicines development to understand where the greatest clinical needs are.
As we develop our medicines we gather not only the clinical data required for regulatory approval but also the health economics costbenet and valueinuse data required by payers.
An essential element of our business model is the creation and protection of our underlying intellectual property assets.
This process is outlined in the diagram above.
The development of a new medicine requires a signicant investment of resources over a period of 10 or more years before product launch with no guarantee of success.
For this to be a viable investment the resulting new medicine must be safeguarded from being copied with a reasonable amount of certainty and for a reasonable period of time.
This allows time to generate a return on our investment and to reinvest in new pharmaceutical innovation.
The loss of key product patents has affected a signicant proportion of sales in recent years and will continue to do so.
A key goal for our planning process is therefore to ensure that we sustain the cycle of successful innovation and as a result continue to refresh our portfolio of patented products and so generate value for shareholders.
Creation and acquisition of intellectual property through innovative RandD
Application for patents to protect the intellectual property assets developed in a potential medicine Clinical development programmes to determine safety and efcacy of the potential medicine and generate further intellectual property rights and data for regulatory submissions AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 13 Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Strategy Overview Distinctive capabilities AstraZeneca has clear strengths that allow us to create value for patients and for shareholders Good underlying science.
External opinion leaders conrm that we have strong disease knowledge research portfolios and related technology platforms in a number of areas particularly in oncology and respiratory and inammation.
Unique scientic capabilities.
Few pharmaceutical companies in the world if any can match the combination of capabilities that we have in small molecules biologics immunotherapies and antibody engineering.
These capabilities allow us to produce combination therapies such as drug antibody conjugates and bispecics and customisable molecules both targeted to specic patient populations.
Strong therapy area franchises brands and commercial capability.
Over the past decade we have developed strong commercial franchises that address respiratory cardiovascular oncology and neuroscience diseases.
We continue to develop these strong therapeutic area positions for example BrilintaBrilique and the diabetes portfolio we are commercialising jointly with BMS provide the next phase of development for our cardiovascular and metabolic disease franchise.
We have strong commercial capability in developing marketing and selling primary care specialty careled and specialty care products.
Strong Emerging Markets presence.
We combine global reach with local customer relationships.
We do this particularly well in Emerging Markets where we invested early and where our decentralised approach to sales and marketing has allowed us to develop and act on local customer insight.
For example we are the second largest pharmaceutical company in China by sales.
As we look ahead the future success of an innovationdriven RandDbased business such as AstraZeneca must be based on the twin foundations of a focus on patients and great science.
We are one of only a handful of companies to span the entire lifecycle of a medicine from discovery early and latestage development to the global commercialisation of primary care specialty careled and specialty care medicines.
Using these skills and capabilities we can make a real difference to the health of a broad range of patients in disease areas where there is unmet medical need in more than 100 markets around the world.
We also harness these skills and capabilities in partnership with others such as the relationships we have with BMS and Amgen.
Health connects us all We know we cannot deliver on our commitment to improve healthcare on our own.
We work closely with others in the healthcare community to understand their needs and challenges and how we can combine skills and resources to achieve common goals.
To be able to do this people must have condence in both what we do and how we do it.
We know that their trust depends on us acting with integrity and staying true to our core values.
The principles of Courage Collaboration and Creativity frame our values.
They describe what we stand for as a company and the behaviours we need to demonstrate to achieve our strategic priorities.
These values reect our belief that health connects us all.
They guide our actions and shape the culture that underpins our drive for business success.
Period of intellectual property protection for an innovative medicine which allows a return to be made on the investment undertaken Sales and marketing Expiry of intellectual property rights and commoditisation of knowledge which typically sees generic versions of a medicine entering a market Strategy  Lifecycle of a medicine AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 14 Lifecycle of a medicine We provide medicines that make a real difference in the treatment of some of the worlds most serious diseases.
The advances made through innovation improve healthcare for more people and make our business model sustainable.
Increased external collaboration From the earliest phases in a medicines development to latestage or onmarket we work with academia external clinicians and industry to access the best science.
See the Partnering to improve health section from page 31.
Customer orientation At an early stage we incorporate payer considerations into everything we do to help ensure the economic and therapeutic value of our medicines is understood.
See the Driving commercial success section from page 37 .
Operational efciency As early as Phase I studies we begin to develop a manufacturing route to ensure the manufacturing process is robust and costs are minimised.
See the Supply and Manufacturing section from page 40.
Investment period Investment in discovery development and commercialisation of patent protected medicines.
Preclinical studies Undertake studies in the laboratory and in animals to understand if the potential medicine should be safe to introduce into humans and in what quantities.
Determine likely efcacy side effect prole and maximum tolerable dose estimate in humans.
Find potential medicine Identify the unmet medical need and market opportunity.
Undertake laboratory research to nd a potential medicine that should be potent selective and absorbed into and well tolerated by the body.
Begin the process of seeking patent protection for the potential medicine.
Phase I studies Studies designed to understand how the potential medicine is absorbed in the body distributed around it and excreted also determine an appropriate dosage and identify side effects.
These studies typically take place in small groups of healthy human volunteers or in certain cases patients.
Phase II studies Studies designed to evaluate effectiveness of the medicine typically using small groups of patients.
During Phase II studies design a Phase III programme to deliver data required for regulatory approval and pricing andor reimbursement throughout the world.
Phase III studies Studies typically in large groups of patients designed to gather information about effectiveness and safety of the medicine and evaluate the overall benetrisk prole in the specic disease and patient segments in which the medicine will be used.
Discovery phase and development phases 1015 years AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 15 Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Strategy Overview Yet the discovery development and commercialisation of a medicine is a risky long and complex process.
This is an overview of the lifecycle of a medicine which demonstrates our business model in practice.
RandD productivity We are focused on improving the quality and quantity of our RandD which includes reducing function costs and investing in new talent critical capabilities as well as partnerships and deals.
See the Research and Development section from page 30.
Global orientation We are building on our leading position in commercialising medicines in Established Markets by using new sales channels and pursuing further growth in Emerging Markets.
See the Sales and Marketing section from page 37 .
Returns period Reinvestment of returns from period of patent protection into next generation of innovative medicines.
Regulatory submission and pricing Seek approval from regulatory authorities to manufacture market and sell the medicine.
Submit package of clinical data which demonstrates the safety prole and efcacy of a medicine to regulatory authorities.
They decide whether to grant marketing authorisation based on the medicines safety prole effectiveness and quality.
Launch new medicine Raise awareness of patient benet and appropriate use.
Clinicians begin to prescribe medicine and patients begin to benet.
Market and sell medicine continuously monitor record and analyse reported side effects review need to update the side effect warnings to ensure that patients wellbeing is maintained.
Postlaunch research and development Studies to further understand the safety prole of the medicine in larger populations.
Work to consider potential additional diseases which might be treated by the medicine or better ways of administering the medicine.
Submit data packages with requests for line extensions.
Regulatory authorities review the data to assess the benets and risks of using the medicine in the new disease or population and issue a decision.
Patent expiry and generic entry Typically when patents protecting the medicine expire generic versions of the medicine may enter the market.
Note This is a high level overview of the process and is illustrative only.
It is neither intended to nor does it represent the lifecycle of any particular medicine or of every medicine discovered andor developed by AstraZeneca or the probability of success or approval of any AstraZeneca medicine.
For more information see the Research and Development section from page 30.
Launch phase 510 years 20 years Strategy  Our industry AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 16 On the supply side the industry faces an ongoing and signicant RandD productivity challenge.
RandD costs have risen signicantly over the past decade while industrywide probability of success from preclinical to launch continues to decline.
For example the median large pharmaceutical company success rate for 2007 to 2011 in delivering a compound from preclinical studies to launch was 2%.
These factors are considered in more detail below.
The industry remains highly competitive.
Our competitors are other large research based pharmaceutical companies that discover develop and sell innovative patentprotected prescription medicines and vaccines as well as smaller biotechnology and vaccine companies and companies that produce generic medicines.
While many of our peers are confronting similar challenges strategically these challenges are being met in different ways.
For example while some companies have pursued a focused strategy others have diversied by acquiring or building branded generics businesses or consumer portfolios arguing that this enables them to better meet changing customer needs and smooth risk for shareholders.
While most companies continued to pursue their existing strategies in 2012 there were exceptions with some companies moving away from diversication.
Key trends across the industry included ongoing efforts to improve RandD innovation and productivity expansion of geographic scope especially in Emerging Markets and Japan and the pursuit of operational efciency.
There was an increase in business development and partnering at all stages of product development with a continued increase in peer collaboration.
Our industry
The pharmaceutical industry has doubled in value since 2000 driven by a large number of FDA approvals in the second half of the 1990s and by the increased use of medicines around the world in the wake of global economic growth in that period.
Now many of the drivers of demand and supply in the industry are under pressure.
Nonetheless as the gure above shows the world pharmaceutical market grew by 2.5% in 2012.
Average revenue growth in Established Markets was 1.5% while that in Emerging Markets was over seven times higher at 11.1%.
The top ve pharmaceutical markets in the world remained the US Japan Germany France and China with the US representing 39.3% of global pharmaceutical sales 2011 38.1%.
On the demand side underlying demographic trends remain favourable to longterm industry growth.
These are outlined below.
However securing recognition through reimbursement approval and reward through favourable pricing and sales for innovation is becoming more difcult as there are intensifying pricing pressures particularly in Established Markets which are facing rising healthcare costs.
Our challenge is to work with governments and other payers to ensure they understand the value of pharmaceutical innovation in order for us to achieve adequate commercial returns on our investment.
We also face increased competition from generic medicines as some of the worlds most successful drugs come off patent.
Finally greater regulatory constraints are being placed on the pharmaceutical industry by governments and those who pay for medicines.
Growth drivers Expanding patient populations The world population is expected to rise from its current level of some seven billion and reach nine billion by 2050.
In addition the number of people who can access healthcare continues to increase particularly among the elderly.
Globally it is estimated that between 2000 and 2050 the number of people aged 60 years and over will increase from 605 million to two billion.
Fasterdeveloping economies such as China India and Brazil offer new opportunities for the pharmaceutical industry to help an expanding number of patients who can benet from innovative medicines.
Developing markets now represent approximately 85% of the world population and over 22% of the worlds pharmaceutical revenues.
Pharmaceutical revenues in those markets therefore continued to grow faster than those in Established Markets in 2012.
As the Estimated pharmaceutical market growth 20112016 gure on page 20 shows we expect this trend will continue.
Unmet medical need In most developed markets ageing populations and certain lifestyle choices such as smoking a poor diet and lack of exercise drive an increased incidence of noncommunicable diseases NCDs such as cancer cardiovascularmetabolic and respiratory diseases which require longterm management.
In 2008 almost twothirds of deaths globally were from NCDs and 80% of those were in lower and middle income countries.
For example in South Asia it is estimated that deaths from NCDs will increase from half to almost threequarters of all deaths between 2008 and 2030.
It is also estimated that nearly onethird of the worlds diabetes patients will come from
US bn 0.4% Western Europe bn 0.8% Established ROW bn 1.5% Emerging ROW bn 11.1% World pharmaceutical markets sales Data based on world market sales using AstraZeneca market denitions as set out in the Market denitions table on page 209.
Source IMS Health IMS Midas Quantum Q3 2012 including US data.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 17 Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Strategy Overview India and China by 2030 by which date its prevalence in Brazil is expected to have increased by twothirds.
Advances in science and technology Innovation leading to new drugs is critical if we are to address unmet medical need.
Existing drugs will continue to be important in meeting the growing demand for healthcare particularly with the increasing use of generic medication.
At the same time advances in disease understanding and the application of new technologies will be required to ensure the delivery of new medicines.
Such approaches include personalised healthcare and predictive science as well as new types of therapy.
With advances in the technologies for the design and testing of novel compounds new opportunities exist for the use of innovative small molecules as new medicines.
The use of large molecules or biologics has also become an important source of innovation with biologics among the most commercially successful new products.
Forecasts for 2018 predict that of the worlds top 100 pharmaceutical products 49% of sales will come from biologics.
This compares with only 34% in 201 1 and 1 7% in 2004.
Most pharmaceutical companies now pursue RandD in both small molecules and biologics.
The challenges RandD productivity Improving RandD productivity is a critical challenge for the pharmaceutical industry.
As shown in the diagram above global investment in pharmaceutical RandD reached an estimated 134 billion in 2012 a 94% increase from 69 billion in 2002.
However the annual growth in RandD spend has slowed in recent years.
The number of new drugs approved by the FDA rose from 30 in 2011 to 39 in 2012.
This marks the greatest increase in annual approvals since 2004.
However the average forecast sales from these products ve years postlaunch is lower than the forecasts for products approved in 2010 reecting the shift away from broad primary care indications to more specialist drugs.
To ensure it delivers a sustainable return on its RandD investment the industry is working to increase its probability of success in developing commercially viable new drugs and is moving to a lower more exible cost base.
It does so at a time when regulators and payers are demanding more and better evidence of comparative effectiveness of compounds which lengthens development times and increases development costs.
The industry is using the full range of innovative technologies to achieve and accelerate product approvals.
Additionally greater emphasis has been placed on demonstrating Proof of Concept which delivers candidate drugs with supporting data demonstrating that the drug results in a clinical change with an acceptable endpoint or surrogate in patients with the disease.
Organisationally companies are addressing productivity challenges in a variety of ways.
These include focusing on a dened set of therapeutic areas and exiting those where success has been poor restructuring RandD organisations to create clearer accountabilities and smaller more entrepreneurial units revamping decision making and governance so that unsuccessful compounds are identied early before signicant costs have been incurred reducing costs and improving process efciency using Lean business improvement tools such as Six Sigma and outsourcing a collaborationcentric business model that includes academic collaborations and codevelopment agreements that provide for the sharing of development risks and costs with external partners looking externally for high quality science technologies targets drug candidates andor entire drug pipelines.
Regulatory requirements Our industry continues to be highly regulated.
This reects public interest in ensuring access to safe effective and high quality medicines that are responsibly tested manufactured and commercialised.
Given the nature and geographic scope of our business we maintain important relationships with health authorities worldwide as they assess the safety efcacy and quality of medicines.
These include the FDA in the US the EMA in the EU the Japan Pharmaceuticals and Medical Device Agency and the SFDA in China.
In 2012 the US reauthorised the Prescription Drug User Fee Act and the EU continued to implement pharmacovigilance legislation.
These measures share the common goals of protecting patient safety creating greater transparency in the regulatory process throughout a products lifecycle and taking greater account of the patient perspective in the regulatory process.
There is also a global trend led by the EU to increase public access to the documentation companies submit to health authorities in support of marketing authorisations.
RandD spend by the top 500 pharmaceutical and biotech companies.
Figure for 2012 estimated.
Source Evaluate Pharma for RandD spend FDA for approvals.
FDA approvals RandD spend bn 7telRandD productivity Strategy  Our industry AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 18 In another trend health technology assessors and payers are increasingly assessing not only the safety of products but also their relative effectiveness and value.
Consequently there is a heightened interest by health authorities in both comparative clinical effectiveness and the ongoing benetrisk assessment of medicines after they have been approved.
This is resulting in a greater focus on incorporating validated health outcome measures into clinical trials and the development of clinical comparative evidence.
However it remains the case that when applications are supported by strong data and compelling benetrisk propositions regulators are approving drugs that address unmet medical need.
Pricing pressure The pricing and reimbursement environment in many markets continues to be highly challenging.
Most pharmaceutical sales are generated in highly regulated markets where governments and private payers such as insurance companies exert various levels of control on pricing and reimbursement.
Costcontainment including containment of spending on pharmaceuticals continues to be a focus.
A wave of austerity programmes following the current global economic downturn further constrain healthcare providers and tougher economic conditions constrain those patients who pay directly for their medicines.
Additional challenges may arise if suppliers and distributors face creditrelated difculties.
At the same time signicant extra resources are required by pharmaceutical companies to demonstrate to payers the economic as well as therapeutic value of medicines.
So far as the development of biosimilars is concerned health authorities continue to face the challenge of developing robust standards to ensure their safety effectiveness and quality.
For further information on biosimilars see the Patent expiries and genericisation section below.
Efforts to harmonise regulations globally continue yet the number of regulations and their impact continue to multiply.
Clinical trials that support the registration of products in a given regulatory jurisdiction must be relevant to a variety of patient demographics.
Programmes using foreign clinical trial data also need to meet each individual health authoritys requirements and be relevant to their population.
Health authorities continue to redene patient safety assessment processes.
In addition in emerging pharmaceutical markets health authorities are developing their own individual requirements and safety initiatives.
One impact of the growing complexity and globalisation of clinical studies and the pressure on industry and healthcare budgets has been an increase in industry collaborations with health authorities.
These are driving innovation and streamlining regulatory processes as well as dening and clarifying approval requirements for new technology and approaches such as personalised healthcare.
They are also accelerating the development of treatments that address public health priorities.
In 2012 pressures on pricing included the implementation of a variety of drug price control mechanisms and other regulatory reforms as well as the introduction of xed hospital tariffs which can act as a method of controlling drug costs by incentivising hospitals to choose cheaper generic alternatives over patentprotected medicines.
In the US the Affordable Care Act has already had a direct impact on healthcare activities despite the fact that many of the healthcare coverage expansion provisions of the Affordable Care Act do not take effect until 2014.
For example in 2010 there was an increase in the mandatory Medicaid rebates.
In addition the pharmaceutical industry including AstraZeneca is making prescription drugs more affordable to senior citizens through for example helping to close the coverage gap in the Medicare Part D prescription drug programme.
The industry continues to work with policymakers and regulators with a view to ensuring that they strike a balance between containing costs improving outcomes and promoting an environment that fosters medical innovation.
In August 2011 as part of the bipartisan agreement to raise the federal debt ceiling the US Congress created the Joint Select Committee on Decit Reduction Committee.
The Committee was empowered to recommend a package of 1.2 trillion in cost savings with the requirement that if the Committee failed to reach an agreement the savings would be achieved through across the board spending cuts sequestration.
Estimated pharmaceutical sales  2016 North America
EU countries South East and East Asia
Latin America 117bn
35.5bn
30.6bn Indian Subcontinent 29.7bn
Non EU countries 21.8bn Middle East 18bn
16.9bn Exmanufacturer prices at CER.
Source IMS Health.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 19 Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Strategy Overview The Committee discussions ended without reaching an agreement and barring future action by Congress sequestration was to take effect on 2 January 2013.
Sequestration would have impacted most federal government healthcare programmes with broad reductions in federal government spending.
On 3 January 2013 President Barack Obama signed a bill that avoided sequestration.
The bill allowed the US Congress and the President an additional two months to address the sequestration challenge.
As Congress and the President continue to discuss how to reduce government expenditure some policymakers may look to the pharmaceutical industry to help achieve the cost savings they seek.
In Europe governments have issued new legislation on mandatory discounts clawbacks and referencing rules driving prices down especially in the distressed economies of Greece Portugal and Spain.
It has been estimated that in Greece Ireland Italy Portugal and Spain the pharmaceutical industry accommodated price cuts and discounts of more than 7 billion in 2010 and 2011 which amounted to 8% of the industrys turnover in these countries.
In Germany Europes largest pharmaceutical market manufacturers are now required to prove the additional benet of their drugs over existing alternatives.
Only
Elsewhere in China the triennial maximum retail drug price review took place in 2012 with more stringent rules being imposed compared with previous rounds of cuts while in Japan biennial cuts are expected to continue.
In Latin America pricing is increasingly controlled by governments for example in Colombia and Venezuela.
More information regarding the impact of price controls and reductions as well as the impact of healthcare reform in the US can be found in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 75.
The principal aspects of price regulation in our major markets are described further in the Geographical Review from page 70.
Patent expiries and genericisation We are in the middle of a period in which some of the biggest selling drugs the industry has ever produced face patent expiry.
As a consequence payers physicians and patients in Established Markets will have access to low price generic alternatives in many important classes of primary care drugs.
For example in the US in 2012 generics constituted 84% of the market by volume.
Patents only protect pharmaceutical products for a nite period and the expiry or early loss of patents often leads to the availability of generics.
Generic versions of drugs are very competitive with signicantly lower pricing than the innovator equivalents.
This is partly due to lower investment by generic manufacturers in RandD and market development.
While generic competition has traditionally occurred when patents expire it can also occur where the validity of patents is disputed or successfully challenged before expiry.
Such early challenges by generics have increased with generics companies increasingly willing to launch products at risk for example prior to resolution of the relevant patent litigation.
This trend is likely to continue resulting in signicant market presence for the generic version during the period in which litigation remains unresolved even though the courts may subsequently rule that the innovative product is properly protected by a valid patent.
The unpredictable nature of patent litigation has led innovators to seek to settle such challenges on terms acceptable to both innovator and generic manufacturer.
However some competition authorities have sought to challenge the scope andor availability of this type of settlement agreement.
Biologics have to date sustained longer lifecycles than traditional small molecule pharmaceuticals and have faced less generic competition.
This is due to a more complex manufacturing process for biologics compared with small molecule medicines.
It is also due to the inherent difculties in producing a biosimilar which as a biological equivalent rather than an exact chemical copy could require additional clinical trials.
However with regulatory authorities in Europe and the US continuing to implement abbreviated approvals pathways for biosimilar versions innovative biologics are likely to become increasingly subject to competition from biosimilars.
Estimated pharmaceutical sales  2016 bn 21.8 Strategy  Our strategy AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 20 economic growth especially in Emerging
While the hurdles to adopting new products have been raised there remains a willingness to pay for differentiated innovative medicines.
We further believe that AstraZeneca has the skills and capabilities to take advantage of these opportunities and turn them into longterm value.
We will do this by exploiting and further developing our competitive advantage an innovation and scienceled organisation capturing the best of biologics small molecules immunotherapies and antibody engineering.
Our revised strategy is to compete as a global biopharmaceutical business delivering great medicines to patients through innovative science and excellence in development and commercialisation global  in that we believe we combine global reach with local customer relationships and have the ability to meet healthcare needs in both developed and developing markets efciently and effectively biopharmaceutical  in that we will develop both chemical small molecule and biological large molecule medicines available by prescription targeting those product categories where medical innovation or brand equity will continue to enable us to make acceptable levels of return on our investments Building trust The pharmaceutical industry faces a challenge in building and maintaining trust particularly with governments and regulators.
The last 10 years have seen a signicant increase in the number of settlements between innovator companies and governmental and regulatory authorities for violations of a variety of laws.
These include breaches of sales and marketing practices inducements of physicians to administer a companys products and breaches of antitrust legislation.
For some audiences there is a perception that pharmaceutical companies place their commercial goals above the interests of patients physicians and payers.
Companies are taking steps to change this perception by embedding a culture of ethics and integrity adopting higher standards of governance and improving relationships with employees shareholders and other stakeholders.
Our strategy AstraZenecas mission is to make the most meaningful difference to health through great medicines.
Our strategic review has conrmed our belief that biopharmaceuticals remain an attractive business with strong underlying drivers of demand expanding and ageing populations a growing chronic disease burden and increasing wealth through innovative science  in that we believe that innovative science must be the foundation for procuring differentiated novel medicines that benet patients and for which payers will pay excellence in development and commercialisation  in that we believe we have strong commercial franchises and capability in developing marketing and selling primary care specialty careled and specialty care products.
We are currently completing the strategic review that we began in 2012.
We plan to hold a Capital Markets Day in March 2013 to provide a more detailed exposition of our strategic priorities.
Changes to the Senior Executive Team In January 2013 we unveiled changes to our Senior Executive Team that came into immediate effect.
Membership of the SET has been expanded to include increased representation of AstraZenecas scientic expertise key products and key markets.
Changes included the creation of three senior RandD roles responsible for discovery and earlystage development in small molecules discovery and earlystage development in biologics and latestage development three roles representing the commercial regions North America Europe and
Estimated pharmaceutical market growth 2011 to 2016 South East and East Asia 13.9% Indian Subcontinent 13.3% Latin America 13.2%
10.5%
10.5% Middle East 7.5%
2.6%
2.5%
Non EU countries 2% North America 1.6%
EU countries 0.6% Compound annual growth rate.
Source IMS Health.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 21 Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Strategy Overview A further role will be responsible for global portfolio and product strategy bridging the RandD and sales organisations.
An appointment will be made at a later date.
The new SET structure is designed to provide sharper management focus on our key pipeline assets product portfolio and key regions as well as devolving and accelerating decision making.
It draws heavily from the leadership talent within AstraZeneca with the six new members being internal appointments.
The full membership of the SET together with information about individual members and their responsibilities is shown in the Senior Executive Team section on pages
Since 2007  we have undertaken signicant efforts to restructure and reshape our business to improve longterm competitiveness.
The rst phase was completed in 2009.
The second phase which featured a signicant change programme in RandD began in 2010.
The restructuring actions for this phase of the programme were completed in 2011 at a total programme cost of 2.1 billion.
Headcount changes associated with this phase involving an estimated 9000 positions were also completed.
Total annual benets of 1.9 billion were to be delivered by the end of 2014 in connection with this phase of the programme of which 1.5 billion had been achieved by the end of 2012.
A third phase of restructuring was announced in February 2012.
This phase comprising initiatives across the supply chain SGandA and RandD carries an estimated programme cost of 2.1 billion approximately 1.7 billion in cash costs.
Restructuring costs of 1558 million associated with this third phase were taken in 2012 together with 261 million that was charged in the fourth quarter of 2011.
Most of the remaining costs of approximately 300 million will be taken in 2013.
To date actions involving around 6300 of the estimated 7 300 positions to be impacted in connection with this phase of the programme have been completed.
When completed this phase is expected to deliver an estimated 1.6 billion in annual benets by the end of 2014 of which approximately 350 million was realised by the end of 2012.
These restructuring programmes have been delivering their targeted benets and are designed to continue to provide the headroom to make appropriate investments to drive future growth and value such as Emerging Markets commercial infrastructure and expansion of our research capabilities in biologics.
Mediumterm planning assumptions We believe challenging market conditions will persist in 2013 including continued government interventions in price.
The revenue impact from the loss of exclusivity will also continue to affect our performance.
In the context of the ongoing update to our strategy we have withdrawn the planning assumptions for revenue and margin evolution for the period 2010 to 201 4 that we had outlined in January 2010.
13.9% 13.3% 13.2% 10.5% 10.5% 5% 0.6% 1.6% 2% 2.6% 2.5% Estimated pharmaceutical market growth 2011 to 2016 Performance  The value of innovation AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 22 Healthcare systems around the world are under pressure working with limited resources to meet the growing demand for healthcare.
Innovative medicines offer benets that go beyond improving patient outcomes helping to deliver economic efciencies and supporting more effective allocation of scarce resources.
For example the introduction of antacid H 2receptors followed by protonpump inhibitors had an almost overnight impact on the cost of surgery by eliminating the need for many gastric operations and followup postoperative care.
The redundancy of surgical intervention freed up resources to be invested more efciently elsewhere.
The decrease in costs associated with hospital care for cardiovascular diseases is estimated to be almost four times larger than the increase in costs of cardiovascular medicines that deliver improved patient outcomes and overall efciencies for healthcare systems.
Innovation means benefits for healthcare systems AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 23 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview We are working more closely than ever before with the people who pay for healthcare to make sure we can answer their questions about the value of our medicines in delivering better costeffective healthcare to patients including evidence about a medicines use in the real world once it has been approved.
Performance  Introduction AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 24 Our performance in 2012 In the previous section of this Annual Report we reviewed our model for creating value the environment in which we operate and our strategic response as a global biopharmaceutical business delivering great medicines to patients through innovative science and excellence in development and commercialisation.
In this section we review our progress towards achieving our priorities in 2012.
Business Review
This section includes information that fulls the requirements of a business review under the Companies Act 2006.
The Strategy Corporate Governance Development Pipeline and Shareholder Information sections from pages 12 106 199 and 203 respectively are incorporated into this section.
Details of the more signicant risks to AstraZeneca are set out in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 75.
Many of our products are subject to litigation.
Information about material legal proceedings can be found in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
References to prevalence of disease have been derived from a variety of sources and are not intended to be indicative of the current market or any potential market for AstraZenecas pharmaceutical products since among other things there may be no correlation between the prevalence of disease and the number of individuals who are treated for such a disease.
Our priorities in 2012 Pipeline discovery and development of innovative differentiated and commercially attractive medicines.
We are transforming our RandD organisation to improve productivity and pioneering innovative ways of conducting research.
We continue to focus on improving the quantity and quality of RandD output by building industryleading capabilities in critical areas and being an outwardlooking organisation accessing the best science regardless of origin.
Deliver the business sales and marketing activities focused on the needs of our customers patients physicians and payers and undertaken in the right way.
We continue to build on our leading positions in Established Markets to introduce innovative ways of serving our customers and pursue further growth opportunities in Emerging
We have accelerated our efforts to secure latestageonmarket product licensing acquisition and peer collaboration opportunities in order to leverage our global development resources and sales and marketing capabilities to bring a broader portfolio of medicines to patients.
Business shape a reliable supply and manufacturing operation and Lean organisational infrastructure that ensure our medicines are where they need to be when they are needed.
Given the pressures in the external environment we continue to simplify the business.
Simplication means not only cost reduction but also streamlining processes and shifting to a more exible cost base.
People a talented and diverse workforce with the right capabilities operating in a high performance culture is critical to the successful achievement of our strategic priorities.
Responsible business our commitment to enhancing the sustainability of our business by operating responsibly.
Our
Responsible Business Plan underpins our work and provides the framework for applying integrity and high ethical standards across all our activities.
Our performance Within AstraZeneca each business function is subject to an annual budget and targetsetting process that includes developing nancial and business forecasts conducting sensitivity and risk analyses and setting relevant objectives.
Regular reviews are undertaken in order to monitor and assess progress against business and budget targets.
During the year we also sought to manage the business appropriately both to optimise our opportunities and to assess key risks and mitigating actions.
Quarterly reports provide the SET and the Board with insight into progress against current year objectives and milestones for longerterm strategic goals.
We assess performance using quantitative comparative market operational and nancial measures and qualitative analysis.
We have developed KPIs by which we measure our success in delivering our strategy.
A description of our KPIs and how we performed against them in 2012 is shown overleaf.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 25 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Our mission is to make the most meaningful difference to patient health through great medicines In the remainder of this section we review our progress in 2012 in terms of Key Performance Indicators P26 how we performed against the indicators by which we measure our success The resources capabilities and skills we have within the business and how we use them to ensure a focus on Research and
Sales and
Supply and
P40 People P43 the discovery and development of innovative differentiated and commercially attractive medicines that make a real difference to the health of patients sales and marketing activities focused on the needs of our customers patients physicians and payers and undertaken in the right way a reliable supply and manufacturing operation that ensures our medicines are where they need to be when they are needed a talented and diverse workforce with the right capabilities operating in a high performance culture Which are supported by
Property
P35 Compliance P47
Business a wellfunctioning system of intellectual property rights employees acting with integrity a commitment to acting responsibly and to the sustainable development of our business Therapy Area
Geographical
Review
P70 Risk P74 Financial Review P86 our chosen Therapy Areas the markets in which we carry out our business the risks that might stop us from achieving our strategy and how we manage them our nances Performance  Our performance in 2012 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 26 Our performance in 2012 Priority KPI Target
Met or exceeded targets as a result of disciplined nancial management and lower Reported tax rate Revenue Sustain annual revenues of 2834 billion Core preRandD operating margin Sustain Core preRandD operating margins of 48%54% Core EPS Achieve Core EPS for 2012 in the range 6.006.30 Reinvestment rate Reinvest 40%50% of preRandD posttax cash ows in RandD and capital investments Total shareholder distribution Provide strong cash returns to shareholders via progressive dividends and periodic share repurchases
Major market approvals for Caprelsa FluMist Quadrivalent Forxiga Zinforo Product approvals One to two rst major market approvals per year that support revenue target for 2014 of 24 billion from recent launches pipeline and inlicensing Regulatory submissions Major market submissions to support rst approvals and line extensions for each new product and continued marketing applications rst local authorisation and local line extensions in additional countries to drive growth Phase III investment decisions Phase III investment decisions that support value targets for new products Licensing dealsacquisitions At least 40% of our pipeline sourced from outside our laboratories Deliver the business Global revenue reduction of 15% largely as a result of loss of exclusivity on Seroquel IR.
Key brands grew where we retained exclusivity Growth of key brands Drive revenue growth of key brands that retain exclusivity Revenue from new product launches Revenue in 2014 in the range of 24 billion from recent launches pipeline and inlicensing Emerging Markets sales 25% of revenue in 2014 from Emerging Markets business These KPIs are subject to review and changes as part of our ongoing strategy review.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 27 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview 201 1 2012 Commentary 33591 million 27 973 million Missed target by 27 million primarily due to adverse exchange rates in 2012 54.2% 53.2% Met target 7 .28 6.41 Exceeded target 40% 48% Met target 2.80 dividend 5.6 billion net share repurchases 2.80 dividend 2.2 billion net share repurchases Met target.
See the Financial Review from page 86 for more information Brilinta approved in the US and Canada Caprelsa approved in the US and positive CHMP opinion in the EU Axanum approved in the EU Komboglyze approved in the EU Fluenz approved in the EU Marketing authorisation for Caprelsa Forxiga and Zinforo granted in the EU FluMist Quadrivalent approved by the FDA in the US We have met our volume target and with inlicensing we have built a foundation for new product revenues Nexium and Faslodex 500mg approved in Japan dapagliozin MAA validated by EMA Complete Response Letter received from the FDA in the US requesting additional clinical data Quadrivalent live attenuated inuenza vaccine MEDI3250 MAA submitted in September Nexium OTC and dapagliozinmetformin IR FDC submitted in the EU Casodex oral tablet Nexium Helicobacter pylori and Arimidex Oral Dispersible Film submitted in Japan On target See the Research and Development section from page 30 for more information Phase III trials started for NKTR118 and initiation of Phase III programme for CAZ AVI Lesinurad entered Phase III clinical development following the acquisition of Ardea.
Positive Phase III investment decisions achieved for moxetumomab and brodalumab On target 6 out of 9 Phase IIIRegistration projects 67% sourced externally 12 out of 24 Phase II projects 50% sourced externally 8 out of 11 Phase IIIRegistration projects 73% sourced externally 15 out of 25 Phase II projects 60% sourced externally Met target 13% Crestor 11% Symbicort 27% Seroquel XR 4% Crestor 5% Symbicort 4% Seroquel XR On target Crestor overall 1% in those markets where we retained exclusivity See the Intellectual Property section from page 35 and the Geographical Review from page 70 for more information 274 million revenue from Onglyza Vimovo BrilintaBrilique Caprelsa and Axanum 633 million revenue from Onglyza Vimovo BrilintaBrilique Caprelsa Axanum Zinforo Bydureon Byetta and Symlin Meeting this target remains a challenge See the Financial Review from page 86 and the Therapy Area Review from page 50 for more information 17% of revenue from Emerging Markets 21% of revenue from Emerging Markets On target Performance  Our performance in 2012 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 28 Priority KPI Target Business shape Met or exceeded targets with continued efciencies across the organisation Core gross margin Maintain Core gross margin in excess of 80% Core SGandA costs Improve cost efciencies and exibility in Core SGandA costs Procurement savings Procurement savings across all functions RandD cost efciency Reduced function costs across RandD to support focused RandD portfolio
A decrease in employee engagement in the context of a challenging business environment and the ongoing transformation of our business Employee engagement Achieve global high performing norm rating for employee engagement by 2014 Leadership communications Further develop our leadership and management capabilities Worklife balance Achieve an improvement in the worklife balance of our employees Responsible business Maintained position in the World Index of the Dow Jones Sustainability Index DJSI as well as the elite European Index DJSI ranking Maintain position within the DJSI World Index comprising the top 10% of the largest 2500 companies Conrmed breaches of external sales and marketing codes or regulations Report conrmed breaches of external codes arising from external scrutiny and voluntary disclosure by AstraZeneca Number of audits conducted Expand riskbased programme of responsible procurement audits across all supplier categories and geographies AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 29 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview 201 1 2012 Commentary 82.2% 81.2% Met target See the Financial Review from page 86 for more information 1.5% reduction in Core SGandA costs 12.2% reduction in Core SGandA costs Met target See the Financial Review from page 86 for more information Savings of 487 million Savings of 566 million Exceeded target for 2012 which was 526 million See the Financial Review from page 86 for more information Achieved Core RandD efciency savings with spend of 5 billion A more variable and efcient RandD cost base achieved through accelerated strategy implementation and increased outsourcing Met target See the Research and Development section from page 30 for more information 84% score 81% score Meeting this target remains a challenge 65% score 61% score Missed target 67% score 66% score Missed target All percentages are the result of our global employee survey FOCUS percentage scores are measured on a likeforlike basis using comparable questionscategories from the 2011 FOCUS survey See the People section from page 43 for more information Top 7% of companies Top 7% of companies Met target 17 conrmed breaches of external sales and marketing regulations or codes globally 10 conrmed breaches of external sales and marketing regulations or codes globally Met target 751 audits 482 audits Audit programme continued.
Responsible procurement assessments have been completed on suppliers who account for twothirds of our spend See the Responsible Business section from page 48 for more information Performance  Business Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 30 Research and Development The discovery and development of innovative differentiated and commercially attractive medicines that make a real difference to the health of patients As a researchbased biopharmaceutical company we are committed to applying innovative science and technology to invent acquire produce and distribute prescription medicines that make a meaningful difference to peoples health around the world.
This commitment is at the core of our RandD strategy.
It drives our focus to create medicines that are valued by patients and that also recognise the needs of healthcare practitioners governments payers and other stakeholders throughout the healthcare system.
We invest in high quality science while developing a learningbased culture which is built on high standards of leadership ethics and transparency.
Focused RandD portfolio We continue to prioritise our resources and focus discovery activities on those diseases within our existing Therapy Areas where we believe there is the greatest potential to meet patient need through the application of novel science.
This continual process of prioritisation is designed to ensure that the projects we have in our pipeline constitute the programmes which we believe are most likely to deliver technical and commercial success.
In 2012 we continued our research focus on six Therapy Areas Cardiovascular Gastrointestinal Neuroscience Infection Oncology and Respiratory and Inammation.
Early RandD efforts are conducted by our small molecules Innovative Medicines and biologics RandD groups which are responsible for discovery and development up to and including Proof of Concept.
Our Global Medicines Development GMD organisation progresses products through latestage development registration and ongoing postlaunch development activities.
The GMD organisation provides a consistent global platform dedicated to conducting trials for small molecules and biologics.
It is accountable for delivering the regulatory packages to support launches of new medicines that have a positive benet risk prole that are commercially attractive and reimbursable.
In addition to our dened disease areas we continuously assess opportunities to acquire through purchase or partnership development and commercialisation rights to compounds targets and technologies.
In February 2012 as part of our accelerated RandD strategy we created a virtual neuroscience Innovative Medicines unit Virtual iMed made up of a team of approximately 40 scientists conducting discovery and development externally through a network of partners in academia and industry.
The team is based in our major neuroscience hubs  US Cambridge Massachusetts and the UK Cambridge and works closely with partners such as the Karolinska Institute in Sweden
The implementation of the Virtual iMed has resulted in the end of RandD activity at two sites that focused on neuroscience in Sweden Sdertlje and in Canada Montreal.
For more information about the Virtual iMed please see the Neuroscience section of the Therapy Area Review at page 61.
Development pipeline Our pipeline includes 84 projects of which 71 are in the clinical phase of development.
As shown in the Development projects chart below we now have a total of 29 projects in Phase I 25 projects in Phase II 11 projects in latestage development either in Phase III or under regulatory review and we are running 19 signicant lifecycle management projects.
2012 was a productive year for RandD and I look forward to working with the new SET members to improve productivity further in both cost and output and to build our capabilities in order to restore AstraZeneca to a position of scientic leadership.
Pascal Soriot Chief Executive Ofcer Four major market approvals Caprelsa FluMist Quadrivalent Forxiga Zinforo Three positive Phase III investment decisions  lesinurad following the acquisition of Ardea also moxetumomab and brodalumab Eight out of 1 1 Phase IIIRegistration projects 73% sourced externally AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 31 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Development projects During 2012 across the clinical portfolio 36 projects successfully progressed to their next phase including 12 projects entering rst human testing.
The Pipeline delivery table overleaf summarises the milestones for products in development passed in 2012.
Ten projects have successfully completed development activities and have now been launched in all relevant major markets.
Nineteen projects were withdrawn in 2012.
One project was withdrawn following failure to obtain the required regulatory or marketing approvals for the product candidate or the facilities in which it is manufactured and 17 projects were withdrawn following poorer than anticipated safety or efcacy results.
One project was withdrawn due to the anticipated completion of the collaboration which supported that project.
For more information about our pipeline including discontinued and completed projects see the Therapy Area Review and Development Pipeline section from page 50 and page 199 respectively.
For information about the risks inherent in the clinical phase of development please see the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 75.
Portfolio quality Our focus continues to be on identifying key candidate medicines that have the highest potential to deliver technical and commercial success.
This includes an annual assessment of our early portfolio projects.
By continuing to apply a rigorous quality approach to our candidate selection process we expect to increase the likelihood that our most promising medicines progress into Phase III development.
Our quality approach focuses on ensuring that every project in our pipeline has been assessed against a valid biological target has sufcient exposure to demonstrate an effect on the disease and has a strong efcacy and safety prole in the intended patient population.
Our Portfolio Investment Board PIB plays an important role in maintaining portfolio quality.
It continuously evaluates our projects with the goal of maximising the value of our RandD investments.
More detail relating to the PIBs responsibilities can be found in the Corporate Governance Report on page 119.
For more information about our pipeline including discontinued and completed projects see the Development Pipeline section from page 199.
Our RandD approach As demonstrated by the Lifecycle of a medicine diagram on page 14 our RandD activities span the entire lifecycle of a medicine.
Our approach brings together drug discoverers and developers within each Therapy Area to focus and collaborate in specic disease areas while continuing to leverage our expertise in latestage development product registration and lifecycle management.
This model is designed to promote accountability and scientic knowledgesharing within therapeutic areas.
In addition our RandD strategy enables more effective and efcient delivery of our research objectives across the therapeutic portfolio regardless of geography disease area or stage of development.
Partnering to improve health We know that we cannot address the challenges of healthcare alone and scientic innovation does not exist solely within our own research laboratories.
By engaging with partners across the healthcare delivery spectrum we can stimulate more creativity and better develop medicines and solutions for patients.
Our collaboration efforts have resulted in a combination of internally and externally sourced compounds throughout our portfolio which include development partnerships with biotechnology rms research institutions and other pharmaceutical companies.
We aim to source at least 40% of our pipeline from outside our laboratories and we continued to deliver against this KPI in 2012 with external partnerships positively impacting our pipeline including A collaboration with Amgen to jointly develop and commercialise ve monoclonal antibodies from Amgens clinical inammation portfolio including brodalumab.
The acquisition of Ardea and their Phase III development product candidate lesinurad as a potential treatment for the chronic management of hyperuricaemia in patients with gout.
An expansion of the diabetes alliance with BMS in connection with BMSs acquisition of Amylin and the potential development and commercialisation of Amylins portfolio of products related to diabetes and other metabolic diseases with a primary focus on a franchise of glucagonlike peptide 1 agonists GLP1 agonists for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes.
This includes Byetta exenatide injection and Bydureon exenatide extended release for injectable suspension both of which are approved for use in the US Europe and Japan and Symlin pramlintide acetate an injected amylin analogue which is approved in the US.
An innovative research alliance that brings four leading academic research laboratories together with AstraZeneca to study a major risk factor for Alzheimers disease the apolipoprotein E4 genotype ApoE.
The acquisition of a portfolio of neuroscience assets from Link Medicine Corporation a privately held biopharmaceutical company developing potential new treatments for a range of neurodegenerative diseases.
A collaboration with the diagnostics division of Roche to develop companion diagnostics for selected products in development across all AstraZeneca Therapy Areas.
A worldwide exclusive licensing agreement with Ardelyx in respect of their NHE3 inhibitor programme for the treatment of complications associated with endstage renal disease ESRD and chronic kidney disease CKD.
A collaboration with Ironwood to codevelop and cocommercialise linaclotide in China.
Linaclotide is a guanylate cyclaseC GCC agonist for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome with constipation IBSC and chronic idiopathic constipation CIC.
A collaboration in China with WuXi AppTec to develop and commercialise MEDI5117  a biologic for autoimmune and inammatory diseases.
Phase I Phase II Phase III Line Extensions Development projects Includes ve projects that are approved or launched in at least one market.
Includes ve projects that are either approved or launched in at least one market.
Includes three projects that are led in at least one market.
Includes seven projects that are approved or launched.
Includes seven lifecycle management projects reintroduced from Brazil Russia India China Mexico Turkey and Japan.
Performance  Business Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 32 a goal to speed the discovery of essential new treatments for tuberculosis TB.
Formation of a nonprot organisation called TransCelerate BioPharma Inc. related to clinical study execution.
Continued activities to meet our commitment to health research through our ongoing efforts with organisations such as the European Innovative Medicines Initiative aimed at improving tools technologies and methodologies.
We have actively shared knowledge through collaborations with the UK Medical Research Council and the World Intellectual Property Organisation WIPO for Neglected Tropical Diseases NTDs.
More information concerning NTDs can be found in the Therapy Area Review in the Infection section on page 58.
Investing in capabilities A component of our RandD strategy is strengthening four core capabilities.
In 2010 we announced an investment of more than 200 million over ve years to develop capabilities in the areas of payer partnering personalised healthcare predictive science and clinical design.
We have made signicant progress in building these skills both internally and through external collaborations and they are now fully integrated into most of our development programmes.
A collaboration with the Cancer Research Institute and the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research to advance the research of immunotherapy in cancer.
Specically the research will focus on clinical trials to test novel combinations of immunotherapies including three investigational MAbs.
A strategic alliance with Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Isis for the discovery and development of novel generation antisense therapeutics against ve cancer targets which includes a licence to develop and commercialise ISISSTAT3RX a drug Isis is currently evaluating in an early clinical trial in patients with advanced lymphomas.
We continue to search for opportunities to advance science and public health through research collaborations and partnerships.
Initiatives that we announced in 2012 include the following A collaboration with other pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies working alongside public partners in the NewDrugs4BadBugs research programme part of the European Commissions Action Plan Against the Rising Threats from Antimicrobial Resistance which is intended to boost the current industrywide faltering discovery and development of new antibiotics.
A collaboration along with six other pharmaceutical companies and four research institutions working with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation with Our resources At the end of 2012 our RandD organisation comprised approximately 9800 people at 10 principal centres in six countries.
In February 2012 we announced an acceleration of our RandD transformation originally announced in 2010.
This included initiatives to cease RandD activities at our site in Sweden Sdertlje and close our laboratories in Canada Montreal France Reims and the US Mountain View California in 2012.
These initiatives have impacted a total of approximately 2200 positions across the RandD organisation.
Our approach to implementing such change is outlined in the Managing change in our organisation section on page 45.
Further details are also set out in the Our strategy section from page 20.
Our current RandD geographic footprint includes four main small molecule facilities in the UK Alderley Park and Maccleseld Sweden MIndal and the US Waltham
We also have a clinical development facility in Japan Osaka.
Our
Our Wilmington Delaware site in the US focuses on late stage development across the entire therapeutic portfolio.
Our strategic expansion in Emerging Markets continues and includes the ongoing growth of our research facilities in China Shanghai and India Bangalore.
Pipeline delivery Milestone Product 2012 Achievement Key pipeline progressions Phase III starts and rst regulatory lings Brodalumab Phase III programme has commenced for brodalumab in psoriasis.
Major market approvals Zinforo ceftaroline fosamil European marketing authorisation for Zinforo a new intravenous cephalosporin antibiotic for the treatment of adult patients with complicated skin and soft tissue infections CSSTI or community acquired pneumonia CAP.
Caprelsa vandetanib European marketing authorisation for Caprelsa for the treatment of aggressive and symptomatic medullary thyroid cancer MTC in patients with unresectable locally advanced or metastatic disease.
Caprelsa is the rst approved treatment for advanced MTC in Europe.
FluMist Quadrivalent inuenza vaccine live intranasal FDA approval for FluMist Quadrivalent in the prevention of inuenza.
This marks the rst fourstrain inuenza vaccine approved by the FDA.
Forxiga dapagliozin European marketing authorisation for Forxiga tablets for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes as an adjunct to diet and exercise in combination with other glucoselowering medicinal products including insulin and as a monotherapy in metformin intolerant patients.
RandD spend analysistel Discovery and early development % 60 56 73 Latestage development % 40 44 27 Core RandD costs m 4452 5033 4219 Reported expenditure in our RandD organisation was 5.2 billion 2011 5.5 billion 2010 5.3 billion.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 33 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Before a trial begins we work to make sure that those taking part understand the nature and purpose of the research and that proper procedure for gaining informed consent is followed including managing any special circumstances such as different levels of literacy.
Protecting participants throughout the trial process is a core priority and we have strict procedures in place to ensure that they are not exposed to any unnecessary risks.
All our clinical studies are conceptually designed and nally interpreted inhouse but a percentage of them are run for us by contract research organisations CROs.
In 2012 around 31% of patients in our small molecule studies and around 87% of patients in our biologics studies were monitored by CROs on our behalf.
We contractually require CROs to work to our global standards and we conduct riskbased audits to monitor compliance.
Animal research Our commitment to embrace promote and embed scientic and technical best practice in animal research.
Our objective to drive continuous improvement internally and engage with external providers on the implementation of AstraZeneca global standards for nonhuman primate housing and care.
These include the following targets rollout of AstraZeneca Good Statistical Practice GSP global standard and associated compliance monitoring more than 80% of external providers of AstraZeneca nonhuman primate research studies are operating to AstraZeneca standards.
We remain committed to minimising our use of animals in our research without compromising the quality of the research data.
Wherever possible we use nonanimal methods such as computer modelling that eliminate the need to use animals early in drug development or reduce the number required.
We also work to rene our existing methods.
This replacement reduction and renement of animal studies is known as the 3Rs.
To support our drive for In 2012 there was Core RandD expenditure of 4.5 billion in our RandD organisation 201 1 5 billion 2010 4.2 billion.
In addition 5228 million was spent on acquiring product rights such as inlicensing 2011 189 million 2010 1017 million and we invested approximately 791 million on the implementation of our RandD restructuring strategy.
The allocations of spend by early development and latestage activities are presented in the RandD spend analysis table opposite.
RandD ethics We want to be recognised for our high quality science and for the impact we can make on serious diseases and to be trusted for the way we work.
Our
Clinical trials Our commitment to deliver consistently high standards of ethical practice and scientic conduct in all our trials worldwide and to public transparency on registration and results of all clinical trials whether positive or negative.
Our objective to be recognised as an industry leader in the publication and sharing of clinical trial information.
We conduct clinical trials at multiple sites in several different countriesregions as shown in the chart above.
A broad geographic span helps us to ensure that those taking part in our studies reect the diversity of patients around the world for whom the new medicine is intended.
This approach also helps to identify the types of people for whom the treatment may be most benecial.
Our global governance process for determining where we place clinical trials provides the framework for ensuring a consistent approach worldwide.
We take several factors into account including the availability of experienced and independent ethics committees and a robust regulatory regime as well as sufcient numbers of trained healthcare professionals and patients willing to participate in a trial. and learning.
The number of animals we use will continue to vary because it depends on a number of factors including the amount of preclinical research we are doing the complexity of the diseases under investigation and regulatory requirements.
We believe that without our active commitment to the 3Rs our animal use would be much greater.
In 2012 we used approximately 304000 animals inhouse 2011 381000.
In addition approximately 14000 animals were used by external CROs on our behalf 2011 17 000.
Against our 2012 target of more than 80% 85% of our externallyplaced nonhuman primate studies met AstraZeneca standards in 2012.
We will continue to progress towards our 2013 target of 100% of our studies being conducted in facilities meeting AstraZeneca required standards.
The welfare of the animals we use continues to be a top priority and our Bioethics Policy applies worldwide.
We routinely have inspections by government authorities of our internal animal research facilities.
External
CROs that conduct animal studies on our behalf are required to comply with our global standards and we undertake audits to ensure our expectations are being met.
During 2012 we developed launched and began implementation of standard operating procedures and guidance documents to underpin our new GSP global standard developed in 201 1.
These apply to our internal animal research and the launch included extensive training programmes for relevant scientists technical staff and managers across the organisation.
100% small molecule studies 100% biologics studies Patients in global AstraZeneca studies by geographic region %
USCanada
Asia Pacic CentralEastern Europe
South Africa Latin America
Extract from 2012 Responsible Business Plan.
Further information on AstraZenecas approach to responsible business can be found in the Responsible Business section from page 48 and on our websitesiteresponsibility.
Performance  Business Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 34 including mechanisms for highlighting those that require immediate attention.
We also work to ensure that accurate wellinformed and uptodate information concerning the safety prole of our drugs is provided to regulators doctors other healthcare professionals and where appropriate patients.
A pharmacovigilance awareness programme was developed in 2012 and circulated to marketing companies together with guidance about how the information should be shared with regulatory authorities in readiness for external enquiry.
One such opportunity arose when SFDA the Chinese health authority met UMC WHO Uppsala Monitoring Centre and we were able to share our experience and thoughts around signal management.
We have an experienced inhouse team of clinical patient safety professionals dedicated to the task of ensuring that we meet our commitment to patient safety.
Patient safety Our commitment the safety of the patients who take our medicines is of fundamental importance to us.
Our objective to enhance pharmacovigilance awareness  including the use of collaborative programmes to share and use our knowledge and best practice in order to improve reporting and patient safety in developing countries.
All drugs have potential side effects and we aim to minimise the risks and maximise the benets of each of our medicines throughout the whole lifecycle of a medicine.
We continually monitor the use of all our medicines to ensure that we become aware of any side effects not identied during the development process.
This is known as pharmacovigilance and is core to our ongoing responsibility to patients.
We have comprehensive and rigorous systems in place for detecting and rapidly evaluating such effects At a global level every medicine in development and on the market is allocated a Global Safety Physician and a team of patient safety scientists.
In each of our markets we also have dedicated safety managers with responsibility for patient safety at a local level.
Our Chief Medical Ofcer has overall accountability for the benetrisk proles of the products we have in development and those on the market.
He provides medical oversight and ensures that appropriate risk assessment processes are in place to enable informed decisions to be made about safety as quickly as possible.
Clinical trial transparency AstraZeneca has a longstanding commitment to making information about our clinical research publicly available to enhance the scientic understanding of how our medicines work and in the medical interest of patients.
By the end of 2012 we had registered 2050 clinical trials and posted the results of 1360 trials on a range of public websites including our own dedicated clinical trials websitesite We publish information on the registration and results of all new and ongoing AstraZenecasponsored clinical trials for all products in all phases including marketed medicines drugs in development and drugs whose further development has been discontinued.
We post results irrespective of whether they are favourable or unfavourable to AstraZeneca.
Our disclosure policy goes beyond legal requirements which currently require publication for Phase II studies onwards only.
From 15 January 2013site once a manuscript relating to an investigational or approved product is published in a peerreviewed medical journal.
These disclosure requirements are set out in our Bioethics Policy and compliance is mandatory across the Group.
We consider requests for patientlevel data from other parties on a casebycase basis following consistent criteria to establish if and how the information provided will be used for valid scientic purposes and to benet patients.
Calls for open access to clinical data raise complex practical legal and ethical issues around full disclosure of patient information.
Decision makers as well as academia and industry have a duty to consider all the implications that could arise from such proposals.
These include ensuring scientic rigour safeguarding patient privacy and protecting innovation and medical progress.
We are engaging with regulators legislators industry and medical and scientic bodies to discuss the issues raised by the proposals to routinely publish full clinical trial and patient data so we can collectively identify practicable solutions that deliver real benets to medical science and patients.
Extract from 2012 Responsible Business Plan.
Further information on AstraZenecas approach to responsible business can be found in the Responsible Business section from page 48 and on our websitesiteresponsibility.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 35 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Intellectual Property A wellfunctioning system of intellectual property rights A period of patent protection is essential in allowing us to achieve a return on our investment in innovation.
Our challenge is to refresh our portfolio of patented products and offset the impact when that protection is lost.
Jeff Pott General Counsel be to the validity of a patent andor to the effective scope of a patent and are based on everevolving legal precedents.
There can be no guarantee of success for either party in patent proceedings.
For information about third party challenges to the patents protecting our products see Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
The basic term of a patent is typically 20 years from the ling of the patent application with the relevant government patent ofce.
However the product protected by a pharmaceutical patent may not be marketed for several years after patent ling due to the time required for clinical trials and the regulatory approval process necessary to obtain marketing approval for the product.
Patent Term Extensions PTE are available in certain major markets including the EU and US to compensate for these delays.
The term of the PTE can vary from zero to ve years depending on the time taken to obtain any marketing approval.
The maximum patent term when including PTE cannot exceed 15 years EU or 14 years US from the rst marketing authorisation.
The generic industry is increasingly challenging innovators patents at earlier stages and almost all leading pharmaceutical products in the US have faced or are facing patent challenges from generic manufacturers.
The result of patent challenges experienced by our competitors products may lead to the availability of generics in the same product class as patented products we currently supply which may materially impact our business.
We are also experiencing increased challenges elsewhere in the world for example in Europe Canada Asia and Latin America.
Further information about The discovery and development of a new medicine requires a signicant investment of resources by researchbased pharmaceutical companies over a period of 10 or more years.
For this to be a viable investment the results new medicines must be safeguarded from being copied with a reasonable amount of certainty for a reasonable period of time.
The principal economic safeguard in our industry is a wellfunctioning patent system that recognises our effort and rewards our innovation with appropriate protection allowing time to generate the revenue we need to reinvest in new pharmaceutical innovation.
Patent rights are limited by territory and duration yet a signicant period of this time can be spent on RandD of our products before product launch.
Therefore we commit signicant resources to establishing and defending our patent and related IP protections for these inventions.
Patent process We le applications for patent protection for our inventions to safeguard the large subsequent investment required to obtain approval of potential new drugs for marketing.
Further innovation means that we may seek additional patent protection as we develop a product and its uses.
We apply for patents via patent ofces around the world which assess whether our inventions meet the strict legal requirements for a patent to be granted.
In some countries our competitors can challenge our patents in the patent ofces and in all countries competitors can challenge our patents in the courts.
We can face challenges early in the patent application process and throughout the life of the patent.
These challenges can the risks relating to patent litigation and early loss and expiry of patents is contained in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 75.
Patent expiries The tables overleaf set out certain patent expiry dates and sales for our key marketed products.
The expiry dates relate to the basic substance patent relevant to that product unless indicated otherwise.
The expiry dates shown include any PTE and Paediatric Exclusivity periods.
Data exclusivity In addition to patent protection Regulatory Data Protection RDP or data exclusivity is an important IP right which arises in respect of data which is required to be submitted to regulatory authorities in order to obtain marketing approvals for our medicines.
Signicant investment is required to generate such data for example through conducting global clinical trials and the use of this proprietary data is protected from use by third parties such as generic manufacturers for a number of years in a limited number of countries.
The period of such protection and the extent to which the right is respected differs signicantly between these countries.
We believe in enforcing our rights to RDP and consider it an important protection for our products particularly as patent rights are increasingly being challenged.
The period of RDP starts from the date of the rst marketing approval from the relevant health authority and runs in parallel to any pending patent protection.
RDP would generally be expected to expire prior to patent expiry in all major markets.
If a product takes an unusually long time
Performance  Business Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 36 Patent expiries for our key marketed products US revenue m Key marketed products US patent expirytel Atacand Expired 150 182 216 Crestor 2016 3164 3074 2640 LosecPrilosec Expired 30 38 47 Nexium 2015 2272 2397 2695 Pulmicort Respules Turbuhaler formulation Turbuhaler device SelokenToprolXL Expired 320 404 689 Seroquel IR Expired 697 3344 3107 Seroquel XR 2017 formulation telSymbicort 2014 combination 2023 formulation 2026 pMDI device 1003 846 721 Synagis 2015 composition 2023 formulation 611 570 646 Zoladex 2021 safety syringe 24 39 46 EU Canada and Japan revenue m Key marketed products EU patent expiry Canadian patent expiry Japanese patent expirytel Atacand Expired Expired na 463 799 837
Expired 2017 2090 2534 2201 LosecPrilosec Expired Expired Expired 484 660 660
648 1042 1422 Pulmicort 2018 Respules 2018 Turbuhaler formulation 2018 Respules 2018 Turbuhaler formulation 2018 Respules 2018 Turbuhaler formulation SelokenToprolXL Expired Expired Expired 139 163 169 Seroquel IR Expired Expired Expired 357 651 705 Seroquel XR 2017 formulation 2017 formulation na 527 562 401 Symbicort 2018 formulation 2018 formulation 2017 combination 1728 1822 1621 2019 Turbuhaler device 2019 Turbuhaler device 2018 formulation 2019 Turbuhaler device Synagis 2015 composition 2015 composition 2015 composition 427 405 392 Zoladex 2021 safety syringe 2021 safety syringe 2021 safety syringe 638 733 718 Patents are or may be challenged by third parties.
Generic products may be launched at risk and our patents may be revoked circumvented or found not to be infringed.
See the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 75.
Many of our products are subject to challenges by third parties.
Details of material challenges by third parties can be found in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
Additional patents relating to the stated products may have terms extending beyond the quoted dates.
Licence agreements with Teva and Ranbaxy Pharmaceuticals Inc. allow each to launch a generic version in the US from May 2014 subject to regulatory approval.
Date includes Paediatric Exclusivity.
A licence agreement with Teva permits their ongoing sale in the US of a generic version from December 2009.
Licence agreements with various generics companies allow launches of generic versions of Seroquel XR in the US from 1 November 2016 or earlier upon certain circumstances subject to regulatory approval.
Aggregate revenue for the EU Canada and Japan.
Expiry in major EU markets.
Crestor is covered by a range of patents including substance formulation and use patents.
Crestor patent coverage is not uniform across countries.
Granted PTEs mean that a Crestor substance patent remains in force in several major markets after the standard patent term expired in 2012.
However this substance patent is not in force in a number of countries such as Australia Brazil Mexico Russia and China.
A substance patent and PTE with expiry in 2017 is in force in most major EU markets.
Includes PTE.
Reexamination period similar to data exclusivity ends July 2019.
AstraZeneca is engaged in numerous patent revocation proceedings regarding Seroquel XR patents and further adverse court rulings in addition to those seen in Germany and the UK are possible. until the RDP right has expired.
Compulsory licensing Compulsory licensing the overruling of patent rights to allow patented medicines to be manufactured and sold by other parties is increasingly being included in the access to medicines debate.
We recognise the right of developing countries to use the exibilities in the World Trade Organizations Agreement on TradeRelated Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights TRIPS including the Doha amendment in certain circumstances such as a public health emergency.
We believe that this should apply only when all other ways of meeting the emergency needs have been considered and where healthcare frameworks and safeguards are in place to ensure that the medicines reach those who need them.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 37 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing activities focused on the needs of our customers patients physicians and payers and undertaken in the right way As anticipated our performance in 2012 was impacted by a series of patent expiries.
I will be working with the new commercial SET members to invest in key growth platforms which are essential if the Group is to return to revenue growth.
Pascal Soriot Chief Executive Ofcer If we are to improve the health of patients around the world we need to ensure that the right medicines are available and help improve access to them.
To that end our global sales and marketing organisation is active in over 100 countries.
At the end of 2012 it comprised approximately 30200 employees.
As well as building on our leading positions in commercialising our medicines in the US and Other Established Markets we continue to increase our ability to serve customers in Emerging Markets including China Brazil Mexico and Russia.
We work to ensure success in serving customers in individual markets by having highly accountable local leaders who understand their markets and have a strong focus on business growth.
This extensive network is supported by our Global Sales and Marketing Organisation that develops global product strategies and drives commercial excellence ensuring a strong customer focus and commercial direction in the management of our pipeline and marketed products.
All our efforts are underpinned by a commitment to conducting our sales and marketing activity in accordance with our values and driving commercial success responsibly.
Driving commercial success Driving commercial success requires us to maximise the value of our portfolio across the whole lifecycle of a medicine.
We do so by connecting our science with our customers needs.
From an early stage in the medicine discovery process we embed customer insights into our RandD strategy based on our interactions with healthcare providers patients regulators and payers.
We build on this with our local market expertise and knowledge.
This approach helps us to prioritise resources and optimise our portfolio thereby delivering medicines that customers value and which meet their needs.
For an overview of this process see the Lifecycle of a medicine diagram on page 14.
Activities in 2012 focused on ensuring continued commercial excellence of key products in our established patented portfolio such as Crestor  Seroquel XR and Symbicort driving growth in developing markets and accelerating the commercialisation of recently launched products.
BrilintaBrilique has now been approved for use in hospitalised ACS patients in 88 countries is reimbursed in 29 available in 33 patient pay markets and commercially launched in 82.
Other
Caprelsa Zinforo and Forxiga.
In the US we also started promotion of Bydureon Byetta and Symlin the Amylin diabetes products that are part of our expanded diabetes alliance with BMS.
Working in partnership Our commitment to collaboration is outlined in the Partnering to improve health section from page 31.
This approach is further evidenced by our global collaboration agreement announced in April 2012 with The Medicines Company which has a strong network in interventional cardiology.
In May their salesforce began supporting Brilinta in the US complementing our own efforts.
In August we entered into an agreement with Pzer pursuant to which Pzer acquired the exclusive global rights to market Nexium for approved OTC indications.
We will continue to manufacture and market the prescription product as well as supply Pzer with the OTC product.
4.5bn Some 4.5 billion of revenue decline was related to loss of exclusivity on several brands in the portfolio with the largest impact from Seroquel IR Symbicort Faslodex Onglyza Iressa BrilintaBrilique and Seroquel XR accounted for more than 600 million revenue growth 4% Emerging Markets revenue rose by 4% and included 17% revenue growth in China offset by weak performance in Mexico Brazil Turkey and India Performance  Business Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 38 Global strategies tailored to meet local needs We focus on developing global strategies tailored to meet local needs and recognise that our commercial capabilities must evolve to meet future market requirements.
The pace and degree of change in global economies and intensifying regulatory and access challenges have led us to look at ways of better and more efciently addressing the changing needs and preferences of payers prescribers and patients.
In 2012 this effort included completing the regional consolidation of our Commercial organisation announced in 2011.
Our streamlined operating model includes integrating our smaller local marketing companies into area clusters allowing them to benet from global resources while staying local and concentrating on meeting local customer needs.
All our markets have a role to play in delivering our commercial strategy.
We continue to prioritise investment and allocate our resources in the most costeffective way.
This allows us to identify those markets of major signicance to us those that will become more important drivers of our business in the future and highlight those Established Markets where we need to refocus our approach to deliver sustained success.
Our footprint continues to evolve to reect declining sales in Established Markets and increasing sales in Emerging
For example in 2012 we enhanced our presence in Asia with the opening of the Zhangjiang Park Regional Hub Headquarters in Shanghai.
Changing customer needs In most countries our sales are made through whollyowned local marketing companies.
In other countries we sell through distributors or local representative ofces.
Our products are marketed primarily to primary care and specialist doctors.
Our
Historically our commercial model has been based on the use of facetoface marketing techniques.
This is now changing to reect the changing prole of the prescribers of our medicines.
For example primary care physicians tend to be younger on average than previously a greater proportion is female and more work parttime.
Primary care physicians want to interact with pharmaceutical companies in different ways.
Driven by experience from innovative approaches piloted and implemented in North America and Europe we have changed the way we work.
Improvements
These selling channels have now been rolled out in more than 30 countries and across a range of products.
Evidence to date suggests these channels are appreciated by those who use them and are an efcient and effective way of driving value for our business.
We are accelerating the rollout and adoption of the new model in the majority of markets in which we operate.
Pricing our medicines Our challenge is to deliver innovative medicines that improve health for patients bring benets to society and provide an appropriate return on our investment.
Our
When setting the price of a medicine we take into consideration its full value to patients to those who pay for healthcare and to society in general.
We also pursue a exible approach to the pricing of our medicines.
For example we support the concept of differential pricing provided that appropriate safeguards are in place to ensure that differentially priced products are not diverted from patients who need them to be sold and used in more afuent markets.
Global KPI Disciplinary actions Breaches of external sales and marketing codes and regulations Delivering value for payers Our medicines play an important role in treating unmet medical need.
In doing so they bring economic as well as therapeutic benets.
Effective treatments can help to lower healthcare costs by reducing the need for more expensive care such as hospital stays or surgery or through preventing patients from developing more serious or debilitating diseases that are costly to treat.
They also contribute to increased productivity by reducing or preventing the incidence of diseases that keep people away from work.
As outlined in the Pricing pressure section on page 18 there is continued downward pressure on drug pricing and in the current difcult economic environment payers expect us to be able to dene the value our medicines create.
We are acutely aware of the challenges facing those who pay for healthcare and are committed to delivering value which will allow us to bring our medicines to the patients that need them.
Therefore we work with payers and healthcare providers to understand their priorities and requirements and generate evidence regarding how our products offer value and support cost effective healthcare delivery.
Increasing access to healthcare Our commitment to increase access to healthcare for underserved patient populations in a sustainable way.
Our objective to rollout our access to healthcare strategy within the business and further develop the framework for implementation including nonnancial performance indicators for monitoring our performance across all our initiatives.
Sales of medicines in our Established Markets enable us to generate the revenue we need to provide our shareholders with a return invest in continued innovation and pursue other opportunities to expand the availability of our medicines.
Increasing
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 39 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Corrective actions Breaches of Code of Conduct by Commercial employees including contract staff Number of persons Action taken 2012 2011 Removed from role Formal warning 685 570 Guidance and coaching 1808 971 Total 2681 1755 In the majority of cases this means dismissal or contract termination but it can include resignations and demotions.
2012 we announced our access to healthcare strategy to help in that process.
The strategy framework is explained on our websitesiteresponsibility.
It seeks to take account of the different barriers to healthcare around the world and is tailored locally to meet the needs of different patient populations.
We are pursuing a range of initiatives including broadening affordability of our medicines across these populations to understand what works best and in what context.
During the year we rolled out our access to healthcare framework within our Global Sales and Marketing Organisation to support further development of our existing approach and to enable us to capture ongoing broadening affordability commercial initiatives.
For example our work to expand patient access to healthcare in countries such as Brazil Romania and Ukraine continues with a range of different commercial approaches being adopted.
In
China we are pursuing our strategy to reach patients in the broader market beyond the big hospitals in the big cities by developing new commercial channels for reaching emerging hospitals and community health centres.
Best practice will be shared and replicated.
In addition in 2012 we acquired Guangdong BeiKang Pharmaceutical Company Limited a generics manufacturing company in China which gave us access to a portfolio of injectable medicines used to treat infections.
First launches are planned for 2013 and underscore our intention to serve the health needs of Chinese patients through our innovative medicines and increasingly high quality branded generic treatments that are locally produced to global standards.
You can read more about our strategy and the access initiatives we have under way on our websitesite We are making progress on the development of nonnancial indicators for monitoring our performance and these are included in our 2013 Responsible Business Plan.
Sales and marketing ethics Our commitment to deliver consistently high ethical standards of sales and marketing practice worldwide.
Our objective to focus on ensuring compliance with our Ethical Interactions Policy and report on the number of conrmed breaches of external sales and marketing codes number of instances of failure to meet our standards in the Global Commercial Organisation including contract staff number of corrective actions for breaches of our Code of Conduct or supporting policies by Commercial employees including contract staff.
During 2012 we continued to provide training for employees on our global standards that govern the way that we conduct our business around the world.
We have comprehensive processes in place for monitoring compliance with our Code of Conduct and global policies including dedicated compliance professionals who support our line managers locally in monitoring their staff activities.
We also have a network of nominated signatories who review our promotional materials against all applicable requirements.
Additionally in 2012 audit professionals have conducted compliance audits of a selection of our marketing companies.
As shown in the Global KPI Disciplinary actions chart opposite we identied a total of 10 conrmed breaches of external sales and marketing regulations or codes globally in 2012 17 in 2011.
There were 1932 instances including contract staff of failure to comply with AstraZenecas Code of Conduct and global policies in our Global Commercial Organisation the majority of which were minor 1292 in 2011 including external breaches.
We believe that the movement in both numbers reects our enhanced management oversight and compliance monitoring.
As shown in the Corrective actions table above in relation to these breaches and it is important to note that a single breach can involve more than one person failing to meet the standards required we removed 188 people from their role formally warned 685 people and provided further guidance or coaching on our policies for 1808 people.
The most serious breaches are raised with the Audit Committee.
US Corporate Integrity Agreement reporting In April 2010 AstraZeneca signed an agreement with the US Department of Justice to settle an investigation relating to the sales and marketing of Seroquel IR.
The requirements of the associated Corporate Integrity Agreement between AstraZeneca and the Ofce of the Inspector General of the US Department of Health and Human Services OIG include a number of active monitoring and self reporting obligations that differ from selfreporting required by authorities in the rest of the world.
To meet these obligations AstraZeneca provides notices to the OIG describing the outcomes of particular investigations potentially relating to violations of certain laws as well as a separate annual report to the OIG summarising monitoring and investigation outcomes relevant to Corporate Integrity Agreement requirements.
Extract from 2012 Responsible Business Plan.
Further information on AstraZenecas approach to responsible business can be found in the Responsible Business section from page 48 and on our websitesiteresponsibility.
Performance  Business Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 40 Supply and Manufacturing A reliable supply and manufacturing operation that ensures our medicines are where they need to be when they are needed necessary due to the legacy systems reaching the end of their lifecycle.
At launch the implementation encountered some unexpected difculties and we put in place a team with representatives from different parts of the organisation to manage the situation so that impact on patients would be minimised and markets were kept informed.
The underlying problems have now been resolved and production levels returned to normal in
We estimate that the negative revenue impact for the year resulting from this disruption was approximately 1%.
Supply from our site in India Bangalore was also disrupted for a period of time following a voluntary recall of products that we determined did not meet our global quality standards.
Remediation actions have been implemented.
Continuous improvement Lessons learned from the supply chain disruptions in 2012 have been shared across the Group as part of our continuous improvement programme.
This programme allows us to improve our systems and minimise the impact of our activities on the environment.
We focus on what adds value to our customers and patients as well as waste elimination.
The programme has delivered signicant benets in recent years including reduced manufacturing lead times and lower average stock levels both of which improve our ability to respond to customer needs and reduce inventory costs.
All improvements are designed to ensure we maintain product quality safety and customer service.
Our strategy is to balance innovative and efcient inhouse manufacturing capabilities with external manufacturing resources particularly in relation to the early stages of our production process.
Where efciencies can be achieved we continue to consider using outsourced production but our strategy is to retain the nal stages of the production cycle inhouse.
This balance is designed to give us product integrity and quality assurance while affording us cost efciency and volume exibility.
We progressed two key production facilities during 2012 in China Taizhou and Russia Vorsino which will enable us to supply our products to both markets locally.
These sites are intended to commence phased commercial production in 2014.
The work is led by our global engineering group who put a strong focus on carrying out these projects fully in line with our ethical and safety standards.
This work was recognised externally in 2012 with the Shell health safety security and environment HSSE award for embedding an HSSE culture in our Emerging Markets projects.
Product quality and supply chain We are committed to delivering product quality that underpins the safety and efcacy of our medicines.
We have a comprehensive quality management system in place designed to assure the quality of our products in compliance with relevant regulations.
Notwithstanding our efforts during 2012 we experienced disruptions to our supply chain resulting from the implementation in February 2012 of an enterprise resource planning IT system in our facilities in Sweden Sdertlje and Grtuna.
This change was The supply of high quality medicines to patients around the world continues to be at the forefront of our strategy.
The increasingly challenging regulatory environment providing access to Emerging Markets and maintaining supply in an increasingly volatile market all represent an opportunity to think about supply to the patient in a more differentiated way.
David Smith Executive VicePresident Operations and IS 81.2% Sustained Core gross margin in excess of 80% Procurement savings of 566 million representing a 7% reduction Capital investment of 417 million in supply and manufacturing facilities AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 41 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview We have applied Lean production business improvement tools and ways of working to improve the efciency of our manufacturing plants for a number of years and in recent years have applied them to the whole of our supply chain.
This has led to improvements in quality lead times and overall equipment effectiveness.
In 2012 we continued to establish more efcient processes with experts from our global supply chain organisation providing crossfunctional support throughout the business.
Regulation and compliance Facilities and processes for manufacturing medicines must observe rigorous standards of quality.
They are subject to inspections by regulatory authorities to ensure compliance with prescribed standards.
Regulatory authorities have the power to require improvements to facilities and processes halt production and impose conditions that must be satised before production can resume.
Regulatory standards are not harmonised globally and evolve over time.
We hosted 44 independent inspections from 22 different regulatory authorities in 2012.
All observations from such inspections are reviewed along with the outcomes of internal inspections and subsequent improvement actions are put in place as required to ensure ongoing compliance.
The knowledge obtained from all inspections is shared across the Group.
We are actively involved in providing input into new product manufacturing regulations and approaches to product registration both at national and international levels through our membership of industry associations.
For example in the EU we continue to provide input into the Falsied Medicines Directive which came into force in January 2013 and starts to take effect in stages from July 2013.
We have taken steps to ensure that our supply chains can comply with the Falsied Medicines
In the US we contributed to debates concerning Supply Chain Security and the prevention of Drug Shortages.
Our supply and manufacturing strategy is based on our commitment to maintaining the highest ethical standards while complying with internal policies and laws and regulations.
We achieve this by placing compliance responsibility with line managers who are supported by dedicated compliance teams.
Independent assurance is provided by our GIA function.
Managing risk Given our strategy to outsource all API manufacturing we place particular importance on our global procurement policies and integrated risk management processes to ensure uninterrupted supply of high quality raw materials.
Supplies are purchased from a range of suppliers.
We factor in a wide range of potential risks to global supply such as disasters that remove supply capability or the unavailability of key raw materials and work to ensure that these risks are effectively mitigated.
Contingency plans include the appropriate use of dual or multiple suppliers and maintaining appropriate stock levels.
Although the price of raw materials may uctuate our global purchasing policies seek to avoid such uctuations becoming material to our business.
We also take into account reputational risk associated with our use of suppliers and are committed to working only with suppliers that embrace standards of ethical behaviour that are consistent with our own.
As part of our overall risk management we carefully consider the timing of investment with a view to ensuring that secure supply chains are in place for our products.
We also have a programme in place to provide appropriate supply capabilities for our new products.
Our resources Capital expenditure on supply and manufacturing facilities totalled approximately 417 million in 2012 2011 388 million 2010 333 million.
This included expenditure on two production facilities in China Taizhou and Russia Vorsino which will enable us to supply our products to both markets locally.
In addition to these two facilities our principal small molecule manufacturing facilities are in the UK Avlon and Maccleseld Sweden Snckviken Grtuna Sdertlje the US Newark Delaware and Westborough Massachusetts France Reims and Dunkerque Japan Maihara Australia North Ryde China Wuxi Indonesia Jakarta Egypt Cairo India Bangalore Puerto Rico Canovanas Germany Wedel Mexico Lomas Verdes Brazil Cotia and Argentina Buenos Aires.
We currently operate sites for the manufacture of APIs in the UK and Sweden complemented by the efcient use of external sourcing.
Our
US.
We also have major formulation sites for the global supply of parenteral andor inhalation products in Sweden France Australia and the UK.
At the end of 2012 approximately 10300 people at 22 sites in 16 countries were working on the manufacture and supply of our products.
This total includes some 770 permanent and 110 seasonal people who are employed at our four principal biologics commercial manufacturing facilities in the US Frederick Maryland and Philadelphia Pennsylvania the UK Speke and the Netherlands Nijmegen with capabilities in process development manufacturing and distribution of biologics including worldwide supply of MAbs and inuenza vaccines.
Our biologics capabilities are scalable which enables efcient management of our combined small molecule and biologics pipeline.
Supplier audits
Number of internal audits Number of external audits 2012teltel 35 13 Number of audits by geographic region 2012 Asia Pacic 143 Europe 182 Americas 129 Middle East and Africa 28 Total 482 Performance  Business Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 42 Environmental impact Our commitment to minimise the environmental impact of our operations by reducing the carbon footprint and natural resource demands of our own and our suppliers business activities.
Our targets for 2012 included reducing operational greenhouse gas footprint to 890 kilo tonnes CO 2 eyr hazardous waste to 0.70 tonnesm sales and nonhazardous waste to 0.52 tonnesemployee water use to 4.0 million m Our SHE strategy and associated objectives and targets for 2011 to 2015 provide the framework for driving our environmental sustainability going forward.
This section includes summary information about certain key areas of the framework.
Full details of our strategy objectives and targets are available on our websitesiteresponsibility.
We work to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions by among other things improving our energy efciency and pursuing lowercarbon alternatives to fossil fuels at our sites.
We strive to ensure that our travel and transport activities are as efcient as possible.
Our carbon footprint is also affected by some of our respiratory therapies specically our pressurised metereddose inhalers that rely on hydrouoroalkane HFA propellants to deliver the medicine to a patients airways.
While HFAs have no ozone depletion potential and a third or less of the global warming potential than the chlorouorocarbons CFCs they replace they are still greenhouse gases.
Our target is to reduce our operational greenhouse gas footprint excluding emissions from patient use of our inhaler therapies by 20% from our 2011 levels by 2015.
In 2012 our gross greenhouse gas emissions from all sources totalled 1.15 million tonnes 41 tonnesm indexed to Group revenue.
Working with suppliers Our commitment to integrate AstraZeneca ethical standards into our procurement activities and decisions worldwide.
Our objective to monitor compliance through our ongoing assessment and programmes with focus on areas experiencing highest challenges to address challenges with our suppliers and promote improvement through collaboration.
Our Global Responsible Procurement Standard denes one of the key business processes for integrating our ethical standards into our procurement activity and decision making worldwide.
It includes detailed expectations of suppliers.
The process is based on an escalating set of riskbased due diligence activities applied in a pragmatic way.
The same initial assessment process is used for all suppliers and more detailed focused assessments are then made relevant to the service provided.
Since the programme began in 2009 we have completed 5661 assessments of new and existing suppliers which accounts for approximately twothirds of our spend on suppliers.
We categorise suppliers as high medium or low risk.
We focus our auditing efforts on high and medium risk rated suppliers but we also audit some suppliers that we consider to be lower risk to conrm our performance expectations across all suppliers we do business with.
In 2012 we continued our audit activity with 482 audits across 52 countries 751 audits in 2011 as set out in the table on the previous page.
Fortythree percent of suppliers audited demonstrated standards that met our expectations with a further 53% implementing improvements to address minor non compliances.
We monitor progress across all corrective actions and 4% of suppliers audited this year will require signicant follow up to conrm they will make the improvements we require.
We will not use suppliers who are unable or unwilling to meet our expectations in a timely way.
During 2012 we removed eight suppliers from our supply chain.
The management of waste is another key aspect of our commitment and we have a 2015 target of a 15% reduction in hazardous and nonhazardous waste from our 2011 levels.
Our primary focus is waste prevention but where this is not practical we concentrate on waste minimisation and appropriate treatment or disposal to maximise the reuse and recycling of materials and minimise disposal to landll.
In 2012 our total waste was 47 000 tonnes with a tonnesm index of 1.7 .
We recognise the need to use water responsibly and where possible to minimise the use of water in our facilities.
To support the delivery of our target to reduce water use by 25% from our 2011 levels by 2015 we now have water conservation plans at our largest sites.
In 2012 our water use was 3.6 million m with a m m index of 130.
We are also working to ensure that we measure and report the impact of our external manufacturing activity on the environment and that our suppliers have appropriate environmental improvement targets.
Our continued commitment to product stewardship is underpinned by our ongoing work to integrate environmental considerations into a medicines complete lifecycle from discovery and development through manufacturing marketing and to its ultimate disposal.
Further information is available on our websitesite responsibility including environmental risk assessment data for our medicines.
Extract from 2012 Responsible Business Plan.
Further information on AstraZenecas approach to responsible business can be found in the Responsible Business section from page 48 and on our websitesiteresponsibility.
The following gures have been revised from those previously published to incorporate our biologics capabilities into our targets.
Greenhouse gas emissions million tonnes Waste production thousand tonnes Water use million m AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 43 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview
A talented and diverse workforce with the right capabilities operating in a high performance culture that enables us to bring great medicines to patients workforce composition gure overleaf.
For example in 20121800 of the new recruits joined AstraZeneca in
We continue to deploy a range of innovative approaches to help us achieve our ambitious growth plans in these markets and to ensure that we have an attractive employer brand and strong reputation globally.
Compared with a level of 6.7% in 2011 the level of voluntary employee turnover across AstraZeneca increased to 7 .3% in 2012 and now stands at the average for the pharmaceutical sector.
We have continued to invest signicant management time to minimise the risks to the business posed by employee turnover particularly in markets where conditions are most volatile.
This has included regular reporting to the SET of resignation rates in total by SET area and by key markets using the global HR platform being deployed across all markets as part of a transformation of the HR function.
In addition specic steps have been taken to retain key people and talent within our business.
For example regular risk assessments and retention plans are in place in respect of key individuals.
With approximately 51700 people in over 100 countries worldwide we value the talents skills and capabilities that a global workforce brings to our business.
Our people strategy which denes our approach to managing our workforce and supports the delivery of our business strategy is built around four key priorities that we believe are critical acquiring and retaining key capabilities and talent further developing leadership and management capabilities further improving the strength and diversity of the talent pipeline and managing employee engagement while building a high performance culture.
Managing signicant change in the organisations workforce is also something to which considerable management attention continues to be directed.
We use a range of metrics to track progress against these priorities many of which are reported regularly to the SET.
Acquiring and retaining key capabilities and talent During 2012 we hired approximately 5700 permanent employees to fuel the expansion of our business in Emerging Markets to continue to build the new capabilities required to implement our strategy successfully and to replace leavers.
We have successfully attracted key talent to supplement critical capabilities across the business and to refresh our leadership pipeline in key areas.
With our focus on business growth in Emerging Markets the composition of our global workforce continued to change as shown in the Sales and Marketing The reduction in scores in our employee survey was disappointing if understandable given our business challenges.
We must redouble our efforts to make AstraZeneca a great place to work  one that leverages the deep commitment and passion of our people and enables us to operate nimbly decisively and collaboratively.
Lynn Tetrault Executive VicePresident Human Resources and Corporate Affairs Employees by geographical area % EMEA 45.6 2 Sweden 12.8 3 Other EMEA 19.7 Americas 27.8 4 US 20 5 Canada 1.2 6 Other Americas 6.6 Asia Pacic 26.6 7 China 11.3 8 Japan 5.6 9 Other Asia Pacic 9.
Engagement score fell by three percentage points to 81% Performance  Business Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 44 Further developing leadership and management capabilities We encourage and support our people in achieving their full potential by providing a range of learning and development LandD programmes.
These are designed to build the capabilities and encourage the behaviours needed to deliver our business strategy.
We have a global approach supported by the creation of our global talent and development organisation to ensure that high standards of LandD practice are applied across AstraZeneca.
We continue to develop and deploy instructorled and online development resources which we aim to make available to all employees to increase access to learning and to support selfdevelopment.
We recognise the importance of good leadership and its critical role in stimulating high levels of performance and engagement.
Our leadership development frameworks are focused on the core capabilities that we believe are essential for strong and effective leadership.
These capabilities are dened for each level in the organisation and apply to all our employees.
We complement our leadership capabilities with a set of manager accountabilities which dene what we expect from our managers.
These manager accountabilities are further enabled across all markets through the deployment of our global HR platform.
Alongside judicious hiring of new leaders into critical senior roles the development of an internal pipeline of future global leaders is a high priority.
We identify individuals with the potential for more senior and complex roles.
These talent pools provide succession candidates for a range of leadership roles across AstraZeneca.
We regard these individuals as key assets to the organisation and we proactively support them to reach their potential through for example global talent development programmes and targeted development opportunities.
Changes to the Senior Executive Team announced in January 2013 included the promotion of six internal candidates and demonstrate our commitment to the development of senior leaders.
We remain committed to making full use of the talents and resource of all our people.
We have policies in place to avoid discrimination including on the grounds of disability.
Our policies cover recruitment and selection performance management career development and promotion transfer and training including retraining if needed for people who have become disabled and reward.
Improving the strength and diversity of the talent pipeline Our commitment to build an inclusive open and trusting organisation embracing the skills knowledge and unique ability of our employees.
Our objective to accelerate diversity and inclusion appropriately throughout the business build accountability and track progress.
Our target for 2015 is to improve female representation at senior manager level and above from 38%  to 43% in the global talent pool from 33% to 38% .
Our global workforce provides a diversity of skills capabilities and creativity and we value the benets that such diversity brings to our business.
We aim to foster a culture of respect and fairness where individual success depends solely on ability behaviour work performance and demonstrated potential.
As we continue to reshape our organisation and geographic footprint our challenge is to ensure that diversity in its broadest sense is reected in our workforce and leadership and integrated into our business and people strategies.
Within this context we support the representation of women at the highest levels in our business.
Women make up 50% of our global workforce giving us a real opportunity to develop female leaders.
Indeed there are currently three women on our Board 25% and below Board level women account for 40% of senior management.
Under the leadership of a global Diversity and Inclusion steering group chaired by a member of the SET and comprising senior leaders from across the business and geographies we are driving change in three key areas leadership and management capability transparency in talent management and career progression and worklife challenges.
In March 2012 we launched our Global Insight Exchange programme as a direct result of the work of the steering group.
This programme which consists of peertopeer mentoring of over 30 learning pairs of identied talent from different functional areas and geographies within our organisation is designed to accelerate the development of our leadership culture and talent pipeline through the exchange of diversity of thought and experience.
In addition we track gender representation at different levels of the organisation and country of origin representation of our senior leaders to measure progress over the medium term.
Driving employee engagement We use a variety of global leadership communication channels to engage employees in our business strategy.
These include facetoface meetings video conferencing and Yammer a social media tool to encourage twoway dialogue to take place.
For the third year in a row our annual global employee survey FOCUS included an open text feedback mechanism with around 25000 comments made on a variety of topics.
Sales and Marketing workforce composition % Emerging Markets Established Markets AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 45 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview FOCUS engagement scores We will continue to empower our leaders to drive performance to hold our managers accountable for understanding and delivering against the standards required and to provide the tools necessary to reward outstanding contributions.
Our focus on optimising performance is reinforced by performancerelated bonus and incentive plans.
AstraZeneca also encourages employee share ownership by offering the opportunity to participate in various employee share plans some of which are described in the Directors Remuneration Report from page 122 and also in Note 24 to the Financial Statements from page 179.
Human rights Our commitment to respect and promote international human rights in our operations and our sphere of inuence.
Our objective to ensure that human rights considerations are appropriately integrated into our policies processes and practices.
As reported in 2011 we have carried out labour reviews in 106 countries in which we have employees.
The reviews focused on International Labour Organization ILO core areas including freedom of association and collective bargaining child labour discrimination working hours and wages.
The framework for the review was provided by an adaptation of the employment section of the Danish Institute for Human Rights assessment tool for pharmaceutical companies which was developed with our industrys help and launched in 2010.
Results showed that our practices are generally consistent across all countries based on our mandate that our global standards are applied when external national standards do not meet our minimum requirements.
Some gaps to ILO standards have been identied and are being addressed as part of the review of our Global People Policy which is planned for 2014.
In 2012 91 % of our employees participated in the survey which measures levels of employee engagement and considers the effectiveness of our organisational leadership and management capabilities and satisfaction in terms of employees working environment.
Our employee engagement score decreased by three percentage points this year and our leadership communications and worklife balance scores also decreased.
The survey took place at a challenging time for the Group and the scores were disappointing.
We remained ahead of external pharmaceutical industry norms in areas such as motivation willingness to put in more effort than would normally be expected line management and operating with integrity and ethics.
However we recognise that we have more work to do in important areas such as strategic understanding and reducing organisational complexity to ensure AstraZeneca is a great place to work.
Local leadership teams have also identied actions designed to target any concerns specic to their organisational area.
A key element of our people strategy is the continued development of a performance culture across the organisation.
By strengthening our focus on setting high quality objectives aligned to our business strategy and ongoing coaching and feedback we strive to ensure that performance at all levels of the organisation delivers value.
The Board is responsible for setting our highlevel strategic objectives and monitoring performance against them see the Operation of the Board section on page 111.
Managers across AstraZeneca are accountable for working with their teams to develop individual and team performance targets and for ensuring that employees understand how they contribute to overall business objectives.
Managing change Recruitment in our Emerging Markets continues to be accompanied by headcount reductions in our Established Markets as a result of our continuing strategic drive to improve efciency and effectiveness.
Reductions have come about through restructuring in RandD supply and manufacturing support functions and our sales and marketing workforce.
The net effect of these changes since the end of 2006 has been to reduce our total headcount by some 15100 from 66800 to 51700.
This decrease includes a reduction of 2600 positions in 2010 5000 in 2011 and a further 6300 in 2012 which resulted from our business change plans announced since 2010.
We are committed to ensuring that AstraZenecas core values robust people policies consultation infrastructure and prior experience were integrated into this multifaceted business transformation.
Trade unions and employee representative groups were involved throughout the restructuring process.
With signicant investment in outplacement support high levels of success have been achieved in nding employees alternative opportunities outside AstraZeneca.
Further details are set out in the Our strategy section from page 20.
Extract from 2012 Responsible Business Plan.
Further information on AstraZenecas approach to responsible business can be found in the Responsible Business section from page 48 and on our websitesiteresponsibility.
Performance  Business Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 46 Managing employee relations We work to ensure a level of global consistency in managing employee relations while allowing enough exibility to support the local markets in building good relations with their workforces taking into account local laws and circumstances.
To that end relations with trade unions are nationally determined and managed locally in line with the applicable legal framework and standards of good practice.
However each change programme has its unique challenges and a standard solution may not always be appropriate.
Where this is the case the appropriate solution is developed through consultation with employee representatives or where applicable trade unions with the aim of retaining key skills and mitigating job losses.
Early in 2012 we implemented our Global Employment Standards which are linked to our Global People Policy.
Our Global Employment Standards serve to provide common and consistent expectations concerning the way in which our employees will be managed globally and cover matters including attendance employee concerns exible working leaving AstraZeneca misconduct performance improvement redeployment and redundancy and worklife balance.
Safety health and wellbeing Our commitment to promote a safe healthy and energising work environment in which our people and those from third parties working closely with us are able to express their talents drive innovation and improve business performance.
Our targets for 2012 included 0 fatalities combined lost time injuryillness rate per million hours worked of 2.38 7 .1 collisions per million kilometres driven.
Driver safety remains our highest priority for improvement and our focus is on promoting driver safety among our sales forces collectively the single largest group of employees who drive on AstraZeneca business.
Driver safety targets are included in regional and local scorecards.
Performance is monitored centrally to assess progress and identify areas for improvement.
In 2012 we missed our annual target for collisions per million kilometres driven.
We remain on track to achieve our 2015 target.
We regret that during 2012 two members of the public were killed in two separate road trafc accidents involving AstraZeneca drivers in Russia and Turkey.
Detailed investigations into both accidents have been carried out.
For the Russian accident an action plan was formulated to respond to the ndings of the investigation and those actions are being tracked.
The investigation report for the Turkish accident which occurred in October has not yet been nalised.
Learning from the investigations into both accidents will be shared widely across the Group.
In 2012 the lost time injuryillness rate increased by 3% from 2011.
However we remain on track to achieve our 2015 target of a 25% reduction in the lost time injuryillness rate from the 2010 baseline with an overall 21% reduction achieved so far.
Workrelated stress has been a particular focus for us in recent years in 2012 we achieved a signicant 59% reduction in the number of reportable cases compared to 2011.
We are continuing our efforts in this area using a riskbased approach including wellbeing risk assessment tools to identify highrisk areas and target interventions effectively.
Extract from 2012 Responsible Business Plan.
Further information on AstraZenecas approach to responsible business can be found in the Responsible Business section from page 48 and on our websitesite responsibility.
Vehicle collisions
Collisions million km Target 2015 5.6 2012 7.43 7.1 2011 8.73 7.7 Lost time injuryillness
Lost time injuryillness rate million hours worked Target 2015 1.91 2012 2.01 2.38 2011 1.96 2.49 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 47 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview
Employees acting with integrity When a potential compliance breach is identied an internal investigation is undertaken by appropriate staff from our Global Compliance HR andor Legal teams.
When appropriate external advisers are engaged to conduct andor advise on investigations.
Should the investigation conclude that an actual breach has occurred management in consultation with our Legal function will consider whether the Company needs to make a disclosure andor to report the ndings to a regulatory or governmental authority.
More information on GIA and our overall risk management and control framework can be found in the Corporate Governance Report from page 110.
Code of Conduct Our Code of Conduct the Code is at the core of our compliance programme and applies worldwide to all full and parttime AstraZeneca Directors ofcers employees and temporary staff.
It has been translated into over 40 languages and each employee has access to an electronic copy.
It provides clear direction as to how our commitment to honesty and integrity is to be realised in consistent actions across all areas of the business.
Compliance with the Code is mandatory and every employee receives training on it.
Every employee is required to comply with local laws and regulations as well as applicable national and international codes.
We always seek to operate at the highest of these various standards.
The
Code is regularly reviewed and updated to take account of changing legal and regulatory obligations.
The Code includes information on how to report possible violations of the Codesite Anyone who raises a possible breach in good faith is fully supported by management.
We take all alleged compliance breaches and concerns extremely seriously and investigate them and report the outcome of such investigations to the Audit Committee as appropriate.
In 2012 194 reports of alleged compliance breaches or other ethical concerns were made via telephonesite website or the Global Compliance email or postal addresses described in the Code.
In 2011 the number of reports through equivalent channels was 222.
This decrease is in the context of a signicant increase in management and selfreporting of compliance incidents which can be seen as an indication that employees are more comfortable in raising their concerns with line managers local HR Legal or Compliance as recommended in the Code and reinforced in the 2012 Code training.
As with the Code our Global Policies apply to all companies within our Group.
They provide clear and comprehensive guidance in plain language to all managers and employees as to their accountabilities in key ethical compliance and corporate responsibility risk areas.
Our Global Compliance function has been established to drive and embed a culture of ethics and integrity within our organisation.
Our key compliance priorities include focusing our efforts on important compliance risk areas communicating clear policies to employees improving compliance behaviours through effective training and support ensuring employees can raise concerns and that those concerns will be properly addressed ensuring fair and objective investigations of possible policy breaches monitoring and auditing compliance with policies providing key stakeholders with assurance and effective reporting of material issues.
These priorities are closely aligned to the Groups strategy and reect our drive to strengthen our efforts for oversight at all levels of our business including risk management relating to external parties and antibriberyanticorruption.
GIA and Global Compliance work closely with one another and both separately provide assurance reporting to the Audit
Our Global Compliance function also works together with a range of specialist compliance functions throughout our organisation to ensure ongoing legal and regulatory compliance.
In March 2012 we created a Group Compliance Council with membership drawn from Global Compliance and from the other specialist compliance functions whose purpose is to coordinate our compliance activities.
If people are to have condence in AstraZeneca we must be trusted as an organisation.
That trust is built on all employees acting with integrity in everything that they do on a daily basis  and feeling able to raise concerns about possible breaches of our Code of Conduct and our Global Policies.
Katarina Ageborg Chief Compliance Ofcer Performance  Business Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 48 Responsible Business A commitment to acting responsibly and to the sustainable development of our business In this section we describe our approach to delivering business success responsibly.
Summary information about our commitment and performance in key areas is integrated into the relevant sections of this Annual Report while further information about these and other areas is available on our websitesiteresponsibility.
Introduction
At AstraZeneca we are dedicated to the discovery development and commercialisation of prescription medicines that make a difference in healthcare.
For us this is at the core of our responsibility to our stakeholders and to society.
Successful pharmaceutical innovation delivered responsibly improves health for patients brings benets to stakeholders and delivers longterm shareholder value.
In the Strategy section from page 12 we describe our approach to creating value across the lifecycle of a medicine our distinctive capabilities and our strategy.
All these efforts are underpinned by our commitment to being a responsible company working with integrity and delivering sustainable business development that adds value for our stakeholders.
To that end our responsible business objectives are aligned to and support delivery of our business strategy.
Our Responsible Business Plan is our framework for managing our commitments and includes objectives targets and KPIs that are agreed across the Group taking account of external stakeholder insights and internal reputational risk assessment.
The Responsible Business Plan puts at the top of the agenda those areas most impacted by our business strategy which are as follows RandD Underpinning our accelerated drive for innovation with sound RandD ethics worldwide see page 33.
Patient safety Maintaining a strong focus on patient safety in everything we do minimising the risks and maximising the benets of all our medicines throughout RandD and after launch see page 34.
Access to healthcare As we expand our geographic footprint exploring ways of increasing access to healthcare for more people tailored locally to different patient needs see page 38.
Sales and marketing Working to consistent global standards of ethical sales and marketing practices in all our markets as we work to restore growth see page 39.
Diversity and inclusion Working to ensure that diversity in its broadest sense is reected in our leadership and people strategies see page 44.
Human rights Continuing to develop and embed a consistent approach to human rights across all our worldwide activities see page 45.
Employee safety health and wellbeing Promoting the safety health and wellbeing of all our people worldwide as we continue to drive a high performance culture and achievement of our business goals see page 46.
Working with suppliers Only working with suppliers who have standards consistent with our own as we increase our outsourcing to drive business efciency see page 42.
The environment Managing our impact on the environment across all our operations with a particular focus on carbon emissions waste and water use see page 42.
Community investment Making a positive contribution to our local communities around the world through community support programmes consistent with improving health and promoting science see page opposite.
A core element of our business strategy is valuecreating business development activity that strengthens our pipeline and accelerates growth.
This includes targeted acquisitions.
When we acquire companies we aim to work with them to align standards of responsible business and incorporate the companies into the setting of targets and measurement of performance.
This process can take time.
Thus for example responsible business data relating to Ardea acquired in June is not incorporated in this Annual Report.
Benchmarking
As expectations of stakeholders evolve we continue to engage with them and use the feedback to inform the development of our responsible business strategy and risk management planning.
We also use the insights we gain from external surveys to develop our approach in line with global best practice.
A member of the Dow Jones Sustainability Index since 2001 we were once again listed in the 2012 World Index the top 10% of the largest 2500 companies.
We also retained our listing on the DJSI STOXX  European index the top 20% of the 600 largest European companies for the fth year running one of only four pharmaceutical companies to do so out of 14 assessed.
We achieved a total score of 83% 2011 85% compared with a sector best score of 87% 2011 87%.
We increased individual scores for nine out of 22 criteria for 2012 compared to 14 out Being a responsible business is not an optional extra.
Despite the challenges we face as a business we remain committed to acting responsibly and our sustainable development.
In this way we can continue to be valued for what we do and trusted for the way we do it.
Nancy Rothwell NonExecutive Director with responsibility for overseeing Responsible Business AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 49 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview External assurance Bureau Veritas has provided external assurance on the responsible business information contained within this Annual Report on pages 3334 3839 42 4446 and below and of the performance related content of the Responsibility section of our website.
Based on the evidence provided and subject to the scope objectives and limitations dened in the full assurance statement nothing has come to the attention of Bureau Veritas causing them to believe that the responsible business information included within this Annual Report is materially misstated.
The full assurance statement which contains detailed scope methodology overall opinion and recommendations can be found on our websitesiteresponsibility.
Bureau Veritas is an independent professional services company that specialises in quality health safety social and environmental management with a long history of providing independent assurance services.
Community investment Our commitment to meet our responsibility as a global corporation to support the wider community maximising the benet of our investment for all stakeholders through focused investment and by embracing current best practice.
Our objective to extend the geographic reach of our Young Health Programme
Our target was to have 15 YHP country programmes running by the end of 2012 with a total target reach of 500000 adolescents by 2015.
In 2012 we spent a total of 1.18 billion 2011 1.06 billion on community investment sponsorships partnerships and charitable donations worldwide including our product donation and patient assistance programmes which make our medicines available free of charge or at reduced prices.
Through our three patient assistance programmes in the US we donated products valued at an average wholesale price of over 1.12 billion 2011 938 million.
We also donated products worth over 5.8 million valued at average wholesale price to charitable organisations Americares and Direct Relief International. and human capital development.
While these scores are encouraging we lost ground in some areas including innovation management and health outcomes contribution.
To better understand these lower scores we commissioned an indepth external benchmark survey and the analysis will be used to inform our improvement planning.
Responsible business governance The Board is responsible for our responsible business framework and NonExecutive Director Nancy Rothwell oversees implementation and reporting to the Board.
The SET and senior managers throughout the Group are accountable for operating responsibly within their areas taking into account national functional and site issues and priorities.
Line managers are accountable for ensuring that their teams understand the requirements and that people are clear about what is expected of them as they work to achieve AstraZenecas business goals.
Our Responsible Business Council the Council is chaired by our Executive VicePresident of Human Resources and Corporate Affairs and members include senior leaders from each relevant SET area.
Its agenda is focused on driving longterm value creation by agreeing among other things responsible business priorities for the Group in line with strategic business objectives managing and monitoring the annual process of setting responsible business objectives and targets recorded in the Responsible Business Plan as well as reviewing performance against KPIs appropriate policy positions to support AstraZenecas business objectives and reputation management.
The Council is supported by a Responsible Business Working Group the Working Group of SET area representatives.
Among other things the Working Group continuously reviews external issues with the potential to impact AstraZeneca and as appropriate prepares management and measurement proposals for the Councils consideration.
Our global community investment strategy focuses on two key areas healthcare in the community and science in education.
In 2012 we continued to expand our YHP country programme.
This is designed to help young people in need around the world deal with the health issues they face so they can improve their chances of living a better life.
We currently have 15 country programmes under way around the world.
Through YHP  we have reached over 250000 young people in communities across ve continents with health information.
Over 3000 of these young people have been trained to share this health information with their peers and with the community and over 2700 frontline health providers have completed training programmes in adolescent health.
We are on track to meet our Clinton Global Initiative commitment to reach 500000 young people by the end of 2015.
Initial ndings from the Wellbeing of Adolescents in Vulnerable Environments study being undertaken by Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health as part of YHP were presented at the World Health Summit in Berlin Germany in October.
As part of our best practice sharing our dedicated online resource site enables those working with young people to access information and resources created by the YHP partners.
Our support for science education takes a number of forms.
For example in 2011 we entered a three year partnership with Career Academies UK to support increased participation by 16 to 19yearolds in Science Technology Engineering and Maths STEM subjects with a target that onethird of Career Academies have a STEM theme by the 201415 academic year.
By the 201213 academic year the proportion was almost onequarter representing 48 Career Academies.
Our work with Career Academies UK complements the involvement we have had since 2003 with the STEM ambassador programme.
Extract from 2012 Responsible Business Plan.
Further information on AstraZenecas approach to responsible business can be found above and on our websitesiteresponsibility.
Figures restated to correct product donation data capture error in 2011.
Performance  Therapy Area Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 50 Therapy Area Review As outlined in the Strategy section from page 12 we are one of only a handful of companies to span the entire lifecycle of a medicine from discovery early and latestage development to the global commercialisation of primary specialty careled and specialty care medicines.
This Therapy Area Review reects the range of our activities.
This includes the work of our small molecule and biologics groups responsible for discovery and development projects up to and including Proof of Concept as well as our Global Medicines Development GMD organisation which progresses products through latestage development registration and postlaunch development activities.
This
Therapy Area Review also draws on the expertise of our Commercial organisation which ensures our science is connected with our customers needs.
We embed customer insights into our RandD strategy based on our interactions with healthcare providers patients regulators and payers.
This approach helps us to prioritise resources and optimise our portfolio thereby delivering medicines that customers value and which meet their needs.
While the focus of this Therapy Area Review is on our key marketed products many of our other established products are key to certain markets within Emerging Markets and taken together represent an important part of AstraZenecas business.
This process is summarised in the Lifecycle of a medicine diagram on page 14 and in the subsequent Business Review section from page 30 we explore how we apply our resources skills and capabilities to the various elements of that process in furtherance of our business strategy.
This Therapy Area Review contains information about the six Therapy Areas in which our efforts are focused Cardiovascular Gastrointestinal Infection Neuroscience Oncology and Respiratory and Inammation.
For each research area we review our pipeline from early projects through to launched brands.
We describe the business environment trends and other factors that have inuenced our decision to focus on diseases in these six areas our strategic objectives for each and our progress towards achieving these objectives.
We include information about our 2012 focus and key developments relating to our marketed medicines and how they are designed to make a meaningful difference for patients.
We also report on the potential new products and product lifecycle developments in our pipeline that reect our commitment to maintaining a ow of innovation that adds value for our shareholders and to society.
For a list of all our potential new products and product lifecycle developments see the Pipeline by Therapy Area table opposite and the Development Pipeline table from page 199.
For details of patent expiries of our key marketed products see the Patent expiries section on page 36.
Indications for each product described in this Therapy Area Review may vary from country to country and local prescribing information should be referred to for countryspecic indications for any particular product.
Many of our products are subject to litigation.
Information about material legal proceedings can be found in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
Details of relevant risks are set out in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 75.
Sales by Therapy Areatel
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Cardiovascular 9531 7 4 1021295 9403 Gastrointestinal 4852 12 11 5536 9 11 6088 Infection and other 1715 8 7 1856 15 15 2176 Neuroscience 3923 46 44 720475 6704 Oncology 3489 6 3 3705 8 12 4045 Respiratory and Inammation 4415 1 2 4468 9 6 4099 Other businesses 48 nm nm 610 19 22 754 Total 27973 17 15 33591 1 2 33269 Represents all other pharmaceutical product sales that are not in our six Therapy Areas.
Represents sales by Aptium Oncology of 48m 2011 224m 2010 219m and Astra Tech of nil 2011 386m 2010 535m.
The last portion of Aptium was sold in July.
Astra Tech was sold to DENTSPLY International Inc. on 31 August 2011.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 51 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Pipeline by Therapy Area at 31 December 2012 Phase I Phase II Phase III
Line extensions
AZD1722
BrilintaBrilique
Forxiga dapagliozin metreleptin
BrilintaBrilique EUCLID
PEGASUSTIMI 54 Bydureon EXSCEL Bydureon Dual Chamber Pen
Forxiga dapagliozin
Forxiga dapagliozin insulin add on
Forxiga dapagliozin triple therapy Kombiglyze XR Komboglyze FDC SaxaDapa FDC
SAVORTIMI 53
Entocort
Nexium pepticulcer bleeding
ATM AVI
MEDI557
MEDI559
AZD5847
CX L CAZ AVI
QLAIV Flu Vaccination
Neuroscience
AZD1446
AZD3293
MEDI5117
AZD3241
AZD3480
AZD5213
AZD6765 naloxegol
Diprivan
Oncology
AZD1208
AZD2014
AZD5363
AZD8330
ARRY
AZD9150
MEDI0639
MEDI3617
MEDI4736
MEDI565
MEDI6469 moxetumomab pasudotox volitinib
MEDI551
MEDI573
MEDI575 olaparib selumetinib
ARRY tremelimumab
Iressa
Respiratory and
AZD8848
AZD7594
MEDI2070
MEDI4212
MEDI551
MEDI5872
MEDI7814
MEDI9929
RDEA3170
AZD2115
AZD5069
AZD5423 benralizumab mavrilimumab
MEDI7183
MEDI8968 sifalimumab tralokinumab brodalumab fostamatinib lesinurad Symbicort BAI asthmaCOPD Partnered product.
Kombiglyze XR in the US Komboglyze FDC in the EU.
Key  showing movements in 2012
No change
New ling Approvedlaunched Performance  Therapy Area Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 52
Diabetes
Forxiga dapagliozin is a selective and reversible inhibitor of human sodium glucose cotransporter 2 SGLT2 inhibitor indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise as a once daily oral medication to improve glycaemic control in adult patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus as add on combination therapy or as monotherapy in metformin intolerant patients.
Komboglyze saxagliptin and metformin HCl is an immediate release xeddose combination indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycaemic control in adult patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus inadequately controlled on their maximally tolerated dose of metformin alone or those already being treated with the combination of saxagliptin and metformin as separate tablets.
Kombiglyze XR saxagliptin and metformin XR is an extended release xeddose combination indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycaemic control in adults with Type 2 diabetes mellitus when treatment with both saxagliptin and metformin is appropriate.
Onglyza
Byetta exenatide injection is an injectable medicine indicated to improve blood sugar glucose control along with diet and exercise in adults with Type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Bydureon exenatide extended release injectable suspension is an injectable medicine indicated to improve blood sugar glucose along with diet and exercise in adults with Type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Symlin pramlintide acetate is an injected amylin analogue for the treatment of Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes in patients with inadequate glycaemic control on mealtime insulin.
Licensed from Shionogi and Co.
Ltd.
Licensed from Takeda Chemicals Industries Ltd.
Licensed from Merck.
Codeveloped and cocommercialised with BMS.
Our marketed products Cardiovascular diseases hypercholesterolemia.
In some markets it is also indicated to slow the progression of atherosclerosis and to reduce the risk of rst cardiovascular CV events.
Atacand candesartan cilexetil is an angiotensin II antagonist used for the 1 st line treatment of hypertension and symptomatic heart failure.
SelokenToprolXL metoprolol succinate is a betablocker once daily tablet used for 24hour control of hypertension and for use in heart failure and angina.
Tenormin atenolol is a cardioselective betablocker used for hypertension angina pectoris and other CV disorders.
Plendil felodipine is a calcium antagonist used for the treatment of hypertension and angina.
Zestril lisinopril dihydrate is an angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitor used for the treatment of a wide range of CV diseases including hypertension.
Axanum acetylsalicylic acid ASA and esomeprazole is a xeddose combination indicated for prevention of CV events in highrisk CV patients in need of daily lowdose ASA treatment and who are at risk of gastric ulcers.
BrilintaBrilique ticagrelor is an oral antiplatelet for the treatment of acute coronary syndromes ACS.
Therapy area world market MATQ312 bn High blood pressure 51.15 2 Diabetes 40.97 3 Others 39.8 Abnormal levels of blood cholesterol 37 .25 5 Thrombosis 14.59 Wordwide market value AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 53 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Cardiovascular diseases Hypertension high blood pressure and dyslipidaemia abnormal levels of blood cholesterol damage the arterial wall which may lead to atherosclerosis.
CV events driven by atherosclerotic disease remain the leading cause of death in the western world.
Lipidmodifying therapy primarily statins is a cornerstone for the treatment of atherosclerosis.
Acute coronary syndromes ACS is an umbrella term for sudden chest pain and other symptoms due to insufcient blood supply ischaemia to the heart muscle.
ACS is the acute culmination of ischaemic heart disease.
There remains a signicant need to improve outcomes and reduce the costs of treating ACS.
Our 2012 focus Globally Crestor has continued to gain market share by value since its launch in 2003 with its differentiated prole in managing cholesterol levels and its more recent label indications for slowing the progression of atherosclerosis and reducing the risk of CV events in some markets.
AstraZeneca is one of the world leaders in cardiovascular CV medicines working to improve the treatment of diseases that cause 17 million deaths each year.
We aim to build on our strong position with a particular focus on thrombosis blood clotting atherosclerosis hardening of the arteries metabolic diseases and diabetes and its complications.
Despite improvements in the quality of diagnosis and treatment the unmet medical need remains high and these disease areas and their complications continue to grow worldwide both in Established Markets and Emerging Markets as a consequence of the spread of a westernised lifestyle.
We are developing potential new therapies using a variety of approaches including small molecules antibodies peptides and proteins to address unmet medical need in the treatment of obesity diabetes and heart disease.
Crestor is the only statin with an atherosclerosis indication in the US which is not limited by disease severity or restricted to patients with coronary heart disease. available in the market.
Fewer than half the people thought to have high levels of lowdensity lipoprotein cholesterol LDL C socalled bad cholesterol are diagnosed and treated.
Of treated patients only about half reach their doctors recommended cholesterol targets using existing treatments.
Study data has shown that the usual 10mg starting dose of Crestor is more effective at lowering LDL C and produces greater achievement of LDL C goals than commonly prescribed doses of other statins.
Crestor also produces an increase in highdensity lipoprotein cholesterol HDL C socalled good cholesterol across the dose range and has again been shown to reduce atherosclerotic plaque in the SATURN study published in 201 1.
Our nancial performance World US Western Europe Established ROW Emerging Markets Prior year
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
World sales Crestor 6253 6 4 3164 3 1156 6 2 1269 24 23 664  4 6622 SelokenToprolXL 918 7 4 320 21 70 18 12 30 21 21 Onglyza BrilintaBrilique nm nm 3 nm nm 12 nm nm 21 Byetta 74 nm nm 74 nm Bydureon 37 nm nm 37 nm Total 9531 7 4 4040 5 1975 16 10 1607 23 23 1909  4 10212 Crestor 6622 16 13 3074 16 1225 10 5 1691 Onglyza 21tel BrilintaBrilique 21 nm nm 11 nm 9 nm nm    1 nm nm Total 10212 9 5 3856 6 2356 6 1 2098 18 9 1902 9 8 9403 Includes Zestril For a detailed narrative explanation of the nancial performance of our products please see the Geographical Review from page 70.
Performance  Therapy Area Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 54 countries.
It has been approved in 88 countries including the US Canada and Brazil under the trade name Brilinta and in the EU Iceland and Norway under the trade name Brilique.
Additional marketing authorisations and regulatory submissions are planned for 2013.
Clinical studies GALAXY is our longterm global clinical research programme for Crestor investigating links between optimal lipid control atherosclerosis and CV morbidity and mortality.
The programme has completed over 29 studies involving approximately 64000 patients in over 57 countries.
The ongoing studies in GALAXY and our investigator sponsored studies programme aim to complete our understanding of the product prole for Crestor.
PEGASUSTIMI 54 a 21000 patient study is ongoing in over 30 countries.
The study examines the ability of BrilintaBrilique plus aspirin to prevent adverse CV events safely compared with aspirin alone in higherrisk patients one to three years after a heart attack.
In July AstraZeneca announced plans to conduct the EUCLID study a global clinical trial involving 11500 patients with peripheral artery disease PAD a condition affecting approximately 27 million people in Europe and North America.
EUCLID which began enrolling patients in early 2013 is a randomised doubleblind parallel group multicentre study evaluating the efcacy of BrilintaBrilique monotherapy compared to clopidogrel monotherapy in reducing the primary endpoint  a composite of CV death myocardial infarction or ischaemic stroke  in patients with PAD.
Both PEGASUSTIMI 54 and EUCLID are part of the PARTHENON programme an AstraZenecafunded comprehensive longterm and evolving global research initiative designed to address unanswered questions in atherothrombotic disease and to investigate the impact of Brilinta Brilique on reducing CV events and death.
The PARTHENON programme is part of AstraZenecas commitment to understand and advance treatments for CV diseases in an effort to improve Crestor continues to face increasing challenges from generic products.
Patents protecting Crestor have been subject to a number of challenges in different jurisdictions.
Details of these matters are included in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
Atacand continues to be an important treatment option for patients with hypertension and symptomatic heart failure.
Atacand is approved for the treatment of hypertension in over 125 countries and for symptomatic heart failure in more than 70 countries.
Most patients with hypertension fail to reach their treatment goals with the use of a single antihypertensive treatment and xeddose combinations of two or more anti hypertensives are commonly prescribed for patients to improve efcacy and attainment of treatment goals.
Atacand Plus candesartan cilexetilhydrochlorothiazide is a xeddose combination of Atacand and the diuretic hydrochlorothiazide indicated for the treatment of hypertension in patients who require more than one antihypertensive therapy.
Atacand Plus is approved in 99 countries.
Axanum is a single capsule of lowdose ASA and esomeprazole the active ingredient in Nexium.
It is indicated for prevention of CV events in highrisk CV patients in need of daily lowdose ASA treatment and who are at risk of gastric ulcers.
Lowdose ASA is a mainstay of therapy for patients at high risk of having a CV event such as a heart attack or stroke.
Up to 30% of highrisk CV patients identied as being at gastrointestinal GI risk discontinue or take deliberate breaks from their lowdose ASA and one of the main reasons is GI problems placing them at risk of a CV event after discontinuation.
Following the rst national approval in the EU in August 2011 Axanum is now approved in 27 countries and has been launched in 11 countries.
BrilintaBrilique is an oral antiplatelet treatment for ACS in a new chemical class called cyclopentyltriazolopyrimidines which are selective adenosine diphospate ADP receptor antagonists that act on the P2Y12 ADPreceptor.
BrilintaBrilique remains under regulatory review in 23 patient health.
The benet of BrilintaBrilique on CV thrombotic events including CV mortality observed in patients who have had an ACS event supports continued study in other areas of CV disease.
The current PARTHENON programme is designed to include more than 51000 patients worldwide.
Diabetes
Type 2 diabetes is a chronic progressive disease and patients often require multiple medications to control their condition.
The disease continues to grow as a consequence of western lifestyles and it increasingly affects people at a younger age.
There are a number of established oral generic and branded classes such as biguanides and sulfonylureas.
However newer classes such as oral dipeptidyl peptidase IV DPPIV inhibitors and GLP1 agonists are successfully entering the market by offering effective blood sugar control and improved tolerability.
Several new classes of drugs are in development in this area including sodiumglucose cotransporter 2 SGLT2.
CV safety of these new classes has been given particular emphasis in recent regulatory reviews and guidance documents provided by the FDA and other regulatory authorities.
Our 2012 focus AstraZeneca continues its worldwide diabetes alliance with BMS to codevelop and cocommercialise two compounds discovered by BMS Onglyza and Forxiga for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes.
Onglyza is a DPPIV inhibitor used for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes and has been submitted for regulatory review in 94 countries and approved in 81 including the US Canada Mexico the EU India Brazil and China.
Forxiga is a rstinclass SGLT2 inhibitor developed with BMS as a once daily oral therapy for the treatment of adult patients with Type 2 diabetes.
In November Forxiga was approved in the EU to improve glycaemic control in adult patients with Type 2 diabetes.
Forxiga is intended to be used as an adjunct to diet and exercise in combination with other glucoselowering medicinal products including insulin or AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 55 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Byetta a twice daily injectable medicine indicated to improve blood sugar glucose control along with diet and exercise in adults with Type 2 diabetes mellitus has been submitted for regulatory review in 92 countries and approved in 88 including the US the EU and Japan.
Bydureon which is a weekly injectable medicine indicated to improve blood sugar glucose along with diet and exercise in adults with Type 2 diabetes mellitus has been submitted for regulatory review in 51 countries and approved in 39 including the US the EU and Japan.
Symlin an injected amylin analogue for the treatment of Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes in patients with inadequate glycaemic control on mealtime insulin is approved in the US.
During the year our research activities on antiarrhythmics to treat atrial brillation were terminated.
In the pipeline We expanded our CV research to include End Stage Renal Disease ESRD and Chronic Kidney Disease CKD with the licensing of an NHE3 inhibitor from Ardelyx.
The NHE3 inhibitor is a novel approach to treating sodium and uid retention in patients with renal impairment.
Metreleptin is a leptin analogue under development for the treatment of rare forms of inherited or acquired lipodystrophy an orphan disease characterised by the deterioration or loss of the bodys adipose tissue.
This compound is part of the Amylin portfolio that AstraZeneca and BMS are codeveloping.
Completion of the Biologics Licence Application submission to the FDA is anticipated in the rst half of 2013. patients.
With the European approval Forxiga is now approved in 31 countries with six additional countries under regulatory review.
Additional submissions are planned for 2013.
In January 2012 AstraZeneca and BMS received a Complete Response Letter from the FDA requesting additional clinical data to allow a better assessment of the benet risk prole for Forxiga.
AstraZeneca and BMS have since had discussions with the FDA which have resulted in a path forward for NDA resubmission.
Additional data from ongoing clinical studies will be submitted to further support the benetrisk prole of Forxiga with resubmission targeted for mid2013.
Komboglyze an immediate release xeddose combination indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycaemic control in adult patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus inadequately controlled on their maximally tolerated dose of metformin alone or those already being treated with the combination of saxagliptin and metformin as separate tablets has been submitted for regulatory review in 34 countries and is approved in the EU plus Norway Iceland Liechtenstein Switzerland and Canada.
Kombiglyze XR an extended release xeddose combination indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycaemic control in adults with Type 2 diabetes mellitus when treatment with both saxagliptin and metformin is appropriate has been submitted for regulatory review in 38 countries and is approved in 17 countries including the US Brazil Mexico and India.
In August AstraZeneca and BMS conrmed that following the completion of BMSs acquisition of Amylin AstraZeneca and BMS had expanded their worldwide diabetes alliance to include the co development and cocommercialisation of Amylins portfolio of products related to diabetes and other metabolic diseases with a primary focus on a franchise of GLP1 agonists for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes.
The products include Byetta Bydureon and Symlin.
Clinical studies The SAVORTIMI 53 saxagliptin assessment of vascular outcomes recorded in patients with diabetes mellitus trial which has completed recruitment is designed to determine whether treatment with Onglyza when added to a patients current standard of care will result in a reduction in a composite CV endpoint CV death nonfatal myocardial infarction nonfatal ischaemic stroke compared to placebo.
This trial involving 16500 adult patients with Type 2 diabetes with a history of established CV disease or multiple risk factors is also designed to full a postmarketing requirement for the FDA.
In June AstraZeneca and BMS announced results from a Phase III clinical study that showed that Forxiga 10mg demonstrated signicant reductions in blood sugar levels glycosylated haemoglobin levels or HbA1c compared with placebo at 24 weeks when either agent was added to existing sitagliptin therapy with or without metformin in adult patients with Type 2 diabetes.
The results were maintained over a 24 week extension and similar results were observed when the data was analysed by subjects background therapy.
The study also demonstrated signicant reductions in total body weight and fasting plasma glucose levels in patients taking Forxiga added to sitagliptin with or without metformin with results maintained throughout the duration of the study extension.
EXSCEL EXenatide Study of Cardiovascular Event Lowering is designed to determine if there are favourable CV effects of exenatide treatment using Bydureon exenatide extended release injectable suspension.
The EXSCEL study started in 2010 and is planned to run until 2017 .
The study has enrolled patients during 2012 and is designed for 9500 patients.
By 2030 almost 25 million people will die from CV disease mainly from heart disease and stroke.
CV diseases are projected to remain the single leading cause of death.
Source WHO Fact Sheet September 2012 347 million people worldwide have diabetes.
WHO projects that diabetes deaths will increase by 60% between 2008 and 2030.
25m 347m Performance  Therapy Area Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 56
Our nancial performance World US Western Europe Established ROW Emerging Markets Prior year
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
World sales Nexium 3944 11 10 2272 5 417 45 41 476 12 11 779 7 11 4429 Others 17 11 6   Total 4852 12 11 2447 4 643 39 34 798 20 19 964 1 4 5536 Nexium 4429 11 12 2397 11 762 37 39 969 Others  2   133 Total 5536 9 11 2536 10 1050 30 33 088 Our marketed products Nexium esomeprazole magnesium is the rst proton pump inhibitor PPI used for the treatment of acidrelated diseases to offer clinical improvements over other PPIs and other treatments.
LosecPrilosec omeprazole is used for the shortterm and longterm treatment of acidrelated diseases.
Entocort budesonide is a locally acting corticosteroid used for the treatment of inammatory bowel disease.
For a detailed narrative explanation of the nancial performance of our products please see the Geographical Review from page 70.
Therapy area world market MATQ312 bn 1 PPI proton pump inhibitors 22.1 2 Other 15.94 38bn Worldwide market value AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 57 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview In August AstraZeneca announced that it had entered into an agreement with Pzer for the OTC rights for Nexium.
Under the terms of the agreement Pzer will acquire the exclusive global rights to market Nexium for OTC indications worldwide.
Nexium continues to face increasing challenges from generic products.
Patents protecting Nexium have been subject to a number of challenges in different jurisdictions.
Details of these matters are included in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
LosecPrilosec used for the shortterm and longterm treatment of acidrelated diseases was rst launched in 1988 and is approved for the treatment of GERD and other indications.
We continue to maintain certain patent property covering Losec
LosecPrilosec is available both as a prescriptiononly medication and in some countries as an OTC medication where it offers consumers a more effective selfmedication option for the treatment of heartburn compared with antacids and H 2receptor antagonists.
In October AstraZeneca and Ironwood announced an agreement to codevelop and cocommercialise in China Ironwoods product linaclotide a guanylate cyclaseC GCC agonist used for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome with constipation IBSC and chronic idiopathic constipation CIC in China.
Ironwood markets the product under the name Linzess in the
Clinical trial applications for linaclotide have been led with the SFDA.
In the pipeline Our activities in the eld of inammatory bowel disease include clinical stage testing of two antibodies in collaboration with Amgen that target IL 13 and a4b7 .
In addition we have expanded our GI research to include IBS and IBD with the NHE3 inhibitor programme including the lead compound RDX5791 which we licensed from Ardelyx in October.
We aim to develop our position in gastrointestinal GI treatments by continuing to focus on our existing proton pump inhibitors PPIs and the development of new therapies for irritable bowel syndrome IBS and inammatory bowel disease IBD.
Our 2012 focus Nexium is marketed in more than 125 countries and is available in oral tablet capsule and sachet for oral suspension and intravenous i. treatment of acidrelated diseases.
Nexium is also approved for use in children from the age of one month in the US and from the age of one year in Europe and other markets.
Nexium capsules were launched in Japan in September 2011 after a Japanspecic development programme.
Nexium is an effective shortterm and longterm therapy for patients with gastroesophageal reux disease GERD.
Nexium is also approved for the healing and prevention of ulcers associated with NSAID therapy and for the treatment of patients with the rare gastric disorder ZollingerEllison syndrome.
Nexium in combination with antibiotics is also approved for use for the treatment of duodenal ulcers caused by Helicobacter pylori infection in the US Europe and other markets.
Nexium is also approved for this use in children from the age of four years approvals vary between countries.
Nexium i. is not suitable.
Nexium i. of one year in Europe and other markets.
In addition it is approved in Europe and other markets for the prevention of pepticulcer bleeding.
In developed countries the prevalence range for GERD is 10% to 20% of the population.
10%20% Performance  Therapy Area Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 58 Our nancial performance World US Western Europe Established ROW Emerging Markets Prior year
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
World sales Synagis 1  975 FluMist nm nm 3 nm nm 1   161 Synagis 975 6 6 570 12 404 3 3    1   1038 Non Seasonal Flu 7 82 82 7 82          39 Others nm nm 20  25 Total 1856 15 15 848 19 593 18 19 73 5 17 342 5 6 2176 For a detailed narrative explanation of the nancial performance of our products please see the Geographical Review from page 70.
Our marketed products Respiratory syncytial virus RSV Synagis palivizumab is a humanised MAb used for the prevention of serious lower respiratory tract disease caused by RSV in paediatric patients at high risk of acquiring RSV disease.
Serious bacterial infections skin and soft tissue infections CSSTI.
Cubicin daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide antibacterial used for the treatment of serious infections in hospitalised patients.
MerremMeronem meropenem is a carbapenem antibacterial used for the treatment of serious infections in hospitalised patients.
Inuenza virus FluMistFluenz inuenza vaccine live intranasal is an intranasal live attenuated trivalent inuenza vaccine.
Licensed from Forest.
Licensed from Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Licensed from Dainippon Sumitomo.
Therapy area world market MATQ312 bn Antibacterials 36.91 2 Antivirals 28.67 3 Vaccines 13.75 4 Others 7.57 5 Antifungals 4.23 1bn Worldwide market value Infection AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 59 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview immunoprophylaxis in the marketplace indicated for the prevention of RSV in paediatric patients at high risk of serious RSV disease.
Synagis is administered by intramuscular injection.
In the pipeline We are developing a live intranasal vaccine for the prevention of lower respiratory tract illness caused by RSV in otherwise healthy infants.
The lead vaccine candidate in clinical development is in Phase I.
Serious bacterial infections World demand for antibiotics and novel therapeutic approaches remains high and will continue to grow due to escalating resistance and the increased risk of serious infections in both immunosuppressed patients and ageing populations.
Many bacterial infections currently have few satisfactory treatment options prompting demand for new and better therapies.
Our discovery and early development platforms focus on the identication of pathogendirected approaches with a particular emphasis on multidrug resistant gramnegatives and methicillin resistant staphylococcus aureus MRSA.
Our 2012 focus Zinforo is a novel injectable cephalosporin developed in collaboration with Forest which is approved for use in the EU.
Zinforo provides broad coverage against common causative pathogens such as staphylococcus aureus including MRSA a cause of serious and difcult to treat complicated skin infections streptococci in complicated skin infections and streptococcus pneumoniae and methicillinsensitive staphylococcus aureus MSSA in community acquired pneumonia.
Forest markets ceftaroline in the US under the brand name Tearo.
In August the European Commission granted marketing authorisation for Zinforo.
This makes Zinforo the only approved cephalosporin monotherapy in the EU with demonstrated clinical efcacy against MRSA in difcult to treat complicated skin infections.
We aim to build a leading franchise in the treatment of infectious diseases through continued commercialisation of brands such as Synagis Merrem Meronem FluMistFluenz and Cubicin the registration and launch of Zinforo in the EU and through our other ongoing development programmes.
We also aim to make effective use of our structural and genomicbased discovery technologies and antibody platforms vaccines and continued small molecule and biologics research into novel approaches in areas of unmet medical need.
Complementing our biologics capabilities we are building a small molecule antiviral platform based on inhouse capabilities and external collaborations focused on respiratory viruses such as respiratory syncytial virus RSV and human rhinovirus.
Respiratory syncytial virus Approximately half of all infants are infected with RSV during the rst year of life and nearly all children in the US have been infected by the time they reach their second birthday.
RSV is the most common virus that causes lung and airway infections in infants and young children.
It is the leading cause of hospitalisations and admissions to paediatric intensive care units in the rst year of life.
Premature babies earlier than 36 weeks gestational age especially those less than 32 weeks and babies with chronic lung disease or congenital heart disease are at increased risk of contracting serious RSV disease than fullterm healthy babies.
Our 2012 focus Synagis is used for the prevention of serious lower respiratory tract disease caused by RSV in children at high risk of the disease.
It was the rst MAb approved in the US for an infectious disease and has become the global standard of care for RSV prevention.
Approved in 83 countries worldwide Synagis remains the only Cubicin is used for the treatment of serious grampositive infections in hospitalised patients and is sold by AstraZeneca in selected territories in Asia Europe and the Middle East.
Cubicin was submitted for marketing approval by the SFDA in China in September for the additional indication of complicated skin and skin structure infections.
MerremMeronem remains the leading carbapenem antibacterial which is approved in most countries outside Japan.
AZD9773 formerly known as CytoFab was a potential treatment for severe sepsis licensed from Protherics Inc. of the BTG plc group.
In August further development of AZD9773 was halted after negative Phase llb study results.
In the pipeline Following the acquisition of Novexel in 2010 we are working with Forest on future joint global development programmes including CAZ AVI a combination of ceftazidime and avibactam CXL a combination of ceftaroline and avibactam and ATM AVI a combination of aztreonam and avibactam.
The CAZ AVI Phase III programme was initiated in 2011 and includes seven trials to conrm the efcacy and tolerability of CAZ AVI in adult patients with complicated intraabdominal infections complicated urinary tract infections or nosocomial pneumonia.
Patients with infections which are resistant to commonly used antibiotics will also be included in the Phase III programme.
CXL is in Phase II development for serious infections where coverage against MRSA and streptococci as well as common gramnegative resistant strains is required.
Our early research and development efforts aim to address multiresistant bacterial strains expressing metallobetalactamases for which very few if any treatment options exist.
We are collaborating with regulatory authorities to design the clinical trials for these programmes.
Performance  Therapy Area Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 60 Inuenza virus Inuenza is the most common vaccine preventable disease in the developed world.
According to WHO estimates seasonal inuenza results in three to ve million cases of severe illness and up to half a million deaths globally each year primarily among the elderly.
Rates of infection are highest among children.
Our 2012 focus FluMist is a trivalent live attenuated nasally delivered vaccine approved for the prevention of disease caused by inuenza virus subtypes A and B in eligible children and adults.
FluMist is approved for eligible individuals in seven countries including the US Canada and Brazil.
In February 2012 AstraZeneca received approval from the FDA for FluMist Quadrivalent inuenza vaccine live intranasal formerly known as MEDI3250 in the prevention of inuenza.
This marks the rst fourstrain inuenza vaccine and the only intranasal fourstrain vaccine approved by the FDA.
Most other approved seasonal inuenza vaccines currently available in the US are trivalent containing three strains two strains of type A inuenza AH1N1 and AH3N2 and one B lineage strain.
FluMist Quadrivalent contains four strains two type A strains and two type B lineages to help provide broad protection against circulating inuenza A and B.
In the pipeline The MAA for the quadrivalent live attenuated inuenza vaccine formerly known as MEDI3250 was submitted in September in the EU.
Neglected tropical diseases As part of our commitment to make a contribution to improving health in the developing world we are working to nd new improved treatments for neglected tropical diseases.
Our strategy is collaborative and seeks to leverage internal investment and expertise in tuberculosis TB and malaria.
For other neglected tropical diseases we participate in open innovation and knowledgesharing platforms enabling the use of AstraZeneca assets and infrastructure by external partners.
TB remains a complex research area in which collaborations play an important role.
Our discovery collaboration with the Global Alliance for TB Drug Development continues to work towards progressing suitable compounds through to the lead optimisation stage.
Research funded by a Wellcome Trust grant under the RandD for Affordable Healthcare in India initiative which will be used to identify novel lead molecules for the treatment of TB continues.
Our most advanced programme AZD5847 a novel antitubercular oxazolidinone antibiotic progressed to Phase IIa trials in South Africa with support from The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
Malaria is another disease for which there remains a tremendous medical need.
Our collaboration with Medicines for Malaria Ventures has progressed during 2012 according to plan and is currently focused on the discovery of a new class of malaria medicines.
We anticipate that this collaboration will continue to progress through discovery stages in 2013.
In 2012 we extended our range of external collaborations with new screening agreements with the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine and the Drugs for Neglected Diseases Initiative.
In these collaborations AstraZeneca shares compounds with external partners with a view to identifying new leads against a variety of diseases of the developing world including leishmaniasis sleeping sickness river blindness and Chagas disease.
We also actively participated in the WIPO ReSearch initiative promoting open innovation for the discovery of novel treatments.
According to a 2008 study every year at least 25000 patients in the EU alone die from an infection caused by multidrug resistant bacteria and estimated additional healthcare costs and productivity losses are at least 1.5 billion.
Worldwide annual epidemics of influenza result in about three to five million cases of severe illness and up to 500000 deaths.
Source left WHO Bulletin Volume 89 2011 Source above WHO Fact Sheet April 2009 25000 5m AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 61 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview as diagnostic procedures.
Vimovo naproxenesomeprazole magnesium 3752050020mg delayed release tablet is generally approved for symptomatic relief in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis osteoarthritis and ankylosing spondylitis in patients at risk of developing NSAIDassociated gastric andor duodenal ulcers.
Naropin ropivacaine is used as a longacting local anaesthetic for surgical anaesthesia and acute pain management.
Xylocaine lidocaine is a widely used shortacting local anaesthetic for topical and regional anaesthesia.
EMLA lidocaine and prilocaine is used as a local anaesthetic for topical application to prevent pain associated with injections and supercial surgical procedures.
Licensed from Pozen.
Our marketed products
Seroquel IR quetiapine fumarate is an atypical antipsychotic drug generally approved for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder mania depression and maintenance.
Seroquel XR an extended release formulation of quetiapine fumarate is generally approved for the treatment of schizophrenia bipolar disorder major depressive disorder MDD and in some countries for generalised anxiety disorder
Analgesia and anaesthesia Zomig zolmitriptan is used for the acute treatment of migraines with or without aura and Zomig Nasal Spray is indicated for the acute treatment of cluster headache in some territories.
Diprivan propofol is an intravenous general anaesthetic used in the induction and maintenance of general anaesthesia Therapy area world market MATQ312 bn Psychiatry 62.18 2 Neurology 44.27 3 Analgesia 32.95 4 Anaesthesia 5.94 Our nancial performance World US Western Europe Established ROW Emerging Markets Prior year
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
World
Sales
Seroquel XR 19 2 490 Vimovo nm nm 34 Others nm 11 35 29 1 33 33 Total 3923 46 44 1561 64 1038 32 27 653 4 4 671 1 4 7204 Seroquel XR 1154 Seroquel IR 4338 5 3 3344 8 546 3 8 228 2 8 220 15 17 4148 Zomig 413 4 7 158 10 174 1 4 68 1 9 Vimovo 34 nm nm 21 nm 6 nm nm 6 nm nm 1 nm nm 5 Others 33 21 24 1  17 37 41 3   Total 7204 7 5 4325 8 1 6704 For a detailed narrative explanation of the nancial performance of our products please see the Geographical Review from page 70.
Wordwide market value Performance  Therapy Area Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 62 There is still signicant unmet medical need in the areas of chronic pain cognitive disorders and other serious central nervous system disorders.
Our aim is to strengthen our position in neuroscience through our experience with Seroquel XR and to discover and develop new drug candidates with meaningful therapeutic advantages primarily in Alzheimers disease neuropathic pain control and depression.
Many of these debilitating illnesses have no effective treatments and for others current therapies are poorly effective leaving major unmet medical need.
Rapid progress is being made in understanding diseases of the brain driven by technological advances in elds including genetics cell biology imaging and informatics.
However despite these advances there have been very few novel treatments delivered during the last 10 to 15 years and it is clear that a new way of working is required which captures advances in neuroscience and harnesses them through the drug development lifecycle.
AstraZeneca responded in 2012 by creating a new neuroscience Innovative Medicines Unit Virtual iMed made up of a team of approximately 40 scientists conducting discovery and development externally through a network of partners in academia and industry.
The team is based in Cambridge Massachusetts US and Cambridge UK.
The locations are strongly associated with neuroscience research and the team works closely with partners such as the Karolinska Institute in Sweden.
The Virtual iMed is designed to be exible independent and lean in its structure.
Scientists are empowered to make decisions quickly.
The team is focused on target identication to Proof of Concept studies with high level focus on personalised medicine and innovative approaches to early clinical development.
The Virtual iMed is designed to bring together scientic advances of the biotechnology and academic world and to develop their potential through the scientic commercial and geographical reach of AstraZeneca.
We will consider any treatments for psychiatric neurological or analgesic disorders affecting the central or peripheral nervous system which have a solid scientic basis a high probability to deliver meaningful new medicines to patients and will provide an acceptable return on investment.
We will be looking at indications that affect smaller numbers of patients.
We will focus on selected populations of patients whose disease biology makes them ideally suited for a particular treatment and we will test our therapeutic candidates in those populations rst.
Where treatments show promise in such selected patient groups we will include a broader range of patients with the same disease or other disease states that might benet from the approach.
For example a treatment that works on a fundamental disease process in neurons that eventually causes neurodegeneration might be best examined initially in patients with Huntingtons disease.
That same therapy could be as well suited for Parkinsons disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ALS or other disorders.
Neurology
Alzheimers disease remains one of the largest areas of unmet medical need.
Product development in this therapy area is particularly difcult due in part to the challenges of establishing efcacy in clinical studies.
Current treatments which doctors consider inadequate target the symptoms not the underlying cause of the disease.
Most if not all marketed treatments will face patent expiry by 2015.
Disease modication delivered through biologics andor small molecule treatments is clearly the hope for Alzheimers disease patients and for patients with other neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinsons disease.
Combined with better diagnostics disease modiers in both areas are expected to allow for earlier intervention and better clinical outcomes.
Unfortunately the rst wave of disease modiers is still several years away.
In the pipeline Alzheimers disease is dened and characterised by the presence of the protein amyloid beta Abeta deposits in the brain.
Present understanding of the pathophysiology of Alzheimers disease suggests that alterations in Abeta production distribution or aggregation lead to Abeta deposition which in turn impacts neuronal viability and function.
A second protein altered in Alzheimers disease is tau.
Our portfolio comprises small molecule and biologic projects addressing both tau and amyloid as well as exploring new mechanisms based on the developments in disease understanding.
Our research pipeline is also exploiting opportunities presented by emerging biologic therapies and contains projects directed at modulating protein accumulation and signalling for a number of neurodegenerative diseases.
In addition the continued progress of technology platforms directed at facilitating the transport of macromolecules into the central nervous system compartment may provide benets to patient health.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 63 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Through our collaborations with the Karolinska Institute in Sweden the Banner Alzheimers Institute in the US the National Institute of Radiological Sciences in Japan and others our RandD capabilities in positron emission tomography PET imaging of the human brain continues to progress.
AstraZenecas amyloid PET ligands may enable us to detect Alzheimers disease early and to assess drug effects in Alzheimers disease.
We have discovered and taken into patient studies one F18 and two C11 amyloid PET ligands which are being developed as research biomarkers.
A new alliance involving several academic centres named A5 is a novel open architecture alliance with four leading academicians that was launched in July to investigate potential new Alzheimers disease treatments.
The initiative is focused on the role of apoliprotein E ApoE in Alzheimers disease.
ApoE is considered second only to age as a risk factor for the development of Alzheimers disease.
Drug discovery efforts involving ApoE have been hampered by challenging biology and a lack of suitable in vivo models.
In addition to ApoE the A5 alliance will focus on identication validation and risk reduction of other drug targets for treatment of Alzheimers disease.
Psychiatry
Globally more than 350 million people of all ages suffer from depression WHO 2012.
Despite this psychiatric illness remains underdetected underdiagnosed and undertreated and current treatments leave substantial unmet medical need.
Three National Institute of Mental Health sponsored effectiveness studies in the US have reported treatment response rates in depression bipolar disorder and schizophrenia to be less than 50% with low around 30% rates of remission and poor compliance.
Clear opportunities exist for novel approaches targeting dened patient subgroups not adequately treated with current generic broad spectrum agents.
Our 2012 focus Seroquel XR has been approved in 85 countries for schizophrenia 81 countries for bipolar mania 72 countries for bipolar depression 61 countries for bipolar maintenance 65 countries for major depressive disorder MDD and nine countries for generalised anxiety disorder.
Patents protecting Seroquel XR have been subject to a number of challenges in different jurisdictions.
In some cases the patents have been found to be invalid.
Details of these matters are included in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
In March 2012 topline results from the remaining Phase III studies investigating efcacy tolerability and safety of TC5214 as an adjunct therapy to an antidepressant in patients with MDD who did not respond adequately to initial antidepressant treatment were released.
RENAISSANCE 4 and RENAISSANCE 5 both of which are efcacy and tolerability studies did not meet the primary endpoint of change on the MontgomeryAsberg Depression Rating Scale total score after eight weeks of adjunct treatment with TC5214 as compared to placebo.
These studies conclude the RENAISSANCE programme for TC5214.
Based on the totality of the results AstraZeneca and Targacept decided not to pursue a regulatory ling for TC5214 as an adjunct treatment for patients with MDD.
We terminated the TC5214 collaboration with Targacept with all rights and licences granted under the licence agreement reverting to Targacept.
In the pipeline AZD6765 a lowtrapping NMDA NmethylDaspartate channel blocker to address the needs of patients with severe treatmentrefractory depression has progressed into Phase IIb development.
Phase IIa results presented in December demonstrated antidepressant efcacy following single and repeated intravenous infusions in patients who have shown inadequate response to multiple oral therapies.
An ongoing Phase IIb study is designed to establish a chronic treatment regimen in this difcult to treat patient population.
Additional earlystage research programmes are also focusing on this area.
Analgesia and anaesthesia The small number of currently approved products in the neuropathic pain market will come off patent between 2014 and 2017 .
However few new products are in development and the unmet medical need for improvements in both efcacy and tolerability is such that the market remains highly attractive.
In Asia neuropathic pain drugs are gaining approval shifting cultural and medical treatment barriers.
The chronic nociceptive pain market including osteoarthritis and chronic low back pain is steadily growing due to ageing populations combined with longer life expectancy across all regions including Asia.
Opioids are considered the gold standard for efcacy for moderate to severe pain across pain segments.
However opioid pain control comes with unwanted side effects such as bowel dysfunction.
There remains a high unmet medical need for products that enable continued opioid pain control by reducing or eliminating side effects.
Performance  Therapy Area Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 64 Biologics are an emerging treatment option for pain control and this is an area in which we have an active interest.
It is believed that advances in the understanding of the mechanisms which lead to neuropathic pain will allow for improved patient segmentation and potential increases in the success rate of drug development.
We are exploring smaller treatments in focused pain areas where patients can be selected on the basis of symptomatic characteristics within the overall development and regulatory approach.
Our 2012 focus Vimovo 3752050020mg delayedrelease tablets codeveloped by AstraZeneca and Pozen is a xeddose combination of entericcoated naproxen an NSAID and immediaterelease esomeprazole a stomach acidreducing proton pump inhibitor PPI.
Vimovo is generally approved for symptomatic relief in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis osteoarthritis and ankylosing spondylitis in patients at risk of developing NSAIDassociated gastric andor duodenal ulcers.
Vimovo is also indicated for treatment in patients where lower doses of naproxen or of other NSAIDs are not considered sufcient.
Following FDA approval in April 2010 Vimovo launched in the US in July 2010.
In October Vimovo received positive agreement for approval in 23 European member states.
In the pipeline Naloxegol formerly NKTR118 licensed from Nektar Therapeutics is a once daily oral peripherally acting opioid receptor antagonist under investigation for treatment of opioidinduced constipation OIC as a side effect of prescription opioid pain medication.
Positive topline results from two Phase III trials and one safety extension trial in patients with noncancer related pain and OIC a common side effect of prescription opioids were announced in November.
Additional analyses and regulatory consultations are ongoing.
Our research pipeline is exploring biologic therapies and contains projects directed at modulating afferent signalling inammation associated with pain and the interplay between the immune and nervous systems.
Projects are directed at targeting welldened patient segments with subset selection based on for example an increase in particular inammatory markers in osteoarthritis and pancreatitis.
We continue to focus on areas of high unmet medical need and thus in addition to osteoarthritis we are also active in researching novel therapies for neuropathic pain.
Efforts to access targets in the central nervous system compartment such as the spinal cord and the brain continue to be facilitated by solid progression of technology platforms designed to transport biologics from the periphery to the central nervous system compartment.
At any time more than 450 million people worldwide are affected by mental neurological or behavioural problems and the rate is steadily rising.
Source WHO Press Release October 2006 450m AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 65 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview
Our nancial performance World US Western Europe Established ROW Emerging Markets Prior year
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
World sales Faslodex 4 4 62 nm nm Iressa 611 1012  100 telArimidex 543 28 26 21 50 124 52 49 279 9 9 119 18 16 756 Others    29 6 3 120 Total 3489 6 3 377 7 741 21 15 1375 4 4 996 2 6 3705 Faslodex  nm nm Iressa 50 12telArimidex 756 50 53 42 91 260 55 56 308 7 2 146 3 6 1512 Casodex 550 5 12 6 138 80 29 33 364 5 5 Others 12019tel18 6410  Total 3705 8 12 353 51 935 19 22 1440 8 1 977 16 16 4045 For a detailed narrative explanation of the nancial performance of our products please see the Geographical Review from page 70.
Our marketed products Arimidex anastrozole is an aromatase inhibitor used for the treatment of breast cancer.
Zoladex goserelin acetate implant in one and three month depots is a luteinising hormonereleasing hormone LHRH agonist used for the treatment of prostate cancer breast cancer and certain benign gynaecological disorders.
Casodex bicalutamide is an antiandrogen therapy used for the treatment of prostate cancer.
Iressa getinib is used as an epidermal growth factor receptortyrosine kinase EGFRTK inhibitor that acts to block signals for cancer cell growth and survival in advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer.
Faslodex fulvestrant is an injectable oestrogen receptor antagonist used for the treatment of hormone receptorpositive metastatic breast cancer for post menopausal women whose disease has progressed following treatment with prior endocrine therapy.
Nolvadex tamoxifen citrate remains a widely used breast cancer treatment outside the US.
Caprelsa vandetanib is a kinase inhibitor indicated for the treatment of symptomatic or progressive medullary thyroid cancer MTC in patients with unresectable nonoperable locally advanced or metastatic disease.
Depots are subcutaneous or intramuscular injections.
Therapy area world market MATQ312 bn Chemotherapy 23.34 2 Monoclonal antibodies 18.85 3 Small molecule TKIs 11.02 Hormonal therapies 8.31 61.5bn Wordwide market value Performance  Therapy Area Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 66 We aim to build on our position as one of the world leaders in cancer treatment with established brands such as Zoladex and Arimidex and growing brands such as Faslodex and Iressa.
Our future growth will be driven through targeting the right treatments both small molecules and biologics to the right patients using companion diagnostics where appropriate.
This approach is driving the growth of Iressa and is a key focus in the development of our early stage portfolio.
Our 2012 focus Arimidex rst launched in 1995 remains a leading global hormonal therapy for patients with early breast cancer.
This success is largely based on the extensive longterm efcacy and safety results of the ATAC study which showed Arimidex to be signicantly superior to tamoxifen at preventing breast cancer recurrence during and beyond the ve year treatment course.
Zoladex a luteinising hormonereleasing hormone LHRH agonist is approved in 120 countries for the treatment of prostate cancer breast cancer and certain benign gynaecological disorders.
In nonmetastatic prostate cancer Zoladex has been shown to improve overall survival both when used in addition to radical prostatectomy and when used in addition to radiotherapy.
In breast cancer Zoladex is widely approved for use in advanced breast cancer in premenopausal women.
In a number of countries Zoladex is also approved for the adjuvant treatment of early stage premenopausal breast cancer as an alternative to andor in addition to chemotherapy.
Zoladex offers proven survival benets for breast cancer patients with a favourable tolerability prole.
Casodex and Zoladex are both leading endocrine therapies for the treatment of prostate cancer.
Casodex is used as a 50mg tablet for the treatment of advanced prostate cancer and as a 150mg tablet for the treatment of locally advanced prostate cancer.
Iressa is approved in 89 countries and is one of the leading epidermal growth factor receptortyrosine kinase EGFRTK inhibitors in Japan and the Asia Pacic region where it is marketed for pretreated advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer
Outside the EU indications are being sought or expanded from the pretreated setting to include 1 st line patients whose tumours harbour activating mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor EGFR.
In the EU Iressa is the rst personalised medicine for the treatment of adults with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with activating mutations.
Faslodex 500mg is now approved in 65 countries including the member states of the EU the US and Japan.
It offers an additional efcacious hormonal therapy option for patients with hormonereceptor positive advanced breast cancer.
It is given by once monthly injections and is approved for the treatment of hormonereceptor positive advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal women whose disease has progressed following treatment with a prior endocrine therapy.
We are now exploring the efcacy and safety of Faslodex 500mg compared to Arimidex in the 1 st line advanced breast cancer setting hormone nave patients in the Phase III FALCON trial.
Caprelsa ghts cancer through two proven mechanisms blocking the development of tumour blood supply by inhibition of the vascular endothelial growth factor pathway and by inhibiting the growth and survival of the tumour through EGFR and rearranged during transfection RET pathways.
Caprelsa was approved by the FDA and granted Orphan Drug status in April 2011 and was approved in the EU in February 2012 for the treatment of medullary thyroid cancer MTC in patients with unresectable locally advanced or metastatic disease.
Caprelsa is also approved in Canada and remains under review by other regulatory agencies around the world.
In the pipeline Our early oncology pipeline includes a range of novel compounds that target signalling pathways believed to be pivotal in cancer cell growth and survival as well as DNA repair mechanisms.
Despite setbacks in earlier Phase II trials olaparib a poly ADPribose polymerase PARP inhibitor continues in Phase II trials in relapsed ovarian cancer gastric cancer and germline BRCA mutation positive cancers.
Olaparib
2013 pending the results of ongoing trials.
Selumetinib a potent mitogenactivated protein kinase MEK inhibitor licensed from Array BioPharma Inc. in Phase II development.
We are also developing potential new cancer drugs using a variety of biologics approaches.
Our investigational biologics are directed towards molecular targets with a strong role in cancer progression and incorporate innovative technologies providing the potential to eliminate cancer cells in more effective ways.
Within biologics we continue to progress a discovery and clinical pipeline that is balanced across different antitumour approaches including disrupting cancer cells ability to grow or communicate growth factor and survival signalling modulating the blood supply that tumours need to grow vascular modulation and activating a patients own immune system to eliminate cancer cells immunemediated therapy.
We currently have ve investigational biologics in Phase I clinical trials and four in Phase II clinical trials.
Additional drug candidates are expected to progress into clinical trials in 2013.
Moxetumomab is a monoclonal antibody approved to begin Phase III testing in hairy cell leukemia in 2013.
Deaths from cancer worldwide are projected to continue rising with an estimated 13.1 million deaths in 2030.
Source WHO Fact Sheet February 2012 1m AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 67 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Respiratory and Inammation Our nancial performance World US Western Europe Established ROW Emerging Markets Prior year
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
World sales Symbicort 3194 1 5 1003 19 1313 8 3 3 3 3148 Total 4415 1 2 1301 8 1589 10 5 468 Symbicort 3 1434 5  746 Others 216 15 19 8 80 109 8 13 23 5  Total 4468 9 6 1207 4 1769 2 3 099 For a detailed narrative explanation of the nancial performance of our products please see the Geographical Review from page 70.
Our marketed products Symbicort pMDI budesonideformoterol in a pressurised metereddose inhaler is a combination of an inhaled corticosteroid and a fast onset longacting beta 2agonist used for maintenance treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease COPD including chronic bronchitis and emphysema in the US.
Symbicort Turbuhaler budesonide formoterol in a dry powder inhaler is a combination of an inhaled corticosteroid and a fast onset longacting beta 2agonist used for maintenance treatment of asthma and COPD.
In asthma it is also approved for Maintenance And Reliever Therapy
Symbicort Turbuhaler is used in most parts of the world outside the US.
Pulmicort Turbuhaler budesonide in a dry powder inhaler is an inhaled corticosteroid used for maintenance treatment of asthma.
Pulmicort Respules budesonide inhalation suspension is a corticosteroid administered via a nebuliser for the treatment of asthma in both children and adults.
Rhinocort budesonide is a nasal steroid used as a treatment for allergic rhinitis hay fever perennial rhinitis and nasal polyps.
Oxis Turbuhaler formoterol in a dry powder inhaler is a fast onset longacting beta 2agonist used for the treatment of bronchialobstructive symptoms in asthma and COPD.
Accolate zarlukast is an oral leukotriene receptor antagonist used for the treatment of asthma.
Therapy area world market MATQ312 bn Asthma 22.78 2 Other 19.84 3 COPD 13.18 4 Rhinitis 8.19 64bn Wordwide market value Performance  Therapy Area Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 68 We aim to build on our strong position in the respiratory and inammation area through the growth of key products with new indications and market launches including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease COPD as well as through developing a strong pipeline of novel small molecule and biologics approaches to COPD and asthma.
We aspire to enter the rheumatology market through our biologics pipeline and targeted small molecule approaches such as fostamatinib.
With our acquisition of Ardea we have expanded our inammation focus to include gout.
COPD and asthma According to WHO COPD a serious lung disease that includes chronic bronchitis andor emphysema is currently the fourth leading cause of death worldwide with future increases anticipated.
Current treatment has recently demonstrated the potential for some survival benet but the impact of medication on the course of the disease is small and the prognosis of the COPD patient remains poor.
In asthma unmet medical need for patients whose asthma is inadequately controlled by current treatments remains an important issue and disease normalisation is currently not optimally achieved by any approved treatment.
The typical treatment for both COPD and asthma is a xeddose combination of an inhaled corticosteroid ICS with a longacting beta 2agonist LABA for example Symbicort or for COPD specically an inhaled longacting muscarinic antagonist as either monotherapy or adjunctive to ICSLABA treatment.
Other major asthma treatments include monotherapy ICSs oral leukotriene receptor antagonists andor oral steroids for severe disease and in combination with antibiotics for exacerbations as well as a MAb targeting allergic asthma for moderate to severe asthma patients.
Over
Our 2012 focus Symbicort improves symptoms and provides a clinically important improvement in the health of many patients with either asthma or COPD by providing effective and rapid control of the symptoms.
Symbicort pMDI is indicated in the US for the treatment of asthma in patients 12 years of age and older.
The COPD indication was approved and launched in the US in early 2009.
In June 2010 the US Prescribing Information was updated to include the FDAs new recommendations for appropriate use of asthma medications containing LABAs.
The class label changes for all LABA containing products are specic to the treatment of asthma and do not apply to the treatment of COPD.
Symbicort Turbuhaler was originally launched in markets outside the US in 2000 and in Japan in 2010 for the treatment of adult asthma and is copromoted in Japan with Astellas Pharma Inc.
The COPD indication and the SMART treatment regimen were approved in Japan in 2012.
Symbicort SMART Symbicort Maintenance And Reliever Therapy provides improved asthma control including less risk for exacerbations relative to comparators and simplies asthma management through the use of only one inhaler for both maintenance and relief of asthma symptoms.
As well as being a costeffective treatment the Symbicort SMART approach reduces the usage of both inhaled and oral corticosteroids compared to other treatment options.
Pulmicort is one of the worlds leading inhaled corticosteroids for the treatment of asthma and is available in several forms.
Teva has had an exclusive licence to sell a generic version of Pulmicort Respules in the US since 2009.
Pulmicort continues to face increasing challenge from generic products.
Patents protecting Pulmicort have been subject to a number of challenges in different jurisdictions.
Details of these matters are included in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
Clinical studies In April 2012 the FDA provided AstraZeneca with a Postmarketing Requirement for a Symbicort LABA safety study designed to be pooled with similar studies with other LABA products.
AstraZeneca is required to conduct a trial comparing Symbicort Inhalation Aerosol with Pulmicort to evaluate the risk of serious asthma outcomes hospitalisations intubation death in 11700 adult and adolescent patients.
Recruitment in the trial is ongoing.
In the pipeline Building on our capabilities in combinations and inhaler device development demonstrated through our experience with Symbicort we are aiming to further improve the mainstay of treatment for COPD patients by combining bronchodilators being developed in collaboration with Pulmagen Therapeutics Synergy Limited with inhaled antiinammatory compounds such as inhaled selective glucocorticoid receptor agonists AZD5423 which continues in Phase II being developed in collaboration with Bayer Schering Pharma AG.
Additionally we are targeting inammation in COPD using oral routes of administration with AZD5069 a CXCR2 antagonist that targets neutrophils which is in Phase II.
MEDI8968 an antiinterleukinIL 1 receptor MAb and benralizumab an antiinterleukin5 receptor MAb are both in Phase II development for severe to very severe COPD.
We are targeting uncontrolled asthma focusing on reducing the rate of annual asthma exacerbations through small molecule approaches such as a CRTh2 receptor antagonist and tolllike receptor 7 agonists being developed in collaboration with Dainippon Sumitomo.
Biological treatments in Phase IIb include benralizumab and tralokinumab a MAb that targets interleukin13.
Also in Phase II brodalumab is an antiinterleukin17 receptor MAb being developed in collaboration with Amgen for asthma.
In April 2012 AstraZeneca and Amgen agreed to jointly develop and commercialise ve MAbs from Amgens clinical inammation portfolio including brodalumab.
The collaboration will provide Amgen with additional resources to optimally progress its portfolio and Amgen will benet from the strong respiratory inammation and asthma development expertise of AstraZenecas biologics capabilities.
The collaboration will also capitalise on AstraZenecas global commercial reach in respiratory and gastrointestinal diseases.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 69 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Rheumatology and gout Rheumatoid arthritis is currently treated with generic diseasemodifying antirheumatic agents and where the relevant criteria are met biologic diseasemodiers.
There remains a need for novel effective treatments since only about a third of patients treated with biologics achieve their treatment goals.
We anticipate that the rheumatoid arthritis market will experience modest annual growth over the next decade.
Sales of the biologic tumour necrosis factor TNF alpha blockers accounted for 72% of major market rheumatoid arthritis sales in 2012.
Use of other biologic approaches is expected to increase due to new entrants new subcutaneous formulations and use earlier in the treatment pathway.
Novel oral drugs targeting intracellular signalling pathways may provide antiTNFlike levels of efcacy and potentially more convenient dosing especially in patients who currently are not taking or are ineligible to take injectable biologic agents.
Current treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus SLE focuses on suppressing symptoms and controlling disease ares and in the case of lupus nephritis preventing renal failure.
Although a biologic has recently been launched for SLE signicant unmet medical need remains.
Most emerging biologic agents are likely to be used initially after failure of standard therapies including corticosteroids and immunosuppressants or in combination in order to provide incremental benet prevent ares and allow reduction of highdose chronic steroid use.
Gout is a chronic painful debilitating arthritis caused by elevated serum uric acid due to overproduction andor under excretion of uric acid.
Gout is the second most common arthritis after osteoarthritis and is the most common form of arthritis in men over 40.
In the pipeline Fostamatinib was inlicensed from Rigel Pharmaceuticals Inc. in 2010.
Fostamatinib is a potential rstinclass oral spleen tyrosine kinase SYK inhibitor being evaluated for a rheumatoid arthritis indication.
It is thought to block reversible signalling in multiple cell types involved in inammation and tissue degradation in rheumatoid arthritis.
The ongoing Phase III programme called OSKIRA commenced in September 2010.
In the Phase IIb dose nding study OSKIRA4 fostamatinib as a monotherapy met the rst primary objective showing a statistically signicant superior DAS28 score change from baseline compared to placebo at six weeks at the 100mg twice daily dose and the 100mg twice daily for a month followed by 150mg once daily dose but not at the 100mg twice daily for a month followed by 100mg once daily dose.
The OSKIRA4 study did not meet its second primary objective as all fostamatinib monotherapy doses were inferior to adalimumab monotherapy at week 24 based on DAS28.
The safety and tolerability ndings for fostamatinib as reported in the OSKIRA4 study were generally consistent with those previously observed in the TASKi Phase II programme.
Results from the ongoing Phase III OSKIRA programme are anticipated in the rst half of 2013 and would form the basis of regulatory submissions.
In June AstraZeneca acquired Ardea a San Diego Californiabased biotechnology company focused on the development of small molecule therapeutics.
Ardeas clinically most advanced product candidate lesinurad formerly known as RDEA594 is currently in Phase III development.
Lesinurad is a selective inhibitor of URAT1 a transporter in the proximal tubule cells of the kidney that regulates uric acid excretion from the body.
The Phase III programme is exploring lesinurad as an oral once daily treatment for the chronic management of hyperuricaemia in patients with gout.
Regulatory lings are planned in the US and Europe for the rst half of 2014.
We also plan to develop and commercialise lesinurad in China and Japan.
In 2012 we continued to invest in several novel multifunctional MAbs in inammatory and autoimmune conditions.
Sifalimumab which targets interferonalpha continued clinical development with an ongoing Phase IIb study in patients with SLE.
MEDI546 which targets the Type I IFN receptor continued in a Phase IIb study in patients with SLE.
Mavrilimumab which targets the alpha subunit of the granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor receptor continues in Phase IIb for patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
Dermatology
Psoriasis is a chronic disease in which the immune system causes the skin cells to grow at an accelerated rate.
Instead of being shed the skin cells pile up causing painful and itchy red scaly patches that can bleed.
Up to 12 million patients are diagnosed with psoriasis across the US and Europe each year.
Despite various treatment options for moderate to severe plaque psoriasis many patients do not meet their therapeutic goals including resolution of underlying inammation clearing of symptoms and improving quality of life.
Biologics are currently used in moderate to severe patients who are candidates for or are unresponsive to phototherapy or systemic therapy.
In the pipeline As mentioned previously in 2012 AstraZeneca and Amgen entered into an agreement to jointly develop brodalumab which has commenced Phase III development in patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis.
In addition brodalumab is being considered in a Phase IIb development programme in psoriatic arthritis.
Some 235 million people currently suffer from asthma.
It is the most common chronic disease among children.
Source WHO Fact Sheet May 2011 Total deaths from COPD are projected to increase by more than 30% in the next 10 years without interventions to cut risks.
Source WHO Fact Sheet November 2012 30% Performance  Geographical Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 70 Geographical Review This section contains further information about the performance of our products within the geographical areas in which our sales and marketing efforts are focused.
2012 in brief In the US sales were down 21% to 10655 million 2011 13426 million 2010 13727 million.
Loss of exclusivity on Seroquel IR in March 2012 as well as the impact of increased generic competition experienced by our other mature brands was partially offset by strong performance from our key brands Brilinta Crestor  Onglyza Symbicort and Faslodex.
AstraZeneca is the fourth largest pharmaceutical company in the US with a 5% market share of US pharmaceuticals by sales value.
AstraZeneca is the eighth largest prescriptionbased pharmaceutical company in Western Europe with a 3.4% market share of sales by value.
Sales in Western Europe were down 19% to 6486 million 2011 8501 million 2010 9168 million.
Key drivers of the decline were the volume erosion on Atacand Seroquel IR Nexium Arimidex and Meronem following entry of generic competition and the negative price and volume impact primarily related to government interventions particularly in Greece Italy Portugal and Spain.
This development was partially offset by revenue growth from Brilique Onglyza Vimovo and Iressa.
Established ROW sales were down 14%.
The entry of generic competition of Crestor in Canada and Seroquel IR and Arimidex in Australia was partially offset by the successful rst full year of launch of Nexium and Faslodex in Japan.
Emerging Markets sales increased by 4% to 5752 million 2011 5763 million 2010 5198 million with sales growth in China of 17% and also in Russia of 17%.
2011 in brief In the US sales were down 2% to 13426 million 2010 13727 million.
The pricing impact from US healthcare reform measures lowered revenue by around 3.3%.
Good growth for Crestor  the Seroquel franchise Symbicort and Onglyza broadly offset the impact of generic competition for Arimidex ToprolXL and Merrem and declines in Nexium.
Sales in Western Europe were down 11% to 8501 million 2010 9168 million due largely to volume erosion on Nexium Arimidex and Meronem.
This was partially offset by volume growth attributable to Crestor  Seroquel XR Symbicort Iressa and Faslodex.
Established ROW sales were up 4% driven by continued growth of Symbicort Crestor  Nexium and the Seroquel franchise.
In 2011 AstraZeneca became the largest researchbased pharmaceutical company in Canada by sales value.
Emerging Markets sales increased by 10% to 5763 million 2010 5198 million with sales growth in China of 15% and Russia of 19%.
Sales in Brazil were down as a result of generic competition for Crestor and Seroquel IR.
For more information regarding our products see the Therapy Area Review from page 50.
Details of material legal proceedings can be found in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184 and details of relevant risks are set out in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 75.
See the Market denitions table on page 209 for information about AstraZenecas market denitions.
Sales gures in this Geographical Review are with reference to the customers location.
US
AstraZeneca is the fourth largest pharmaceutical company in the US with a 5% market share of US pharmaceuticals by sales value.
Sales in the US decreased by 21% to 10655 million 201 1 13426 million 2010 13727 million as strong performance from our key brands Brilinta Crestor Onglyza Symbicort and Faslodex was offset by loss of exclusivity on Seroquel IR in March 2012 as well as the impact of increased generic competition experienced by our other mature brands.
Combined sales of our key brands Brilinta Crestor Onglyza Symbicort and Faslodex were up by 9% to 4733 million 2011 4351 million 2010 3569 million.
Other drivers of the sales decline include the reduction of sales for Zomig following the licensing of Zomig to Impax Pharmaceuticals Inc.
2010 176 million additional generic competition affecting sales of ToprolXL down to 320 million 2011 404 million 2010 689 million and loss of exclusivity of Atacand down to 150 million 2011 182 million 2010 216 million.
Brilinta achieved sales of 19 million.
Commercial preferred unrestricted managed markets access was 54% Our nancial performancetel
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
US 10655 21 21 13426 2 2 13727 Western Europe 6486 24 19 8501 7 11 9168 Canada 1090 32 31 1604 6 1 1510 Japan 2904 5 5 3064 17 6 2617 Other Established ROW 1086 12 12 1233 18 4 1049 Established ROW 5080 14 14 5901 14 4 5176 Emerging Europe 1165 6 2 1244 7 7 1165 China 1512 20 17 1261 20 15 1047 Emerging Asia Pacic 923 5 3 Other Emerging ROW 2152 6  2290 9 12 2096 Emerging Markets 5752  4 5763 11 10 5198 Total 27973 17 15 33591 1 2 33269 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 71 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview and trial among target interventional cardiologist initiators was 39% at the end of 2012.
Crestor demonstrated resilience in the face of the November 2011 market entry of a generic version and from May multiple generic versions of atorvastatin all competitors of Crestor .
Crestors performance volume showed resilience in two of the largest and most protable segments of the market Commercial and Medicare.
Crestors existing patient base remained solid and continuing patients represented 94% of Crestors volume.
Crestor achieved sales of 3164 million 2011 3074 million 2010 2640 million and a total prescription share of 11.8% within the statin market.
In
2012 Crestor became the most prescribed branded pharmaceutical in the US.
Symbicort pMDI continued to deliver steady growth in the US with sales up 19% to 1003 million 2011 846 million 2010 721 million and prescription growth of 12.5%.
It achieved a 21.3% total prescription share and a 22.5% new prescription share of the inhaled corticosteroidlongacting beta 2agonist market.
Following the completion of BMSs acquisition of Amylin AstraZeneca and BMS have been developing and commercialising Amylins portfolio of products related to diabetes and other metabolic diseases.
Sales of GLP1 agonists for the treatment of diabetes were 74 million for Byetta 37 million for Bydureon and 17 million for Symlin.
OnglyzaKombiglyze XR captured more than one in ve new DPPIV patient treatment decisions and achieved a 2.8% total prescription market share gain in 2012 ending the year with a total prescription market share of 17 .1% of the rapidly growing DPPIV inhibitor market.
Onglyza
2011 156 million 2010 54 million.
The loss of exclusivity for Seroquel IR in March 2012 resulted in a decrease in sales of 79% to 697 million 2011 3344 million 2010 3107 million.
In 2012 generics accounted for 58.5% of quetiapine prescriptions in the US.
The presence of generic competition impacted the prescription volume of Seroquel XR in 2012.
However sales of Seroquel XR were up 4% to 811 million 2011 779 million 2010 640 million because of higher prices.
Nexium was the third most prescribed branded pharmaceutical in the US.
In the face of continuing generic OTC and pricing pressures Nexium sales declined 5% to 2272 million 2011 2397 million 2010 2695 million.
Nexium remains the branded market leader retaining signicant market share and volume within the proton pump inhibitor class.
In 2012 sales of Synagis were up 7% to 611 million 2011 570 million 2010 646 million.
Sales in the 201 1 to 2012 RSV season experienced payer pressure which was offset by heightened awareness efforts surrounding the RSV burden of disease appropriate patient identication and enhanced efforts to ensure continuity of care for patients from the hospital to the paediatricians ofce.
In March 2010 the Affordable Care Act came into force.
It has had and is expected to continue to have a signicant impact on our US sales and the US healthcare industry as a whole.
In 2012 the overall reduction in our prot before tax for the year due to higher minimum Medicaid rebates on prescription drugs discounts on branded pharmaceutical sales to Medicare Part D beneciaries and an industrywide excise fee was 858 million.
This amount reects only those effects of the Affordable Care Act that we know have had or will have a direct impact on our nancial condition or results of operations and which we are therefore able to quantify based on known and isolatable resulting changes in individual nancial items within our Financial
There are other potential indirect or associated consequences of these legislative developments which continue to evolve and which cannot be estimated but could have similar impacts.
These include broader changes in access to or eligibility for coverage under Medicare Medicaid or similar governmental programmes such as the recent proposals to limit Medicare benets.
These could indirectly impact our pricing or sales of prescription products within the private sector .
By their nature and the fact that these potentially numerous consequences are not directly linked to a corresponding and quantiable impact on our Financial Statements it is not possible to accurately estimate the nancial impact of these potential consequences of the Affordable Care Act or related legislative changes when taken together with the number of other market and industryrelated factors that can also result in similar impacts.
Further details on the impact of the Affordable Care Act are contained in the Pricing pressure section from page 18 and the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 75.
Currently there is no direct governmental control of prices for commercial prescription drug sales in the US.
However some publicly funded programmes such as Medicaid and TRICARE Department of Veterans Affairs have statutorily mandated rebates and discounts that have the effect of price controls for these programmes.
Additionally pressure on pricing availability and utilisation of prescription drugs for both commercial and public payers continues to increase.
This is driven by among other things an increased focus on generic alternatives.
Primary drivers of increased generic use are budgetary policies within healthcare systems and providers including the use of generics only formularies and increases in patient coinsurance or copayments.
In 2012 84% of the prescriptions dispensed in the US were generic.
While it is unlikely that there will be widespread adoption of a broad national price control scheme in the near future there will continue to be increased attention to pharmaceutical prices and their impact on healthcare costs for the foreseeable future.
Rest of World Sales performance outside the US in 2012 was down by 1 1% to 17 318 million 201 1 20 165 million 2010 19542 million due to loss of exclusivity competition from generic products and the continuing challenging economic environment.
Combined sales of key products Arimidex Crestor  Nexium Seroquel IR and Seroquel XR and Symbicort were down 1 1% with sales of 8769 million 201 1 10301 million 2010 9923 million.
Emerging Markets delivered strong sales up 4% with sales of 5752 million 201 1 5763 million 2010 5 198 million.
Western Europe AstraZeneca is the eighth largest pharmaceutical company in Western Europe with a 3.4% market share of prescription sales by value.
Performance  Geographical Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 72 The macroeconomic situation has deteriorated particularly in Greece Italy Portugal and Spain which have seen the implementation of new austerity measures leading to increased pressure on healthcare budgets.
Most governments in Europe intervene directly to control the price volume and reimbursement of medicines.
Several governments have imposed price reductions and increased the use of generic medicines as part of healthcare expenditure control.
A number of countries are applying strict criteria for costeffectiveness evaluations of medicines which has delayed and reduced access to medicines for patients in areas of important unmet medical need.
These and other measures all contribute to an increasingly difcult environment for branded pharmaceuticals in Europe.
Total sales in Western Europe were down 19% to 6486 million 2011 8501 million 2010 9168 million due largely to volume erosion on Seroquel IR Nexium Arimidex and Meronem following generic entrants and the negative price and volume impact primarily related to government interventions particularly in Greece Italy Portugal and
The loss of exclusivity for Atacand in April 2012 resulted in a decrease in sales of 39% to 422 million 2011 731 million 2010 736 million.
Generics now account for 9.7% of candesartan prescriptions in Western Europe.
This development was partially offset by revenue growth attributable to Brilique Onglyza Vimovo and Iressa.
Crestor outperformed the statin class with strong 2% sales growth.
Generic versions of Seroquel IR are now available in Western Europe with overall sales down 56% to 226 million 2011 546 million 2010 560 million.
Brilique has been launched in all markets in Western Europe and sales reached 55 million in 2012 2011 9 million.
In Germany sales fell by 30% to 775 million 2011 1189 million 2010 1235 million mainly driven by market entries of generic versions of Atacand sales declined to 141 million 2011 255 million 2010 252 million Seroquel IR sales declined to 31 million 2011 127 million 2010 113 million and Seroquel XR sales declined to 93 million 201 1 151 million 2010 100 million.
In the UK a 22% decrease in sales to 668 million 201 1 866 million 2010 1022 million reected strong volume erosion on Seroquel IR and Seroquel XR sales declined to 58 million 201 1 120 million 2010 124 million following generic entrants.
Sales of Nexium decreased by 59% to 17 million 201 1 41 million 2010 89 million and sales of Arimidex decreased by 85% to 4 million 201 1 28 million 2010 1 14 million both following the impact of a full year of generic penetration.
The decrease in UK sales was partially offset by the solid performance of Symbicort up 6% to 328 million 201 1 312 million 2010 272 million.
Sales in France decreased by 18% to 1314 million 2011 1740 million 2010 1889 million driven largely by volume erosion on Nexium Atacand Zomig and Arimidex following generic entrants and the impact from the disposal of Astra Tech which was not entirely offset by the strong growth of Crestor and the successful launch of Seroquel XR which had sales of 37 million.
Sales in Spain and Italy were down by 22% to 510 million 2011 708 million 2010 788 million and by 15% to 876 million 2011 1113 million 2010 1198 million respectively mainly driven by generic entrants and the implementation of price and prescription controls associated with existing and new austerity measures.
Established ROW Sales in Established ROW decreased by 14%.
The key products with sales growth in 2012 were Symbicort Seroquel XR Onglyza Faslodex and Iressa.
Canada
The trend in Canada indicates that provinces will continue to introduce policy changes that drive cost savings and exert pricing pressure on new and existing medicines for example conditional listings product listing agreements and bulk purchasing while providing reasonable patient access to innovative medicines.
Due to the loss of exclusivity for Crestor in Canada in April 2012 and the continued impact of the at risk launch of a generic version of Nexium by a competitor in 2011 total Canadian sales decreased by 31% to 1090 million 2011 1604 million 2010 1510 million.
Combined sales of Crestor Nexium Symbicort Seroquel IR and Seroquel XR were 742 million 2011 1171 million 2010 1055 million.
Japan
Sales in Japan decreased by 5% to 2904 million 2011 3064 million 2010 2617 million.
Strong performance from Crestor  Symbicort Faslodex and Iressa was largely offset by biennial price cuts imposed in April 2012.
Crestor sales grew by 4% becoming the number one brand in the statin market in
Symbicort sales grew 12% backed by additional therapeutic indications for SMART and COPD.
Nexium achieved sales of 78 million in its rst full year after launch with sales accelerating following the lifting in October of the two week prescription limit imposed by the Japanese Ministry of Health Labour and Welfare on new medicines during the rst year from launch.
Our oncology business remains one of the leaders in Japan based on the performance of established brands including Iressa Arimidex Zoladex and Casodex.
Faslodex launched in November 201 1 achieved sales of 58 million in its rst full year in the market.
Other Established ROW Our sales in Other Established ROW showed a decline of 12% to 1086 million 2011 1233 million 2010 1049 million.
Australian sales were impacted by price cuts triggered by loss of exclusivity of Seroquel IR and Arimidex in April 2012 as well as by price reductions due to the Australian governments therapeutic group policy which impacted Crestor and Atacand.
Price reductions were partially offset by performance of Crestor Nexium and Symbicort which all gained market share.
Crestor achieved a 28.1% volume share in the statin class and became the number one drug in the statin market in Australia following loss of exclusivity of atorvastatin.
Brilinta was successfully launched in Australia with reimbursement through the Australian pharmaceutical benets scheme becoming available from
Brilinta achieved formulary listing in the vast majority of hospitals in Australia in 2012.
Marketing authorisation was obtained for Symbicort pMDI in Australia.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 73 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Crestor continues to face challenges from generic competitors.
The patent protecting Crestor in Australia has been challenged.
Details of this matter are included in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
Emerging Markets In Emerging Markets our sales increased by 4% to 5752 million 2011 5763 million 2010 5198 million which was principally driven by growth in China and Russia.
In many of the larger markets such as Brazil and Mexico patients tend to pay directly for prescription medicines and consequently these markets are at less risk of direct government interventions on pricing and reimbursement.
In other markets such as South Korea Taiwan and Turkey where governments pay for medicines we are seeing continued efforts to reduce the cost of prescriptions in line with the systems in Western Europe Canada and Australia.
Some strong growth markets such as Vietnam are also implementing price and volume controls in an attempt to control government spending.
Emerging Europe Sales in Emerging Europe grew by 2% to 1165 million 2011 1244 million 2010 1165 million driven by increased sales in Russia and Romania which more than offset reduced sales in Turkey.
We have continued to build our presence in Russia where sales increased by 17% to 314 million 2011 284 million 2010 232 million mainly due to increased sales of Symbicort by 24% Nexium by 93% Crestor by 14% and Seroquel XR by 154% driven by growth in the retail segment.
We have also consolidated our position among the growth leaders in the hospital and regional reimbursement segments.
In Romania we delivered a strong performance with sales up 19% to 161 million 2011 154 million 2010 119 million largely as a result of sales of Atacand increasing by 34% Seroquel XR increasing by 41% Crestor increasing by 10% and Symbicort increasing by 4%.
In Turkey a decrease in sales to 252 million 2011 297 million 2010 304 million reected the additional price and prescription controls imposed by the Turkish government in late 2011.
China
Our sales in China excluding Hong Kong increased by 17% to 1512 million 2011 1261 million 2010 1047 million.
Sales of products in our Cardiovascular and Respiratory and Inammation Therapy Areas continue to grow ahead of the market driven by strong performances of Crestor Betaloc Zok and Pulmicort Respules.
Sales of Nexium and Symbicort grew strongly by 27% and 50% respectively while our mature gastrointestinal and oncology brands experienced challenges from government pricing reductions.
In 2012 we saw Zoladex 10.8mg successfully launched in China the expansion of our copromotion with BMS to achieve listing of Onglyza into key hospitals and a new collaboration formed between AstraZeneca and Ironwood to codevelop and cocommercialise linaclotide in China.
We continue to be one of the leading multinational pharmaceutical companies in China.
Emerging Asia Pacic Sales in Emerging Asia Pacic decreased by 3% to 923 million 2011 968 million 2010 890 million.
This decline was driven by India where sales decreased by 29% to 67 million 2011 110 million 2010 92 million due primarily to supply issues continued government interventions on pricing in countries such as Thailand where sales decreased by 7% to 97 million 2011 106 million 2010 114 million and by Vietnam where sales decreased by 4% to 45 million 2011 47 million 2010 37 million.
This was partially offset by sales growth in Indonesia up 7% to 39 million 2011 39 million 2010 34 million South Korea up 4% to 239 million 2011 235 million 2010 213 million and Malaysia up 6% to 73 million 2011 70 million 2010 66 million.
Other Emerging ROW Sales in Other Emerging ROW were at at 2152 million 2011 2290 million 2010 2096 million with increased sales in Latin America Egypt Maghreb Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States balanced by reduced sales in South Africa and Israel.
The Latin American pharmaceutical market continues to grow underpinned by a reasonably stable political and economic climate.
However in many of the countries the majority of the growth in the market is being captured by generics branded generics and private label product offerings often from local nonmultinational companies.
In Latin America our sales were down 1% to 1331 million 2011 1455 million 2010 1392 million.
This was driven by declines in Mexico down 22% and Brazil down 5%.
Brazil continued to feel the effects of the loss of exclusivity on Seroquel IR and Crestor with yearonyear declines of 54% and 39% respectively.
Growth of Seloken Faslodex and older products such as Diprivan and Meronem helped to compensate for this development.
In Mexico challenging market conditions and the impact of an at risk generic version of Crestor  resulted in weak performance with sales in Mexico declining by 22%.
This was partially offset by sales growth in Venezuela up 41% and Argentina up 24%.
All key brands achieved double digit growth in Argentina Nexium Crestor Atacand Symbicort and Seroquel XR and growth of more than 40% in Venezuela Crestor  Symbicort Seroquel XR Atacand Zoladex and Arimidex.
Successful product launches in the year included Brilinta and Kombiglyze XR in Mexico Colombia and Argentina and Vimovo in Brazil Colombia and Argentina.
Faslodex 500mg was launched in the fourth quarter of 2012 in Argentina and is expected to launch in the rst half of 2013 in Brazil and Venezuela.
In the Middle East and Africa despite political challenges arising from the Arab Spring revolutions we further accelerated our growth with sales up 3%.
Our largest markets were South Africa Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States.
Performance  Risk AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 74
Embedded in business processes We strive to ensure that sound risk management is embedded within our strategy planning budgeting and performance management processes.
The Board has dened the Groups risk appetite expressing the acceptable levels of risk for the Group using three key dimensions.
These are i earnings and cash ow ii return on investment and iii potential impact on our reputation.
This denition provides a clear statement by the Board of its position on risk which enables the Group in both quantitative and qualitative terms to judge the level of risk it is prepared to take so as to achieve its overall objectives.
Annually the Group develops a longterm business plan to support the delivery of its strategy which the Board reviews to ensure that it conforms to its risk appetite.
Line managers are accountable for identifying and managing risks and for delivering business objectives in accordance with the Groups risk appetite.
Each area for which a SET member is responsible a SET function is required to provide a comprehensive assessment of its risks as part of the annual business planning process.
Identied risks are mapped to AstraZenecas risk taxonomy providing a structured disaggregation of the various potential risks facing the Group.
The CEO and the CFO undertake quarterly business reviews QBRs with each SET function where the key risks are reviewed.
Business managers within each SET function are required to provide quarterly updates on their key risks which are then consolidated to create a list of key risks for In this section we describe our key risk management and assurance mechanisms and the principal risks and uncertainties which we consider to be material to our business as they may have a signicant effect on our nancial condition results of operations andor reputation.
Specic risks and uncertainties are also discussed in the Business Review from page 30 where relevant.
Managing risk As an innovationdriven global prescription based biopharmaceutical business we face a diverse range of risks and uncertainties that may adversely affect our business.
Our
We work continuously to ensure that we have effective risk management processes in place to support the delivery of our strategic objectives the material needs of our stakeholders and our core values.
We monitor our business activities and external and internal environments for new emerging and changing risks to ensure that these are managed appropriately as they arise.
The Board believes that the processes and accountabilities which are in place described below provide it with adequate information on the key risks and uncertainties we face.
Further information about these risks and uncertainties is set out in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 75. that SET function to review at QBRs.
The key risks for each SET function are then aggregated into a Group risk register.
The purpose of the risk review is to identify and measure risks and to dene and review risk management and mitigation plans.
Supporting tools are in place to assist the managers in this process and we continue to work on developing our risk management standards and guidelines.
We develop business resilience plans to provide for situations where specic risks have the potential to severely impact our business.
Global business resilience plans covering crisis management business continuity and emergency responses are in place.
These plans are supported by the provision of training and crisis simulation activities for business managers.
Key responsibilities Management of risk Daytoday risk management is delegated from the Board to the CEO and through the SET to line managers.
SET functions are accountable for establishing an appropriate line managementled process and for providing the resources for supporting effective risk management.
Line and project managers have primary responsibility within the context of their functional area for identifying and managing risk as well as for putting in place appropriate controls and procedures to monitor effectiveness.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 75 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Oversight and monitoring The SET is responsible for overseeing and monitoring the effectiveness of the risk management processes implemented by management.
The Compliance and Finance functions together with the GIA support the SET by advising on policy and standard setting monitoring and auditing communication and training as well as reporting on the adequacy of line management processes as they apply to managing our risk.
Our compliance organisation is comprised of the Global Compliance function together with a wide range of specialist compliance functions.
Further information about Global Compliance and the Code of Conduct can be found in the Compliance section on page 47 .
Management reporting and assurance We provide quarterly risk reports to the SET and to the Board.
Among other things these summarise our current assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including environmental social and governance risks senior management accountability and our expected plans in order to address these risks to the extent possible.
The Audit Committee comprises ve NonExecutive Directors.
It reviews and reports to the Board following each Audit Committee meeting on the overall framework of risk management and internal controls and is responsible for promptly bringing to the Boards attention any signicant concerns about the conduct results or outcomes of internal audits and other compliance matters.
The Audit Committee receives regular reports from our external auditor and the following business functions GIA independent assurance reports on the Groups risk management and control framework Global Compliance compliance programme reports on key compliance risks updates on key compliance initiatives reports on performance against the Global Compliance scorecard and summaries of compliance incidents and investigations including contact made by employees with AZethics via our helplines Financial Control and Compliance Group reports on SarbanesOxley Act compliance and the nancial control framework Management the Grouplevel risk summary from the annual business planning process and QBRs and reports on the performance management and monitoring processes.
For further information on the Audit Committee see the Audit Committee section from page 115.
GIA is an independent assurance and advisory function that reports to and is accountable to the Audit Committee.
GIAs budget resources and programme of audits are approved by the Audit Committee annually and the ndings from its audit work are reported to and discussed at each Audit Committee meeting.
A core part of the audit work carried out by GIA includes assessing how we are managing risk and reviewing the effectiveness of selected aspects of our risk control framework including the effectiveness of other assurance and compliance functions within the business.
Principal risks and uncertainties The pharmaceutical sector is inherently risky and a variety of risks and uncertainties may affect our business.
In the remainder of this section we describe the principal risks and uncertainties which we consider to be material to our business in that they may have a signicant effect on our nancial condition results of operations andor reputation.
These risks are not listed in any particular order of priority.
Other risks unknown or not currently considered material could have a similar effect.
We believe that the forwardlooking statements about AstraZeneca in this Annual Report identied by words such as anticipates believes expects and intends are based on reasonable assumptions.
However forwardlooking statements involve inherent risks and uncertainties such as those summarised below.
They relate to events that may occur in the future that may be inuenced by factors beyond our control and that may have actual outcomes materially different from our expectations.
Performance  Risk AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 76 Product pipeline risks Failure to meet development targets Impact The development of any pharmaceutical product candidate is a complex risky and lengthy process involving signicant nancial RandD and other resources which may fail at any stage of the process due to a number of factors.
These include failure to obtain the required regulatory or marketing approvals for the product candidate or its manufacturing facilities unfavourable clinical efcacy data safety concerns failure of RandD to develop new product candidates failure to demonstrate adequate costeffective benets to regulators and the emergence of competing products.
Production and release schedules for biologics may be more signicantly impacted by regulatory processes than other products.
This is due to more complex and stringent regulation on the manufacturing of biologics and their supply chain.
A succession of negative drug project results and a failure to reduce development timelines effectively or produce new products that achieve commercial success could adversely affect the reputation of our RandD capabilities and is likely to materially adversely affect our business or results of operations.
Difculties of obtaining and maintaining regulatory approvals for new products Impact We are subject to strict controls on the commercialisation processes for our pharmaceutical products including their development manufacture distribution and marketing.
The requirements to obtain regulatory approval based on a products safety efcacy and quality before it can be marketed for an indication in a particular country as well as to maintain and comply with licences and other regulations relating to its manufacture and marketing are particularly important.
The submission of an application to regulatory authorities which vary with different requirements in each region or country may or may not lead to the grant of marketing approval.
Regulators can refuse to grant approval or may require additional data before approval is given even though the medicine may already be launched in other countries.
The approval of a product is required by the relevant regulatory authority in each country although a single panEU MAA can be obtained through a centralised procedure.
In recent years companies sponsoring NDAs and regulatory authorities have been under increased public pressure to apply more conservative benetrisk criteria.
In some instances regulatory authorities require a company to develop plans to ensure safe use of a marketed product before a pharmaceutical product is approved or after approval if a new and signicant safety issue is established.
In addition third party interpretation of publicly available data on our marketed products has the potential to inuence the approval status or labelling of a currently approved and marketed product.
The predictability of the outcome and timing of review processes remains challenging particularly in the US due to competing regulatory priorities and a continuing sentiment of risk aversion on the part of regulatory reviewers and management.
Delays in regulatory reviews and approvals could impact the timing of a new product launch.
In addition the drive for public transparency of the review processes through the more extensive use of public advisory committees increase the unpredictability of the process.
Failure to obtain and enforce effective IP protection Impact Our ability to obtain and enforce patents and other IP rights in relation to our products is an important element of our ability to protect our investment in RandD and create longterm value for the business.
A number of the countries in which we operate are still developing their IP laws or may even be limiting the applicability of these laws to pharmaceutical inventions.
Adverse political perspectives on the desirability of strong IP protection for pharmaceuticals in certain emerging and even developed markets may limit the scope for us to obtain effective IP protection for our products.
As a result certain countries may seek to limit or deny effective IP protection for pharmaceuticals.
Limitations on the availability of patent protection or the use of compulsory licensing in certain countries in which we operate could have a material adverse effect on the pricing and sales of our products and consequently could materially adversely affect our revenues from those products.
More information about protecting our IP is contained in the Intellectual Property section on page 35.
Information about the risk of patent litigation and the early loss of IP rights is contained in the Expiry or loss of or limitations on IP rights risk on page 78.
Delay to new product launches Impact Our continued success depends on the development and successful launch of innovative new drugs.
The anticipated launch dates of major new products have a signicant impact on a number of areas of our business including investment in large clinical studies the manufacture of prelaunch product stocks investment in marketing materials prelaunch sales force training and the timing of anticipated future revenue streams from new product sales.
These launch dates are primarily driven by the development programmes that we run and the demands of the regulatory authorities in the approvals process as well as pricing negotiations.
Delays to anticipated launch dates can result from a number of factors including adverse ndings in preclinical or clinical studies regulatory demands price negotiation competitor activity and technology transfer.
Signicant delays to anticipated launch dates of new products could have a material adverse effect on our nancial condition and results of operations.
For example for the launch of products that are seasonal in nature delays in regulatory approvals or manufacturing difculties may delay launch to the next season which in turn may signicantly reduce the return on costs incurred in preparing for the launch for that season.
In addition a delay in the launch may lead to increased costs if for example marketing and sales efforts need to be rescheduled or protracted for longer than expected.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 77 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Strategic alliances and acquisitions may be unsuccessful Impact We seek technology licensing arrangements and strategic collaborations to expand our product portfolio and geographical presence as part of our business strategy.
Such licensing arrangements and strategic collaborations are key enabling us to grow and strengthen the business.
The success of such arrangements is largely dependent on the technology and other IP we acquire rights to and the resources efforts and skills of our partners.
Also under many of our strategic alliances we make milestone payments well in advance of the commercialisation of the products with no assurance that we will recoup these payments.
Furthermore we experience strong competition from other pharmaceutical companies in respect of licensing arrangements and strategic collaborations and therefore we may be unsuccessful in establishing some of our intended projects.
We may also seek to acquire complementary businesses as part of our business strategy.
The integration of an acquired business could involve incurring signicant debt and unknown or contingent liabilities as well as having a negative effect on our reported results of operations from acquisition related charges amortisation of expenses related to intangibles and charges for the implementation of longterm assets.
We may also experience difculties in integrating geographically separated organisations systems and facilities and personnel with different organisational cultures.
If we fail to complete these types of collaborative projects in a timely manner on a costeffective basis or at all this may limit our ability to access a greater portfolio of products IP technology and shared expertise.
Additionally disputes or difculties in our relationship with our collaborators or partners may arise often due to conicting priorities or conicts of interest between parties which may erode or eliminate the benets of these alliances.
The incurrence of signicant debt or liabilities as a result of integration of an acquired business could cause deterioration in our credit rating and result in increased borrowing costs and interest expense.
Further if following an acquisition liabilities are uncovered in the acquired business the Group may suffer losses and may not have remedies against the seller or third parties.
The integration process may also result in business disruption diversion of management resources the loss of key employees and other issues such as a failure to integrate IT and other systems.
Commercialisation and business execution risks Challenges to achieving commercial success of new products Impact The successful launch of a new pharmaceutical product involves substantial investment in sales and marketing activities launch stocks and other items.
The commercial success of our new medicines is of particular importance to us in order to replace lost sales following patent expiry.
We may ultimately be unable to achieve commercial success for any number of reasons.
These include difculties in manufacturing sufcient quantities of the product candidate for development or commercialisation in a timely manner the impact of price control measures imposed by governments and healthcare authorities erosion of IP rights including infringement by third parties and failure to show a differentiated product prole.
As a result we cannot be certain that compounds currently under development will achieve success and our ability to accurately assess prior to launch the eventual efcacy or safety of a new product once in broader clinical use can only be based on data available at that time which is inherently limited due to relatively short periods of product testing and relatively small clinical study patient samples.
The commercialisation of biologics is often more complex than for small molecule pharmaceutical products primarily due to differences in the mode of administration technical aspects of the product and rapidly changing distribution and reimbursement environments.
If a new product does not succeed as anticipated or its rate of sales growth is slower than anticipated there is a risk that we are unable to fully recoup the costs incurred in launching it which could materially adversely affect our business or results of operations.
Due to the complexity of the commercialisation process for biologics the methods of distributing and marketing biologics could materially adversely impact our revenues from the sales of products such as Synagis and FluMistFluenz.
Illegal trade in our products Impact Illegal trade covers the theft illegal diversion and counterfeiting of our products.
Illegal trade in pharmaceutical products is estimated to exceed 75 billion per year and is generally considered by the industry nongovernmental organisations and governmental authorities to be increasing.
We suffer a commensurate nancial exposure to illegal trade and there is also a risk to public health.
Regulators and the public expect us to secure the integrity of our supply chain and to cooperate actively in the reduction of illegal trade in AstraZeneca products through surveillance investigation and legal action against others engaged in illegal trade.
Public loss of condence in the integrity of pharmaceutical products as a result of counterfeiting could materially adversely affect our reputation and nancial performance.
In addition undue or misplaced concern about the issue may induce some patients to stop taking their medicines with consequential risks to their health.
There is also a direct nancial loss where counterfeit medicines replace sales of genuine products and where genuine products are recalled following discovery of counterfeit stolen andor illegally traded products in an effort to regain control of the integrity of the supply chain.
Developing our business in Emerging Markets Impact The development of our business in Emerging Markets is a critical factor in determining our future ability to sustain or increase our global product revenues.
This poses various challenges including more volatile economic conditions competition from companies with existing market presence the need to identify correctly and to leverage appropriate opportunities for sales and marketing poor IP protection inadequate protection against crime including counterfeiting corruption and fraud the need to impose developed market compliance standards inadvertent breaches of local and international law not being able to recruit appropriately skilled and experienced personnel identication of the most effective sales channels and route to market and interventions by national governments or regulators restricting access to market andor introducing adverse price controls.
The failure to exploit potential opportunities appropriately in Emerging Markets may materially adversely affect our reputation business or results of operations.
Performance  Risk AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 78 Expiry or loss of or limitations on IP rights Impact Pharmaceutical products are only protected from being copied during the limited period of protection under patent rights andor related IP rights such as Regulatory Data Protection or Orphan Drug status.
Expiry or loss of these rights typically leads to the immediate launch of generic copies of the product in the country where the rights have expired or been lost.
See the Intellectual Property section on page 35 which contains a table of certain patent expiry dates for our key marketed products.
Additionally the expiry or loss of patents covering other innovator companies products may also lead to increased competition for our own stillpatented products in the same product class due to the availability of generic products in that product class.
Further there may be increased pricing pressure on our stillpatented products as a result of the lower prices of generic entrants.
Products under patent protection or within the period of Regulatory Data Protection typically generate signicantly higher revenues than those not protected by such rights.
Our revenues nancial condition and results of operations may be materially adversely affected upon expiry or early loss of our IP rights due to generic entrants into the market for the applicable product.
Additionally the loss of patent rights covering major products of other pharmaceutical companies such as Plavix in May may adversely affect the growth of our stillpatented products in the same product class eg Brilinta Brilique in that market.
Pressures resulting from generic competition Impact Our products compete not only with other products approved for the same condition marketed by researchbased pharmaceutical companies but also with generic drugs marketed by generic pharmaceutical manufacturers.
These competitors may invest more of their resources into the marketing of their products than we do depending on the relative priority of these competitor products within their companys portfolio.
Generic versions of products are often sold at lower prices than branded products as the manufacturer does not have to recoup the signicant cost of RandD investment and market development.
The majority of our patented products including Nexium Crestor and Seroquel XR are subject to price pressures as a result of competition from generic copies of these products and from generic forms of other drugs in the same product class for example generic forms of Lipitor and Plavix and generic forms of Seroquel IR.
As well as facing generic competition upon expiry or loss of IP rights we also face the risk that generic drug manufacturers seek to market generic versions of our products prior to expiries of our patents andor the Regulatory Exclusivity periods.
For example we are currently facing challenges in the US from numerous generic drug manufacturers regarding our patents for Seroquel XR Nexium Crestor and Pulmicort four of our key products.
Generic manufacturers may also take advantage of the failure of certain countries to properly enforce Regulatory Data Protection and may launch generics during this protected period.
This is a particular risk in some Emerging Markets where appropriate patent protection may be difcult to obtain or enforce.
If challenges to our patents by generic drug manufacturers succeed and generic products are launched or generic products are launched at risk on the expectation that challenges to our IP will be successful this may materially adversely affect our nancial condition and results of operations.
In 2012 US sales for Seroquel XR Nexium and Crestor were 811 million 2272 million and 3164 million respectively.
Furthermore if limitations on the availability scope or enforceability of patent protection are implemented in jurisdictions in which we operate generic manufacturers in these countries may be increasingly able to introduce competing products to the market earlier than they would have been able to had more robust patent or Regulatory Data Protection been available.
Effects of patent litigation in respect of IP rights Impact Any of the IP rights protecting our products may be asserted or challenged in IP litigation initiated against or by external parties.
Such IP rights may also be the subject of validity challenges in patent ofces.
We expect our most valuable products to receive the greater number of challenges.
Despite our efforts to establish and defend robust patent protection for our products we may not succeed in protecting our patents from such litigation or other challenges.
Where we assert our IP rights and allege infringement we bear the risk that courts may decide that third parties do not infringe our IP rights.
This may result in AstraZeneca losing exclusivity andor erosion of revenues.
Noninfringement defences are typically led by third parties in response to patent infringement lawsuits including in socalled 505b2 cases in the US.
Details of 505b2 actions can be found in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
We also bear the risk that we may be found to infringe patents owned or licensed exclusively by third parties including researchbased and generic pharmaceutical companies and individuals.
Infringement accusations may implicate for example our manufacturing processes product intermediates or use of research tools.
Details of signicant infringement claims against us by third parties enforcing IP rights can be found in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
If we are not successful in maintaining exclusive rights to market one or more of our major products particularly in the US where we achieve our highest revenue our revenue and margins could be materially adversely affected.
Managing or litigating infringement disputes over socalled freedom to operate can be costly.
We may be subject to injunctions against our products or processes and be liable for damages or royalties.
We may need to obtain costly licences.
These risks may be greater in relation to biologics and vaccines where patent infringement claims may relate to discovery or research tools and manufacturing methods andor biological materials.
While we seek to manage such risks by for example acquiring licences foregoing certain activities or uses or modifying processes to avoid infringement claims and permit commercialisation of our products such steps can entail signicant cost and there is no guarantee that they will be successful.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 79 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Price controls and reductions Impact Most of our key markets have experienced the implementation of various cost control or reimbursement mechanisms in respect of pharmaceutical products.
For example in the US realised prices are being depressed through restrictive reimbursement policies and costcontrol tools such as restricted lists and formularies which employ generic rst strategies and require physicians to obtain prior approval for the use of a branded medicine where a generic alternative exists.
These mechanisms can be used by payers to limit the use of branded products and put pressure on manufacturers to reduce net prices.
Many of these mechanisms shift a greater proportion of the cost of medicines to the patient via outofpocket payments at the pharmacy counter.
The patient outofpocket spend is generally in the form of a copayment or in some cases a coinsurance which is designed principally to encourage patients to use generic medicines.
A summary of the principal aspects of price regulation and how price pressures are affecting our business in our most important markets is set out in the Pricing pressure section from page 18 and these economic pressures are also further discussed below in the following risk factor.
Due to these pressures on the pricing of our products there can be no certainty that we will be able to charge prices for a product that in a particular country or in the aggregate enable us to earn an adequate return on our product investment.
These pressures including the increasingly restrictive reimbursement policies to which we are subject and the potential adoption of new legislation expanding the scope of permitted commercial importation of medicines into the US could materially adversely affect our business or results of operations.
We expect that these pressures on pricing will continue and may increase.
Economic regulatory and political pressures Impact We face continued economic regulatory and political pressures to limit or reduce the cost of our products.
In 2010 the US passed the Affordable Care Act a comprehensive health reform package with provisions taking effect between 2010 and 2014.
The law expands insurance coverage establishes health insurance exchanges and establishes new national entities focused on health system reforms.
In terms of specic provisions impacting our industry the law mandates higher rebates and discounts on branded drugs for certain Medicare and Medicaid patients as well as an industrywide excise fee.
Implementation of several health system delivery reforms included in the law has commenced and will continue over the next two years.
For example a new comparative effectiveness research organisation the PatientCentered Outcomes Research Institute has been established and an Independent Payment Advisory Board with broad authority to propose to cut Medicare expenditures is scheduled to commence in 2014.
The Affordable Care Act expands the patient population eligible for Medicaid and will provide new insurance coverage for individuals through stateoperated and federaloperated health insurance exchanges from 2014.
Large employers have typically offered generous health insurance benets but many are struggling with increasing health insurance premiums and may therefore opt to shift employee coverage into the health insurance exchanges which will be operational by 2014.
The pharmaceutical industry could be adversely impacted by such shifts if the health insurance exchanges do not offer a prescription drug benet that is as robust as benets historically provided by large employers.
We anticipate further government intervention in the US in connection with the recent initiative to contain federal spending.
For more information see the Regulatory requirements and Pricing pressure sections from page 17 and 18 respectively.
In the EU efforts by the European Commission to reduce inconsistencies and to improve standards in the disparate national regulatory systems have met with little immediate success.
The industry continues to be exposed in Europe to a range of disparate pricing systems ad hoc costcontainment measures and reference pricing mechanisms which impact prices.
Concurrently many markets are adopting the use of Health Technology Assessment HTA to provide a rigorous evaluation of the clinical efcacy of a product at or post launch.
HTA evaluations are also increasingly being used to assess the clinical as well as costeffectiveness of products in a particular health system.
This comes as payers and policymakers attempt to drive increased efciencies in the use and choice of pharmaceutical products.
Further information regarding these pressures is contained in the Regulatory requirements and Pricing pressure sections from page 17 and page 18 respectively.
It is not possible to accurately estimate the nancial impact of the potential consequences resulting from the Affordable Care Act or related legislative changes when taken together with the number of other marketrelated and industryrelated factors that can also result in similar impacts.
While the overall reduction in our prot before tax for the year due to higher minimum Medicaid rebates on prescription drugs discounts on branded pharmaceutical sales to Medicare Part D beneciaries and an industrywide excise fee was 858 million this reects only the limited number of known quantiable and isolatable effects of these legislative developments.
Other potential indirect or associated consequences of these legislative developments which continue to evolve and which cannot be estimated could have similar impacts.
These include broader changes in access to or eligibility for coverage under Medicare Medicaid or similar governmental programmes such as the recent proposals to limit Medicare benets which could indirectly impact our pricing or sales of prescription products within the private sector.
These continued disparities in pricing systems could lead to marked price differentials between markets which by way of the implementation of existing or new reference pricing mechanisms increases the pricing pressure affecting the industry.
The importation of pharmaceutical products from countries where prices are low due to government price controls or other market dynamics to countries where prices for those products are higher is already prevalent and may increase.
In particular as discussed in the Pricing pressure section on page 18 Greece Portugal and Spain have all introduced measures to lower healthcare spending including mandatory discounts clawbacks and price referencing rules which could have a material adverse effect on our business or results of operations.
Performance  Risk AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 80 Biosimilars Impact While no application for a biosimilar has been made in relation to an AstraZeneca biologic various regulatory authorities are implementing or considering abbreviated approval processes for biosimilars that would compete with patented biologics.
For example in 2010 the US enacted the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act within the Affordable Care Act which contains general directives for biosimilar applications.
The FDA issued draft guidance in February 2012 on implementing an abbreviated biosimilar approval pathway.
However signicant questions remain including standards for designation of interchangeability.
In 2012 the FDA also implemented user fee programmes to support biosimilar product review and policy development.
In Europe the EMA published nal guidelines on similar biological medicinal products containing MAbs and in May the rst MAb biosimilar application was made.
Notably a number of jurisdictions have adopted either the EMA guidelines or those recently set forth by the WHO to enable biosimilars to enter the market after discrete periods of data exclusivity.
The extent to which biosimilars would be differentiated from patented biologics on price is unclear.
However due to their complex nature it is uncertain whether biosimilars would have the same impact on patented biologics that generic products have had on patented small molecule products.
In addition it is uncertain when any such abbreviated approval processes may be fully realised particularly for more complex protein molecules such as MAbs.
Any such processes may materially adversely affect the future commercial prospects for patented biologics such as the ones that we produce.
Increasing implementation and enforcement of more stringent antibribery and anticorruption legislation Impact There is an increasing global focus on the implementation and enforcement of antibribery and anticorruption legislation.
For example the UK Bribery Act 2010 came into force in July 2011.
This act has extensive extraterritorial application implements signicant changes to existing UK antibribery legislation and broadens the scope of statutory offences and the potential applicable penalties including organisational liability for any bribe paid by persons or entities associated with an organisation where the organisation failed to have adequate preventative procedures in place at the time of the offence.
There is also an increase in the maximum applicable penalties for bribery including up to 10 years imprisonment and unlimited nes.
There have also been increased enforcement efforts in the UK by the Serious Fraud Ofce and in the US there has been signicant enforcement activity in respect of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act by the SEC and US Department of Justice against US companies and nonUS companies listed in the US.
We are the subject of current anticorruption investigations and there can be no assurance that we will not from time to time continue to be subject to informal inquiries and formal investigations from governmental agencies.
In the context of our business governmental ofcials interact with us in a variety of roles that are important to our operations such as in the capacity of a regulator partner or healthcare payer reimburser or prescriber among others.
Details of these matters are included in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
We devote signicant resources to the considerable challenge of compliance with this legislation including in emerging and developing markets at considerable cost.
Investigations from governmental agencies require additional resources.
Despite taking signicant measures to prevent breaches of applicable antibribery and anticorruption laws by our personnel breaches may result in the imposition of signicant penalties such as nes the requirement to comply with monitoring or self reporting obligations or debarment or exclusion from government sales or reimbursement programmes any of which could materially adversely affect our reputation business or results of operations.
Any expected gains from productivity initiatives are uncertain Impact We continue to implement various productivity initiatives and restructuring programmes with the aim of enhancing the longterm efciency of the business.
However anticipated cost savings and other benets from these programmes are based on estimates and the actual savings may vary signicantly.
In particular these cost reduction measures are often based on current conditions and cannot always take into account any future changes to the pharmaceutical industry or our operations including new business developments wage or price increases.
If inappropriately managed the expected value of these initiatives could be lost through low employee engagement and hence productivity increased absence and attrition levels and industrial action.
Our failure to successfully implement these planned cost reduction measures either through the successful conclusion of employee relations processes including consultation engagement talent management recruitment and retention or the possibility that these efforts do not generate the level of cost savings we anticipate could materially adversely affect our business or results of operations.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 81 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Changes in senior management failure to attract and retain key personnel and failure to successfully engage with our employees Impact The success of our business is guided by our SET and their direct reports.
The departure of senior leaders can introduce uncertainty in the business.
We rely heavily on recruiting and retaining talented employees with a diverse range of skills and capabilities to meet our strategic objectives.
For example the success of our RandD activities is particularly dependent on our ability to attract and retain sufcient numbers of highquality researchers and development specialists.
We face intense competition for qualied individuals as the supply of people with specic skills and signicant leadership potential or in specic geographic regions may be limited.
Our ability to achieve high levels of employee engagement in the workforce and hence benet from strong commitment and motivation is key to the successful delivery of our business objectives.
In 2012 we appointed a new CEO and in January 2013 we changed the composition of our SET.
Senior management transitions can introduce uncertainty and could materially adversely impact our business or results of operations.
The inability to attract andor retain highly skilled personnel in particular those in key scientic and leadership positions may weaken our succession plans for critical positions in the medium term may materially adversely affect the implementation of our strategic objectives and could ultimately impact our business or results of operations.
Failure to engage effectively with our employees could lead to business disruption in our daytoday operations reduce levels of productivity andor increase levels of voluntary turnover all of which could ultimately adversely impact our business or results of operations.
While we are committed to working on improving drivers of engagement such as increasing our employees understanding of our new management strategy and our ongoing efforts to reduce organisational complexity our efforts may be unsuccessful.
Failure of information technology Impact We are dependent on effective IT systems.
These systems support key business functions such as our RandD manufacturing supply chain and sales capabilities and are an important means of safeguarding and communicating data.
Any signicant disruption to these IT systems including breaches of data centre security or cybersecurity or failure to integrate new and existing IT systems could harm our reputation and materially adversely affect our nancial condition or results of operations.
While we have invested heavily in the protection of our data and IT we may be unable to prevent breakdowns or breaches in our systems that could adversely affect our business.
For example in 2012 the failure of the implementation of an IT interface in an enterprise resource planning IT system in our facility in Sweden Sdertlje caused a disruption to our supply chain resulting in an estimated negative revenue impact of 1%.
As previously disclosed we terminated our previous outsourcing relationship for the provision of IT infrastructure services.
We continue to migrate applications and servers to equipment and facilities managed by AstraZeneca and our current providers of IT infrastructure services.
This migration activity may not be completed on time and within budget which could adversely impact our business or results of operations.
Failure of outsourcing Impact We have outsourced a number of business critical operations to third party providers.
This includes certain RandD processes IT systems HR and nance and accounting services.
A failure to successfully manage and implement the integration of IT infrastructure services provided by our outsourcing providers could create disruption which could materially adversely affect our business or results of operations.
Failure of outsource providers to deliver timely services and to the required level of quality and failure of outsource providers to cooperate with each other could materially adversely affect our nancial condition or results of operations.
In addition such failures could adversely impact our ability to meet business targets maintain a good reputation within the industry and with stakeholders and result in noncompliance with applicable laws and regulations.
Performance  Risk AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 82 Supply chain and delivery risks Manufacturing biologics Impact Manufacturing biologics especially in large quantities is complex and may require the use of innovative technologies to handle living microorganisms and facilities specically designed and validated for this purpose with sophisticated quality assurance and control procedures.
Slight deviations in any part of the manufacturing process may result in lot failure product recalls or spoilage for example due to contamination.
Difculties and delays in the manufacturing distribution and sale of our products Impact We may experience difculties and delays in manufacturing our products such as i supply chain continuity including as a result of disruptions such as a natural or manmade disaster at one of our facilities or at a critical supplier or vendor ii delays related to the construction of new facilities or the expansion of existing facilities including those intended to support future demand for our products iii seizure or recalls of products or shutdown of manufacturing plants and iv other manufacturing or distribution problems including changes in manufacturing production sites limits to manufacturing capacity due to regulatory requirements changes in the types of products produced or physical limitations or other business interruptions that could impact continuous supply.
Manufacturing distribution and sale difculties may result in product shortages and signicant delays which may lead to lost sales.
In 2012 supply from our site in India was disrupted for a period of time following a voluntary recall of products that we determined did not meet our global quality standards.
In 2012 the failure of the implementation of an IT interface in an enterprise resource planning IT system in our facility in Sweden Sdertlje caused a disruption to our supply chain resulting in an estimated negative revenue impact of 1%.
Reliance on third parties for goods Impact We increasingly rely on third parties for the timely supply of goods such as raw materials for example the API in some of our medicines equipment formulated drugs and packaging all of which are key to our operations.
Unexpected events andor events beyond our control could result in the failure of the supply of goods.
For example suppliers of key goods we rely on may cease to trade.
In addition we may experience limited supply of biological materials such as cells animal products or byproducts.
Furthermore government regulations in multiple jurisdictions could result in restricted access to use or transport of such materials.
Third party supply failure could materially adversely affect our nancial condition or results of operations.
This may lead to signicant delays andor difculties in obtaining goods and services on commercially acceptable terms.
Loss of access to sufcient sources of key goods and biological materials may interrupt or prevent our research activities as planned andor increase our costs.
Further information is contained in the Managing risk section on page 74.
Legal regulatory and compliance risks Adverse outcome of litigation andor governmental investigations Impact We may be subject to legal proceedings and governmental investigations.
Litigation particularly in the US is inherently unpredictable and unexpectedly high awards for damages can result from an adverse verdict.
In many cases plaintiffs may claim compensatory punitive and statutory damages in extremely high amounts.
In particular the marketing promotional clinical and pricing practices of pharmaceutical manufacturers as well as the manner in which manufacturers interact with purchasers prescribers and patients are subject to extensive regulation litigation and governmental investigation.
Many companies including AstraZeneca have been subject to claims related to these practices asserted by federal and state governmental authorities and private payers and consumers which have resulted in substantial expense and other signicant consequences.
Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184 describes the material legal proceedings in which we are currently involved.
Investigations or legal proceedings regardless of their outcome could be costly divert management attention or damage our reputation and demand for our products.
Unfavourable resolution of current and similar future proceedings against us could subject us to criminal liability nes penalties or other monetary or nonmonetary remedies require us to make signicant provisions in our accounts relating to legal proceedings and could materially adversely affect our business or results of operations.
Substantial product liability claims Impact Pharmaceutical companies have historically been subject to large product liability damages claims settlements and awards for injuries allegedly caused by the use of their products.
Adverse publicity relating to the safety of a product or of other competing products may increase the risk of product liability claims.
Substantial product liability claims that result in court decisions against us or in the settlement of proceedings could materially adversely affect our nancial condition or results of operations particularly where such circumstances are not covered by insurance.
Furthermore in the past we incurred substantial costs relating to product liability litigation involving Seroquel IR.
For more information see the Limited third party insurance coverage risk on page 84.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 83 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Failure to adhere to applicable laws rules and regulations Impact Any failure to comply with applicable laws rules and regulations may result in civil andor criminal legal proceedings being led against us or in us becoming subject to regulatory sanctions.
Regulatory authorities have wideranging administrative powers to deal with any failure to comply with continuing regulatory oversight and this could affect us whether such failure is our own or that of our contractors or external partners.
Failure to comply with applicable laws including ongoing control and regulation could materially adversely affect our business or results of operations.
For example once a product has been approved for marketing by the regulatory authorities it is subject to continuing control and regulation such as the manner of its manufacture distribution marketing and safety surveillance.
In addition any changes that are made to the manufacturing distribution marketing and safety surveillance processes of our products may require additional regulatory approvals which could result in signicant additional costs andor disruption to these processes.
Such changes may be imposed on us by regulatory authorities as a result of continuing inspections to which we are subject or may be made at our own discretion.
For example if regulatory issues concerning compliance with current Good Manufacturing Practice or safety monitoring regulations for pharmaceutical products often referred to as pharmacovigilance arise this could lead to loss of product approvals product recalls and seizures and interruption of production which could create product shortages and delays in new product approvals.
Failure to adhere to laws rules and regulations relating to anticompetitive behaviour Impact Any failure to comply with laws rules and regulations relating to anticompetitive behaviour may expose us to regulatory sanctions or lawsuits from private nongovernmental entities.
Certain of our commercial arrangements with generics companies which have sought to settle patent challenges on terms acceptable to both innovator and generics manufacturer may be subject to challenge by competition authorities.
An example of such a challenge is the Federal Trade Commission inquiry.
See Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184 for more details.
Where a government authority investigates our adherence to competition laws or we become subject to private party lawsuits this may result in inspections of our sites or requests for documents and other information.
Competition investigations or legal proceedings could be costly divert management attention or damage our reputation.
Unfavourable resolution of such challenges investigations or legal proceedings against us could require us to make changes to our commercial practice and could subject us to nes and penalties and other sanctions.
These could materially adversely affect our business or results of operations.
Environmental and occupational health and safety liabilities Impact We have environmental andor occupational health and safetyrelated liabilities at some currently or formerly owned leased and third party sites the most signicant of which are detailed in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 183.
While we carefully manage these liabilities if a signicant noncompliance issue environmental occupational health or safety incident for which we are responsible were to arise this could result in us being liable to pay compensation nes or remediation costs.
In some circumstances such liability could materially adversely affect our business or results of operations.
In addition our nancial provisions for any obligations that we may have relating to environmental or occupational health and safety liabilities may be insufcient if the assumptions underlying the provisions including our assumptions regarding the portion of waste at a site for which we are responsible prove incorrect or if we are held responsible for additional contamination or occupational health and safetyrelated claims.
Misuse of social media platforms and new technology Impact We increasingly use the internet social media mobile applications and other forms of new technology to communicate internally and externally.
The accessibility and instantaneous nature of interactions with such media may facilitate or exacerbate the risk of data leakages from within AstraZeneca or false or misleading statements being made about AstraZeneca which may be damaging to our reputation.
As social media platforms expand it becomes increasingly challenging to identify new points of entry and to put structures in place to secure and protect information.
Inappropriate use of certain media vehicles could lead to misuse including public disclosure of sensitive information such as personally identiable information on employees healthcare professionals or patients for example those enrolled in our clinical trials which may damage our reputation and expose us to legal risks as well as additional legal obligations.
Similarly the involuntary public disclosure of commercially sensitive information such as trade secrets through external media channels or an information loss could materially adversely affect our business or results of operations.
In addition negative posts or comments on social media websites about us or for example the safety of any of our products could harm our reputation.
Performance  Risk AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 84 Economic and nancial risks Adverse impact of a sustained economic downturn Impact A variety of signicant risks may arise from a sustained global economic downturn.
Additional pressure from governments and other healthcare payers on medicine prices and volumes of sales in response to recessionary pressures on budgets may cause a slowdown or a decline in growth in some markets.
In some cases those governments most severely impacted by the economic downturn may seek alternative ways to settle their debts through for example the issuance of government bonds which might trade at a discount to the face value of the debt.
In addition our customers may cease to trade which may result in losses from writing off debts.
We are highly dependent on being able to access a sustainable ow of liquid funds due to the high xed costs of operating our business and the long and uncertain development cycles of our products.
In a sustained economic downturn nancial institutions with whom we deal may cease to trade and there can be no guarantee that we will be able to access monies owed to us without a protracted expensive and uncertain process if at all.
More than 95% of our cash investments are managed centrally and are invested in AAA credit rated institutional money market funds backed by institutions in the US and the EU which in turn invest in other funds including sovereign funds.
This means our credit exposure is a mix of US sovereign default risk and nancial institution default risk.
While we have adopted cash management and treasury policies to manage this risk see Financial risk management policies section on page 99 we cannot be certain that these will be as effective as they are intended to be in particular in the event of a global liquidity crisis.
In addition open positions where we are owed money and investments we have made in nancial institution money market funds cannot be guaranteed to be recoverable.
Additionally if we need access to external sources of nancing to sustain andor grow our business such as the debt or equity capital nancial markets this may not be available on commercially acceptable terms if at all in the event of a severe andor sustained economic downturn.
This may for instance be the case in the event of any default by the Group on its debt obligations which may materially adversely affect our ability to secure debt funding in the future or our nancial condition in general.
Further information on debt funding arrangements is contained in the Financial risk management policies section on page 99.
Political and socioeconomic conditions Impact We operate in over 100 countries across the world some of which may be subject to political and social instability.
There may be disruption to our business if there is instability in a particular geographic region including as a result of war terrorism riot unstable governments civil insurrection or social unrest.
Deterioration of or failure to improve socioeconomic conditions and situations andor events resulting therefrom depending on their severity could adversely affect our supply andor distribution chain in the affected countries and the ability of customers or ultimate payers to purchase our medicines.
This could materially adversely affect our business or results of operations.
Impact of uctuations in exchange rates Impact As a global business currency uctuations can signicantly affect our results of operations which are reported in US dollars.
Approximately 38% of our global 2012 sales were in the US which is expected to remain our largest single market for the foreseeable future.
Sales in other countries are predominantly in currencies other than the US dollar including the euro Japanese yen Australian dollar and Canadian dollar.
We have a growing exposure to emerging market currencies where some have exchange controls in place but for others the exchange rates are also linked to the US dollar.
Major components of our cost base are located in the UK and Sweden where an aggregate of approximately 25.9% of our employees are based.
Movements in the exchange rates used to translate foreign currencies into US dollars may materially adversely affect our nancial condition or results of operations.
Additionally some of our subsidiaries import and export goods and services in currencies other than their own functional currency and so the nancial results of such subsidiaries could be affected by currency uctuations arising between the transaction dates and the settlement dates for these transactions.
In addition there are foreign exchange differences arising on the translation of equity investments in subsidiaries.
See Note 23 to the Financial Statements from page 175.
Limited third party insurance coverage Impact In recent years the costs associated with product liability litigation have increased the cost of and narrowed the coverage afforded by pharmaceutical companies product liability insurance.
To contain insurance costs in recent years we have continued to adjust our coverage prole accepting a greater degree of uninsured exposure.
The Group has not held any material product liability insurance since February 2006.
In addition where claims are made under insurance policies insurers may reserve the right to deny coverage on various grounds.
For example product liability litigation cases relating to Crestor and Nexium in the US are not covered by third party product liability insurance.
See Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 183 for details.
If we are found to have a nancial liability as a result of product liability or other litigation in respect of which we do not have appropriate insurance or if an insurers denial of coverage is ultimately upheld this could materially adversely affect our business or results of operations.
For details about litigation with a number of insurers with respect to the Seroquel IR liability claim see Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
For more information see the Substantial product liability claims risk on page 82.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 85 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Taxation Impact The integrated nature of our worldwide operations can produce conicting claims from revenue authorities as to the prots to be taxed in individual countries.
The majority of the jurisdictions in which we operate have double tax treaties with other foreign jurisdictions which provide a framework for mitigating the incidence of double taxation on our revenues and capital gains.
The resolution of these disputes can result in a reallocation of prots between jurisdictions and an increase or decrease in related tax costs and has the potential to affect our cash ows and EPS.
Claims regardless of their merits or their outcome are costly divert management attention and may adversely affect our reputation.
If any of these double tax treaties should be withdrawn or amended especially in a territory where a member of the Group is involved in a taxation dispute with a tax authority in relation to crossborder transactions such withdrawal or amendment could materially adversely affect our business or results of operations as could a negative outcome of a tax dispute or a failure by the tax authorities to agree through competent authority proceedings.
See the Financial risk management policies section on page 99 for tax risk management policies and Note 25 to the Financial Statements on page 189 for details of current tax disputes.
Pensions Impact Our pension obligations are backed by assets invested across the broad investment market.
Our most signicant obligations relate to the UK pension fund.
Sustained falls in these asset values will put a strain on funding which may result in requirements for additional cash restricting cash available for strategic business growth.
Similarly if the liabilities increase as a result of a sustained low interest rate environment there will be a strain on funding from the business.
The likely increase in the IAS 19 accounting decit generated by any of these factors may cause the ratings agencies to review our credit rating with the potential to negatively affect our ability to raise debt.
See Note 18 to the Financial Statements from page 167 for further details of the Groups pension obligations.
Performance  Financial Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 86
Financial Review
The nancial performance for the full year 2012 was dened by the signicant revenue decline associated with the loss of exclusivity for several products with revenue down 15% in constant currency terms.
Spending discipline and restructuring benets only partially mitigated the impact of the revenue decline on Core prots and margins particularly as we remain committed to investment to drive future growth and value.
Core earnings per share which beneted from the favourable impact of two tax related matters and the sale of Nexium OTC rights were down 9%.
Productivity and efciency programmes continue to deliver their target levels of savings providing the headroom to invest behind key growth platforms and in progressing the pipeline.
Our cash generation remains strong funding these investments for future growth and value whilst providing 5.9 billion in net cash distributions to shareholders through net share repurchases of 2.2 billion and 3.7 billion from payment of the second interim dividend from 2011 and the rst interim dividend from 2012.
The Companys commitment to its progressive dividend policy was conrmed with the full year 2012 results announcement.
Simon Lowth Chief Financial Ofcer The purpose of this Financial Review is to provide a balanced and comprehensive analysis of the nancial performance of the business during 2012 the nancial position as at the end of the year and the main business factors and trends which could affect the future nancial performance of the business.
All growth rates in this Financial Review are expressed at CER unless noted otherwise.
2012 Business background and results overview The business background is covered in the Our industry section from page 16 the Therapy Area Review from page 50 and the Geographical Review from page 70 and describes in detail the developments in both our products and geographical regions.
As described earlier in this Annual Report sales of our products are directly inuenced by medical need and are generally paid for by health insurance schemes or national healthcare budgets.
Our operating results can be affected by a number of factors other than the delivery of operating plans and normal competition such as The risk of generic competition following loss of patent protection or patent expiry of one of our products or an at risk launch by a competitor or the launch of a generic competitor in the same class as one of our products with the potential adverse effects on sales volumes and prices.
For example in 2012 our performance was affected by generic competition in the US for Seroquel IR and again in the US there has been
86 Introduction 2012 Business background and results overview 88 Measuring performance Results of operations summary analysis of year to 31 December 91 Cash ow and liquidity 92 Financial position 94 Capitalisation and shareholder return 94 Future prospects Results of operations summary analysis of year to 31 December 96 Cash ow and liquidity 97 Financial position 97 Revised Core nancial measures 99 Financial risk management Critical accounting policies and estimates 103 SarbanesOxley Act Section 404 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 87 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview some volume decline of Crestor following the introduction of a large number of generic atorvastatin products.
Further details of patent expiries for our key marketed products are included in the Patent expiries section on page 35.
The adverse impact on pharmaceutical prices as a result of the macroeconomic and regulatory environment.
For instance although there is no direct governmental control on prices in the US action from federal and individual state programmes and health insurance bodies is leading to downward pressures on realised prices.
In other parts of the world there are a variety of price and volume control mechanisms and retrospective rebates based on sales levels that are imposed by governments.
The timings of new product launches which can be inuenced by national regulators and the risk that such new products do not succeed as anticipated together with the rate of sales growth and costs following new product launches.
Currency uctuations.
Our functional and reporting currency is the US dollar but we have substantial exposures to other currencies in particular the euro Japanese yen pound sterling and Swedish krona.
Macro factors such as greater demand from an ageing population and increasing requirements of Emerging Markets.
Over the longer term the success of our RandD is crucial and we devote substantial resources to this area.
The benets of this investment are expected to emerge over the long term and there is considerable inherent uncertainty as to whether and when it will generate future products.
The most signicant features of our nancial results in 2012 are Revenue was down 15% to 27 973 million Reported 17%.
Loss of exclusivity on several brands most notably Seroquel IR and the disposals of Astra Tech and Aptium were the key drivers of the revenue decline.
Symbicort Faslodex Onglyza Iressa BrilintaBrilique and Seroquel XR delivered aggregate CER revenue growth of 600 million for the full year.
Emerging Markets revenue increased by 4% Reported unchanged.
Core operating prot was down 18% Reported 21% to 10430 million driven by lower revenues and lower Core gross margin partially offset by reduced Core RandD and SGandA expenses.
Reported operating prot was down 34% Reported 36% to 8148 million.
Core operating margin of 37 .3% of revenue was down 1.6 percentage points at CER.
Reported operating margin was 29.1% of revenue.
Core EPS decreased by 9% Reported 12% to 6.41.
Basic EPS was down 29% Reported 32% to 4.99.
Basic and Core EPS beneted by 0.37 from two separate taxrelated matters during the year.
Proceeds from the sale of Nexium OTC rights contributed 0.16 to Basic and Core EPS.
The larger decline in Basic EPS reects the 1.08 per share benet in 2011 from the sale of Astra Tech and higher restructuring costs in 2012 neither of which are included in Core earnings.
Dividends paid decreased to 3665 million 2011 3764 million.
Net share repurchases totalled 2206 million 2011 5606 million.
On 1 October the Group announced the suspension of its share repurchase programme.
Total restructuring costs associated with the global programme to reshape the cost base of the business were 1558 million in 2012.
Total costs to date for this third phase of restructuring comprised of initiatives across the supply chain SGandA and RandD amount to 1819 million.
This brings the total restructuring costs charged to 31 December since the start of our restructuring programme in 2007 to 6427 million.
Most of the remaining costs of approximately 300 million for the third phase of our restructuring will be taken in 2013.
The financial performance for the full year 2012 was defined by the loss of exclusivity for several products.
Performance  Financial Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 88 The following measures are referred to in this Financial Review when reporting on our performance both in absolute terms but more often in comparison to earlier years Reported performance.
Reported performance takes into account all the factors including those which we cannot inuence principally currency exchange rates that have affected the results of our business as reected in our Group Financial Statements prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as issued by the IASB.
Core nancial measures.
These are nonGAAP measures because unlike Reported performance they cannot be derived directly from the information in the Groups Financial Statements.
These measures are adjusted to exclude certain signicant items such as charges and provisions related to our global restructuring programmes amortisation and impairment of the signicant intangibles relating to the acquisition of MedImmune in 2007  the amortisation and impairment of the signicant intangibles relating to our exit arrangements with Merck in the US and other specied items.
In determining the adjustments to arrive at the Core result we use a set of established principles relating to the nature and materiality of individual items or groups of items excluding for example events which i are outside of the normal course of business ii are incurred in a pattern that is unrelated to the trends in the underlying nancial performance of our ongoing business or iii are related to major acquisitions to ensure that investors ability to evaluate and analyse the underlying nancial performance of our ongoing business is enhanced.
See the 2012 Reconciliation of Reported results to Core results table on the page opposite for a reconciliation of Reported to Core performance.
Constant exchange rate CER growth rates.
These are also nonGAAP measures.
These measures remove the effects of currency movements by retranslating the current years performance at previous years exchange rates and adjusting for other exchange effects including hedging.
A reconciliation of the Reported results adjusted for the impact of currency movements is provided in the 2012 Reported operating prot table on the page opposite.
Gross and operating prot margin percentages and Core preRandD operating margin.
These measures set out the progression of key performance margins and illustrate the overall quality of the business.
Core preRandD operating margin is a nonGAAP measure of our Core nancial performance.
A reconciliation of Core preRandD operating margin to our operating prot is provided on the page opposite and page 95.
Prescription volumes and trends for key products.
These measures can represent the real business growth and the progress of individual products better and more immediately than invoiced sales.
Net fundsdebt.
This represents our cash and cash equivalents current investments and derivative nancial instruments less interestbearing loans and borrowings.
CER measures allow us to focus on the changes in sales and expenses driven by volume prices and cost levels relative to the prior period.
Sales and cost growth expressed in CER allows management to understand the true local movement in sales and costs in order to compare recent trends and relative return on investment.
CER growth rates can be used to analyse sales in a number of ways but most often we consider CER growth by products and groups of products and by countries and regions.
CER sales growth can be further analysed into the impact of sales volumes and selling price.
Similarly CER cost growth helps us to focus on the real local change in costs so that we can manage the cost base effectively.
We believe that disclosing Core nancial and growth measures in addition to our Reported nancial information enhances investors ability to evaluate and analyse the underlying nancial performance of our ongoing business and the related key business drivers.
The adjustments made to our Reported nancial information in order to show Core nancial measures illustrate clearly and on a yearonyear or periodbyperiod basis the impact upon our performance caused by factors such as changes in sales and expenses driven by volume prices and cost levels relative to such prior years or periods.
As shown in the 2012 Reconciliation of Reported results to Core results table on the page opposite our reconciliation of Reported nancial information to Core nancial measures includes a breakdown of the items for which our Reported nancial information is adjusted and a further breakdown by specic line item as such items are reected in our Reported income statement.
This illustrates the signicant items that are excluded from Core nancial measures and their impact on our Reported nancial information both as a whole and in respect of specic line items.
Core preRandD operating margin is our Core operating margin before Core RandD costs recorded in the year.
This measure reects Core operating performance before reinvestment in internal RandD.
Management presents these results externally to meet investors requirements for transparency and clarity.
Core nancial measures are also used internally in the management of our business performance in our budgeting process and when determining compensation.
Core nancial measures are nonGAAP adjusted measures.
All items for which Core nancial measures are adjusted are included in our Reported nancial information as they represent actual costs of our business in the periods presented.
As a result Core nancial measures merely allow investors to differentiate between different kinds of costs and they should not be used in isolation.
You should also refer to our Reported nancial information in the 2012 Reported operating prot table on the page opposite our reconciliation of Core nancial measures to Reported nancial information in the Reconciliation of Reported results to Core results table on the page opposite and to the Results of operations  summary analysis of year to 31 December 2011 section from page 95 for our discussion of comparative Reported growth measures that reect all factors that affect our business.
Our determination of nonGAAP measures and our presentation of them within this nancial information may differ from similarly titled nonGAAP measures of other companies.
With effect from the rst quarter results of 2013 we will update our denition of Core nancial measures to exclude all intangible asset amortisation charges and impairments except those for ISrelated intangibles.
Further details of this change are included in the Revised Core nancial measures section of this Financial Review from page 97 .
With the exception of the numbers detailed on page 98 all other references to Core in this Annual Report are calculated using our current denition of Core.
The SET retains strategic management of the costs excluded from Reported nancial information in arriving at Core nancial measures tracking their impact on Reported operating prot and EPS with operational management being delegated on a casebycase basis to ensure clear accountability and consistency for each cost category.
Measuring performance AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 89 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Results of operations  summary analysis of year to 31 December 2012 2012 Reported operating prot 2012 2011 Percentage of sales 2012 compared with 2011
CER growth
Reported
Reported %
CER growth %
Revenue 27973 4965 653 33591 15 17 Cost of sales 5393 528 105 6026 19.3 17 .9 9 11 Gross prot 22580 4437 548 27 565 80.7 82.1 16 18 Distribution costs 320 16 10 346 1.1 1.0 5 8 Research and development 5243 208 72 5523 18.8 16.5 4 5 Selling general and administrative costs 9839 1134 188 11161 35.2 33.2 10 12 Prot on disposal of Astra Tech 1483  1483  4.4 na na Other operating income and expense 970 211 18 777 3.5 2.3 27 25 Operating prot 8148 4351 296 12795 29.1 38.1 34 36 Net nance expense 430 428 Prot before tax 7718 12367 Taxation 1391 2351 Prot for the period 6327 10016 Basic earnings per share  4.99 7.33 2012 Core operating resultstel compared with 2011
CER growth
Core
CER growth %
Core growth % Gross prot 22716 4355 548 27 619 16 18 Gross margin % 81.2% 82.2% Distribution costs 320 16 10 346 5 8 Research and development 4452 533 48 5033 11 12 Selling general and administrative costs 8541 1207 170 9918 12 14 Other operating income and expense 1027 200 18 845 24 22 Operating prot 10430 2399 338 13167 18 21 Operating margin % 37.3% 39.2% Net nance expense 430 428 Prot before tax 10000 12739 Taxation 1885 2797 Prot for the period 8115 9942 Basic earnings per share  6.41 7.28 2012 Reconciliation of Reported results to Core results
Restructuring costs Merck and MedImmune
Core
Amortisation
Intangible
Gross prot 22580 136    22716 Distribution costs 320     320 Research and development 5243 791    4452 Selling general and administrative costs 9839 631 534  133 8541 Other operating income and expense 970  57   1027 Operating prot 8148 1558 591  133 10430 Add back Research and development 5243 791    4452 PreRandD operating prot 13391 767 591  133 14882 PreRandD operating margin % 47.9% 53.2% Net nance expense 430     430 Prot before tax 7718 1558 591  133 10000 Taxation 1391 375 87  32 1885 Prot for the period 6327 1183 504  101 8115 Basic earnings per share  4.99 0.94 0.40  0.08 6.41 Performance  Financial Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 90 Revenue decreased by 15% on a CER basis and 17% on a Reported basis.
More than 13 percentage points of the decline at CER approximately 4.5 billion was related to loss of exclusivity on several brands in the portfolio.
Seroquel IR revenues declined by 3 billion and regional losses of exclusivity for Atacand Nexium and Crestor combined for a further negative impact of more than 1 billion.
The disposals of Astra Tech and Aptium accounted for a further decrease of 562 million or approximately 1.7 percentage points of the yearonyear revenue change at CER.
Disruptions to our supply chain from the implementation of an enterprise resource planning IT system in our plant in Sweden early in the year negatively impacted revenues by approximately 1%.
Revenue in the US was down 21% Reported 21% with revenue in the Rest of World down 1 1% Reported 14%.
Emerging Markets sales increased by 4% Reported at.
Further details of our sales performance are contained in the Therapy Area Review from page 50 and the Geographical Review from page 70.
Core gross margin of 81.2% decreased 0.9 percentage points Reported 1.0 percentage points.
In 2012 benets from the absence of the lower margin businesses of Astra Tech and Aptium and from lower net expense related to our accounting for the amendments to the Merck exit arrangements as detailed in Note 9 to the Financial Statements from page 159 were more than offset by an unfavourable impact from product mix.
Core gross margin in 2011 beneted from a 131 million settlement of a royalty dispute with PDL Biopharma Inc.
Core RandD expenditure was 4452 million 11% lower than last year Reported 12%.
Higher costs from new spending on inlicensed acquired or partnered projects including 151 million relating to Amylin Ardea and Amgen were more than offset by lower intangible impairments in 2012 of 186 million compared with 2011 impairments of 527 million a reduction of 341 million and reduced spend on projects.
Core SGandA costs of 8541 million were 12% lower than in 2011 Reported 14% as a result of spending discipline partially offset by amortisation expense related to the expansion of our diabetes alliance with BMS and increased promotional costs in Emerging Markets.
The excise fee imposed by the enactment of US healthcare reform measures amounted to 2.8% 2011 2.1% of Core SGandA expense for the year.
Core other income of 1027 million was 182 million higher Reported growth than the previous year principally as a result of 250 million income from an agreement with Pzer for OTC rights for Nexium.
Core preRandD operating margin was 53.2% down 0.9 percentage points Reported 1.0 percentage points as the benet from higher Core other income was more than offset by higher Core cost of sales and Core SGandA costs as a percentage of revenue.
Core operating prot was 10430 million a decrease of 18% Reported 21%.
Core operating margin declined by 1.6 percentage points Reported 1.9 percentage points to 37 .3% as a result of an unfavourable impact from lower Core gross margin combined with higher Core RandD and SGandA costs as a percentage of revenue being only partially mitigated by the increased Core other income for the year.
Core EPS was 6.41 down 9% Reported 12% lower than the decline in Core operating prot as a result of the benets from net share repurchases and a lower tax rate.
Pretax adjustments to arrive at Core amounted to 2282 million in 2012 2011 372 million.
Excluded from Core results were Restructuring costs totalling 1558 million 2011 1161 million incurred as the Group commenced the third phase of restructuring announced in February 2012.
Amortisation totalling 591 million 2011 537 million relating to assets capitalised as part of the MedImmune acquisition and the Merck exit arrangements the increase driven by the additional amortisation arising from the amendment to the Merck exit arrangements during 2012 as detailed in Note 9 to the Financial Statements from page 159.
72 million 2011 135 million of legal provision charges in respect of ongoing Seroquel franchise legal matters Average Wholesale Price litigation in the US the ToprolXL antitrust litigation and Nexium commercial litigation.
In line with prior years these have been excluded from our Core performance and full details of these matters are included in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
61 million 2011 nil of acquisition and transactionrelated expenses in relation to our Ardea and new BMS collaboration arrangements.
Further details of these transactions are included in Note 9 and Note 22 to the Financial Statements.
In 2011 the prot on sale of our subsidiary Astra Tech of 1483 million was also excluded from Core results.
Further details of this disposal are included in Note 22 to the Financial Statements on page 173.
Reported operating prot was down 34% Reported 36% at 8148 million.
Reported
EPS was 4.99 down 29% Reported 32%.
The larger declines compared with the respective Core nancial measures are the result of the 1483 million benet to Reported other income in 2011 from the sale of Astra Tech together with higher restructuring and amortisation costs in 2012 compared with the prior year.
Net nance expense was 430 million in line with the 428 million expense recorded in 2011.
Net fair value losses on longterm debt and derivatives were 10 million for the year versus 4 million gains in 2011.
This was partially offset by reduced net nance cost on the Groups pension schemes.
The Reported taxation charge of 1391 million 2011 2351 million consists of a current tax charge of 1682 million 201 1 2578 million and a credit arising from movements on deferred tax of 291 million 2011 227 million.
The current year tax charge includes a prior period current tax credit of 79 million 2011 102 million.
The Reported tax rate for the year was 18.0% 2011 19.0%.
The Reported tax rate for the year beneted from a 230 million adjustment to deferred tax balances following substantive enactment in 2012 of a reduction in the Swedish corporation tax rate from 26.3% to 22% which is effective 1 January 2013 and a 240 million adjustment in respect of prior periods following the favourable settlement of a transfer pricing matter.
Excluding these items the Reported tax rate for the year would have been 24.1% this tax rate is applied to the taxable Core adjustments to operating prot resulting in a Core tax rate for the year of 18.9%.
The Reported tax rate for last year beneted from a nontaxable gain on the disposal of Astra Tech and a favourable adjustment to tax provisions of 520 million following the announcement in March 2011 that HM Revenue and Customs in the UK and the US Internal Revenue Service had agreed the terms of an Advance Pricing Agreement regarding transfer pricing arrangements for AstraZenecas US business for the period from 2002 to the end of 2014 and a related valuation matter.
Excluding these benets the Reported tax rate for 2011 was 26.4%.
Total comprehensive income for the year decreased by 3065 million from 2011 to 6405 million.
This was driven by the decrease in prot for the year of 3689 million partially offset by an increase of 624 million in other comprehensive income which was principally due to the nonrecurrence in 2012 of 741 million of actuarial losses recorded in 2011 on our dened benet schemes arising from lower discount rates applied to our longterm pension obligations reecting external market conditions.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 91 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Cash ow and liquidity  2012 All data in this section is on a Reported basis.
Summary cash ows Net funds brought forward at 1 January 2849 3653 535 Earnings before interest tax depreciation amortisation and impairment EBITDA 10666 15345 14235 Prot on disposal of Astra Tech  1483 EBITDA before prot on disposal of Astra Tech 10666 13862 14235 Movement in working capital and shortterm provisions 706 897 82 Tax paid 2043 3999 2533 Interest paid 545 548 641 Noncash and other movements 424 597 463 Net cash available from operating activities 6948 7821 10680 Purchase of intangibles net 3947 458 1180 Other capital expenditure net 473 737 708 Acquisitions of business operations 1187  348 Net cash received on disposal of Astra Tech  1772 Investments 5607 577 2236 Dividends 3665 3764 3361 Net share repurchases 2206 5606 2110 Distributions 5871 9370 5471 Other movements 312 168 145 Net debtfunds carried forward at 31 December 1369 2849 3653 Net debtfunds reconciliation Cash and cash equivalents 7701 7571 1 1068 Shortterm investments 823 4248 1482 Net derivative nancial instruments 417 358 325 Cash shortterm investments and derivatives 8941 12 177 12875 Overdraft and shortterm borrowings 879 221 125 Finance leases 84 Current instalments of loan  1769 Loans due after one year 9347 7338 9097 Loans and borrowings 10310 9328 9222 Net debtfunds 1369 2849 3653 Cash generated from operating activities was 6948 million in the year to 31 December 2012 compared with 7 821 million in 2011.
The decrease of 873 million is primarily driven by lower operating prots offset by lower tax payments.
Investment cash outows of 5607 million include the purchases of Ardea 1187 million and intangible assets associated with our collaboration with BMS on Amylin 3358 million.
The 2011 investment cash inow of 577 million beneted from the sale of Astra Tech 1772 million.
Further details of the Ardea acquisition and Astra Tech disposal are included in Note 22 to the Financial Statements from page 173.
Our
Amylin transaction is detailed in Note 9 to the Financial Statements on page 161.
Net cash distributions to shareholders decreased from 9370 million in 2011 to 5871 million in 2012 the reduction being driven by the suspension of our share repurchase programme in October.
Included in net cash distributions to shareholders are dividend payments of 3665 million 2011 3764 million.
At 31 December 2012 outstanding gross debt interestbearing loans and borrowings was 10310 million 2011 9328 million.
Of this gross debt 901 million is due within one year including 77 4 million of commercial paper borrowings 2011 nil with various shortterm maturities all within 90 days.
In
2011 amounts due within one year included 1769 million relating to current instalments of loans.
During September the Company issued 2 billion of new longterm debt in two tranches 1 billion maturing in 2019 with a coupon of 1.95% and 1 billion maturing in 2042 with a coupon of 4.00%.
Net proceeds of 1980 million from the issue were used to repay a 1.75 billion bond with a coupon of 5.40% maturing in September 2012 and for general corporate purposes.
Net debt was 1369 million at the end of the year a decrease from net funds of 2849 million at the end of 201 1 a movement of 4218 million during the year as a result of the net cash outow described above.
Offbalance sheet transactions and commitments We have no offbalance sheet arrangements and our derivative activities are non speculative.
The table below sets out our minimum contractual obligations at the year end.
Payments due by period Less than 1 year 13 years 35 years
5 years
Total
Bank loans and other borrowings 1365 2649 2536 10766 17316 15515 Finance leases 23 46 32  101 Operating leases 102 140 8telContracted capital expenditure 245 245 190 Total 1735 2835 2651 10875 18096 16097 Bank loans and other borrowings include interest charges payable in the period as detailed in Note 23 to the Financial Statements on page 175.
Performance  Financial Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 92 Financial position  2012 All data in this section is on a Reported basis.
Summary statement of nancial position
Movement
Property plant and equipment 6089 336 6425 532 6957 Goodwill and intangible assets 26346 5504 20842 1187 22029 Inventories 2061 209 1852 170 1682 Trade and other receivables 7981 773 8754 907 7847 Trade and other payables 10222 862 9360 326 9034 Provisions 1344 518 1862 76 1938 Net income tax payable 2059 275 2334 1521 3855 Net deferred tax liabilities 1465 244 1221 449 1670 Retirement benet obligations 2265 409 2674 202 2472 Noncurrent other investments 199 2 201 10 211 Net debtfunds 1369 4218 2849 804 3653 Net assets 23952 480 23472 62 23410 In 2012 net assets increased by 480 million to 23952 million.
The increase in net assets is broadly as a result of the Group prot of 6327 million offset by dividends of 3619 million and net share repurchases of 2206 million.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment decreased by 336 million to 6089 million.
Additions of 772 million 2011 807 million were offset by depreciation of 1023 million 2011 1086 million and disposals of 224 million 2011 233 million.
Goodwill and intangible assets The Groups goodwill of 9898 million 2011 9862 million principally arose on the acquisition of MedImmune in 2007 and the restructuring of our US joint venture with Merck in 1998.
Goodwill of 30 million arising on our acquisition of Ardea as detailed in Note 22 to the Financial Statements on page 173 was capitalised in 2012.
Intangible assets amounted to 16448 million at 31 December 2012 201 1 10980 million.
Intangible asset additions were 6916 million in 2012 2011 442 million including 1464 million arising on the acquisition of Ardea 3358 million arising from the expansion of our diabetes alliance with BMS and 1475 million in connection with our Merck arrangements.
Amortisation in the year was 1296 million 2011 911 million and impairments totalled 199 million 2011 553 million.
Further details of our additions to intangible assets and impairments recorded are included in Note 9 to the Financial Statements from page 159.
Receivables payables and provisions Trade receivables decreased by 934 million to 5696 million in line with lower revenues in 2012.
Included within trade receivables is approximately 420 million of net receivables representing 7% of our trade receivables due from customers in the eurozone countries of Spain Italy Portugal and Greece Spain 120 million Italy 205 million Portugal 30 million and Greece 65 million.
Within this balance is approximately 130 million of overdue government trade receivables.
In light of current market conditions debts within these eurozone countries have been subject to enhanced monitoring and scrutiny by the Group.
Our bad debt provisioning against these debts reects our current estimate of the recoverability of these balances based on consideration of a number of factors such as the status of current negotiations past payment history and the budget constraints of individual countries.
In 2012 our revenue from these four countries was 876 million Italy 510 million Spain 241 million Greece and 168 million Portugal.
Other receivables decreased by 402 million to 835 million as a result of monies being released from externally held settlement funds in relation to Seroquel franchise legal matters.
Prepayments and accrued income increased by 563 million driven principally by an increase in prepayments related to our Amylin transaction see Note 9 to the Financial Statements on page 161.
Trade and other payables increased by 862 million in 2012 to 10222 million with increases in accruals of 1323 million due to our Merck exit commitments as detailed in Note 9 to the Financial Statements from page 161 being offset by a decrease in rebates and chargeback accruals of 799 million.
The decrease in rebates and chargebacks is principally driven by the reduction in US revenues recorded in 2012.
Further details of the movements on rebates and chargebacks are included from page 99.
The reduction in provisions of 518 million in 2012 includes 1096 million of additional charges recorded in the year offset by 1476 million of cash payments.
Included
Cash payments of 1476 million include a reduction in our Seroquel franchiserelated provisions of 427 million following release of monies from our settlement funds as detailed above and 853 million for our global restructuring programme.
Further details of the charges made against our provisions are contained in Notes 17 and 25 to the Financial Statements.
Tax payable and receivable Net income tax payable has decreased by 275 million to 2059 million principally due to the settlement of a transfer pricing matter as detailed in Note 4 to the Financial Statements from page 152.
Our tax receivable balance of 803 million comprises tax owing to AstraZeneca from certain governments expected to be received on settlements of transfer pricing audits and disputes see Note 25 to the Financial Statements on page 189 and cash tax timing differences.
Net deferred tax liabilities increased by 244 million in the year.
Retirement benet obligations Net retirement benet obligations decreased by 409 million driven by an additional lump sum payment made into the UK dened benet scheme in 2012.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 93 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview In recent years the Group has undertaken several initiatives to reduce its net pension obligation exposure.
For the UK dened benet pension scheme which represents AstraZenecas largest dened benet scheme these initiatives have included agreeing funding principles for cash contributions to be paid to the UK pension scheme to target a level of assets in excess of the current expected cost of providing benets and in 2010 amendments to the scheme to freeze pensionable pay at 30 June 2010 levels.
In addition to the cash contributions to be paid into the UK pension scheme AstraZeneca makes contributions to an escrow account which is held outside the pension scheme.
The escrow account assets are payable to the fund in agreed circumstances for example in the event of AstraZeneca and the pension fund trustee agreeing on a change to the current longterm investment strategy.
AstraZeneca has agreed to fund the UK dened benet scheme shortfall by making lump sum payments totalling 715 million 1103 million.
The rst of these lump sum payments of 180 million 278 million was paid into the pension scheme from the escrow account in December 2011.
2012 and the balance will be paid in due course.
In 2011 132 million 213 million was paid into the escrow account and a further 230 million 355 million was paid in during January 2012.
At 31 December 2012 462 million 748 million escrow fund assets are included within other investments as detailed in Note 10 to the Financial Statements on page 163.
In 2012 approximately 97% of the Groups obligations were concentrated in the UK the US Sweden and Germany.
Further details of the Groups pension schemes are included in Note 18 to the Financial Statements from page 167 .
Commitments and contingencies The Group has commitments and contingencies which are accounted for in accordance with the accounting policies described in the Financial Statements in the Group Accounting Policies section from page 146.
The Group also has taxation contingencies.
These are described in the Taxation section in the Critical accounting policies and estimates section on page 99 and in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 189.
Research and development collaboration payments Details of future potential RandD collaboration payments are also included in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 183.
As detailed in Note 25 to the Financial Statements payments to our collaboration partners may not become payable due to the inherent uncertainty in achieving the development and revenue milestones linked to the future payments.
As part of our overall externalisation strategy we may enter into further collaboration projects in the future that may include milestone payments and therefore as certain milestone payments fail to crystallise due to for example development not proceeding they may be replaced by potential payments under new collaborations.
Investments divestments and capital expenditure As detailed earlier in the Research and Development section from page 30 AstraZeneca views collaborations including externalisation arrangements in the eld of RandD as a crucial element of the development of our business.
The Group has completed over 130 major externalisation transactions over the past three years two of which were accounted for as business acquisitions under IFRS 3 Business Combinations being the acquisition of Ardea in 2012 for 1.3 billion and Novexel in 2010 for 0.5 billion and all others were strategic alliances and collaborations.
Further details of our business acquisitions and disposals in the past three years are contained in Note 22 to the Financial Statements from page 173.
Details of our signicant externalisation transactions are given below In January 2007  AstraZeneca signed an exclusive codevelopment and copromotion agreement with BMS for the development and commercialisation of Onglyza a DPPIV and Forxiga a selective sodiumglucose cotransporter 2 SGLT2 inhibitor both for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes.
The agreement is global with the exception of Japan for
Under each agreement the two companies jointly develop the clinical and marketing strategy and share development and commercialisation expenses on a global basis.
To date AstraZeneca has made upfront and milestone payments totalling 300 million for Onglyza and 170 million for Forxiga will make a further payment of 80 million for Forxiga in early 2013 and may make future milestone payments of up to 150 million on Forxiga contingent on achievement of regulatory milestones and launch in key markets.
Following launch prots and losses globally are shared equally and an additional 300 million of salesrelated payments for each product may be triggered based on worldwide sales success.
In August AstraZeneca expanded its diabetes alliance with BMS to incorporate the development and marketing of Amylins portfolio of diabetes products.
Amylin a wholly owned subsidiary of BMS is a biopharmaceutical company dedicated to the discovery development and commercialisation of innovative medicines for patients with diabetes and other metabolic diseases.
Amylins primary focus is on the research development and commercialisation of a franchise of GLP1 agonists for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes.
The portfolio of collaboration products includes Byetta exenatide injection and Bydureon exenatide extendedrelease for injectable suspensionexenatide 2mg powder and solvent for prolonged release suspension for injection that are approved for use in both the US and Europe Symlin pramlinitide acetate injection that is approved for use in the US and metreleptin a leptin analogue currently under review at the FDA for the treatment of diabetes andor hypertriglyceridaemia in patients with rare forms of inherited or acquired lipodystrophy.
AstraZeneca has expanded the alliance for a total consideration of 3.7 billion.
This includes an amount of 135 million relating to an option of AstraZeneca contained in the collaboration agreement to acquire certain additional governance rights in respect of the collaboration.
The Group notied BMS of its decision to exercise the option in August and the balance of 135 million will be payable once applicable antitrust and competition approvals are received by AstraZeneca.
The Group expects to make this payment in the rst half of 2013.
Prots and losses arising from the collaboration will be shared equally.
Further details of this collaboration and our accounting treatment for this arrangement are included in Note 9 to the Financial Statements on page 161.
In April 2012 AstraZeneca announced an agreement to jointly develop and commercialise ve monoclonal antibodies from Amgens clinical inammation portfolio AMG 139 AMG 157  AMG 181 AMG 557 and brodalumab AMG 827.
Under the terms of the agreement AstraZeneca made a 50 million upfront payment and the companies share both costs and prots.
Approximately
65% of costs for the 2012 to 2014 period will be funded by AstraZeneca.
Thereafter the companies will split costs equally.
In addition AstraZeneca will make milestone payments to a maximum of 30 million up to launch.
On commercialisation Amgen will retain a low singledigit royalty for brodalumab and a midsingledigit royalty for the rest of the portfolio after which the companies will share prots equally.
Performance  Financial Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 94 The Group determines the above externalisation transactions to be signicant using a range of factors.
We look at the specic circumstances of the individual externalisation arrangement and apply several quantitative and qualitative criteria.
Because we consider our externalisation strategy to be an extension of our RandD strategy the expected total value of development payments under the transaction and its proportion of our annual RandD spend both of which are proxies for overall RandD effort and cost are important elements of the signicance determination.
Other quantitative criteria we apply include without limitation expected levels of future sales the possible value of milestone payments and the resources used for commercialisation activities for example the number of staff.
Qualitative factors we consider include without limitation new market developments new territories new areas of research and strategic implications.
In aggregate payments capitalised under the Groups externalisation arrangements other than those detailed above amounted to 156 million in 2012 123 million in 2011 and 337 million in 2010.
The Group recognised other income in respect of other externalisation arrangements totalling 255 million in 2012 including 250 million of income from an agreement with Pzer for OTC rights for Nexium 18 million in 2011 and 82 million in 2010.
Capitalisation
The total number of shares in issue at 31 December 2012 was 1247 million.
12.2 million Ordinary Shares were issued in consideration of share option exercises for a total of 429 million.
Share repurchases amounted to 57 .8 million Ordinary Shares at a cost of 2635 million.
Shareholders equity increased by 491 million to 23737 million at the year end.
Noncontrolling interests decreased to 215 million 2011 226 million.
Dividend and share repurchases The Board has recommended a second interim dividend of 1.90 120.5 pence 12.08 SEK to be paid on 18 March 2013.
This brings the full year dividend to 2.80 178.6 pence 18.34 SEK.
This dividend is consistent with the progressive dividend policy by which the Board intends to maintain or grow the dividend each year.
In adopting this policy the Board recognised that some earnings uctuations are to be expected as the Groups revenue base transitions through this period of exclusivity losses and new product launches.
The Boards view is that the annual dividend will not just reect the nancial performance of a single year taken in isolation but reect its view of the earnings prospects for the Group over the entirety of the investment cycle.
The Company has revised the basis by which it assesses dividend cover.
The previous basis was a dividend cover target of two times ie a payout ratio of 50% based on Reported earnings before restructuring costs.
With the adoption of new denitions of Core nancial measures as detailed from page 97  the dividend cover target is now two times based on Core earnings under the new denition.
In the context of the earnings uctuations that are to be expected as the Groups revenue base transitions through this period of exclusivity losses and new product launches the Board recognises that dividend cover in any year is likely to vary from the two times target level through the investment cycle.
In setting the distribution policy and the overall nancial strategy the Boards aim is to continue to strike a balance between the interests of the business our nancial creditors and our shareholders.
After providing for business investment funding the progressive dividend policy and meeting our debt service obligations the Board will keep under review the opportunity to return cash in excess of these requirements to shareholders through periodic share repurchases.
Future prospects We believe challenging market conditions will persist in 2013 including continued government interventions in price.
The revenue impact from the loss of exclusivity will also continue to affect our performance.
In the context of the ongoing update to our strategy we have withdrawn the planning assumptions for revenue and margin evolution for the period 2010 to 2014 we outlined in January 2010.
We plan to hold a Capital Markets Day in March 2013 to provide a more detailed exposition of our strategic priorities.
Capitalisation and shareholder return Dividend for 2012 Pence SEK Payment date First interim dividend 0.90 58.1 6.26 10 September 2012 Second interim dividend 1.90 120.5 12.08 18 March 2013 Summary of shareholder distributions
Cost
Dividend per share
Shareholder distributions 2000 9.4 352 0.70 1236 1588 2001 23.5 1080 0.70 1225 2305 2002 28.3 1190 0.70 1206 2396 2003 27.2 1154 0.795 1350 2504 2004 50.1 2212 0.94 1555 3767 2005 67.7 3001 1.30 2068 5069 2006 72.2 4147 1.72 2649 6796 2007 79.9 4170 1.87 2740 6910 2008 13.6 610 2.05 2971 3581 2009   2.30 3339 3339 2010 53.7 2604 2.55 3604 6208 2011 127 .4 6015 2.80 3653 9668 2012 57.8 2635 2.80 3493 Total 610.8 29170 21.225 31089 60259 Total dividend cost estimated based upon number of shares in issue at 31 December 2012.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 95 Strategy Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview Financial Statements Performance Results of operations  summary analysis of year to 31 December 2011 2011 Reported operating prot 2011 2010 Percentage of sales 2011 compared with 2010
CER growth
Reported
Reported %
CER growth %
Revenue 33591 601 923 33269 2 1 Cost of sales 6026 625 262 6389 17.9 19.2 10 6 Gross prot 27565 24 661 26880 82.1 80.8  3 Distribution costs 346 3 14 335 1.0 1.0 1 3 Research and development 5523 15 190 5318 16.5 16.0  4 Selling general and administrative costs 11161 409 307 10445 33.2 31.4 4 7 Prot on disposal of Astra Tech 1483 1483   4.4  na na Other operating income and expense .3 2.1 8 9 Operating prot 12795 1 145 156 11494 38.1 34.5 10 11 Net nance expense 428 517 Prot before tax 12367 10977 Taxation 2351 2896 Prot for the period 10016 8081 Basic earnings per share  7.33 5.60 2011 Core operating resultstel compared with 2010
CER growth
Core
CER growth %
Core growth % Gross margin % 82.2% 81.2% Distribution costs 346 3 14 335 1 3 Research and development 5033 639 175 4219 15 19 Selling general and administrative costs 9918 160 301 9777 2 1 Other operating income and expense 845 71 6 910 8 7 Operating prot 13167 610 174 13603 4 3 Operating margin % 39.2% 40.8% Net nance expense 428 517 Prot before tax 12739 13086 Taxation 2797 3416 Prot for the period 9942 9670 Basic earnings per share  7.28 6.71 2011 Reconciliation of Reported results to Core results
Restructuring costs Merck and MedImmune
Prot on disposal of Astra Tech
Amortisation
Intangible
Gross prot 27565 54 27619 Distribution costs 346  346 Research and development 5523 468  22   5033 Selling general and administrative costs 11161 639 469  135  9918 Prot on disposal of Astra Tech 1483     1483 Other operating income and expense 777  68 845 Operating prot 12795 1 1483 13 167 Add back Research and development 5523 468  22  5033 PreRandD operating prot 18318 693 537  135 1483 18200 PreRandD operating margin % 54.5% 54.2% Net nance expense 428      428 Prot before tax 12367 1 1483 12739 Taxation 2351 306 98 6 36  2797 Prot for the period 10 1483 9942 Basic earnings per share  7.33 0.63 0.32 0.01 0.07 1.08 7.28 Performance  Financial Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 96 2011 revenue increased by 1% on a Reported basis but decreased by 2% on a CER basis.
As in 2010 revenue beneted from strong growth of Crestor  Symbicort and the Seroquel franchise but was offset by lower revenues for Nexium Arimidex and
Emerging Markets sales growth of 10% in 2011 Reported 11% and Established ROW 4% Reported 14% was offset by a decline in 2011 US sales of 2% Reported 2% and Western Europe of 11% Reported 7%.
Further details of our sales performance are contained in the Therapy Area Review from page 50 and the Geographical Review from page 70.
Core gross margin in 201 1 of 82.2% increased 1.3 percentage points Reported 1.0 percentage points.
The 2011 yearonyear improvement in the margin was largely due to the impact of the intangible impairment related to lesogaberan on 2010 gross margin and a 131 million benet from the settlement of a royalty dispute with PDL Biopharma Inc. in 2011.
Core RandD expenditure in 2011 was 5033 million 15% higher than 2010 Reported 19% driven by higher intangible impairments charged to RandD expenditure in 2011 including 285 million for olaparib and 150 million for TC5214 and latestage project spend.
2011 Core SGandA costs of 9918 million were 2% lower than in 2010 Reported 1% higher.
Investment in Emerging Markets and recently launched brands as well as the impact of the US healthcare reform excise tax were more than offset by operational efciencies across Established Markets.
Core other income in 2011 of 845 million was 65 million less than the previous year principally as a result of a higher level of disposal gains in 2010.
Core preRandD operating margin was 54.2% in 2011 up 1.0 percentage points Reported 0.7 percentage points as the higher 2011 gross margin was only slightly offset by lower Core other income and higher SGandA costs as a percentage of revenue.
2011 Core operating prot was 13167 million a decrease of 4% from 2010 Reported 3%.
Core operating margin declined by 1.2 percentage points Reported 1.6 percentage points to 39.2% in 2011 as a result of the higher RandD spend and lower Core other operating income.
Core EPS was 7 .28 in 2011 up 7% Reported 9% with the lower operating prot offset by a lower tax rate lower net interest as well as the benet of a lower average number of shares outstanding.
Within Core adjustments for 2011 restructuring costs and amortisation were broadly in line with 2010.
Noncore intangible impairments and legal provisions were signicantly reduced from 2010.
In 2011 Core adjustments also included the prot on the sale of our dental and healthcare subsidiary Astra Tech.
Excluded from 201 1 Core results were Impairment charges of 22 million 2010 568 million arising from impairments of assets capitalised as part of the MedImmune acquisition.
135 million 2010 612 million of legal provision charges in respect of the ongoing Seroquel IR product liability litigation Average Wholesale Price litigation in the US and the ToprolXL antitrust litigation.
Restructuring costs totalling 1161 million in 2011 2010 1202 million incurred as the Group continued its previously announced efciency programmes.
Amortisation totalling 537 million 2010 518 million relating to assets capitalised in 2011 as part of the MedImmune acquisition and the Merck exit arrangements.
Prot on sale of our subsidiary Astra Tech of 1483 million.
On 31 August 2011 we completed the sale of Astra Tech to DENTSPLY International Inc. million.
Further details of this disposal are included in Note 22 to the Financial Statements on page 173.
2011 Reported operating prot was up 10% at CER Reported 11% at 12795 million largely as a result of the impact of the prot on the disposal of Astra Tech.
Reported EPS was 7 .33 in 2011 up 29% Reported 31% as a result of the same factors affecting Core EPS along with the prot recognised on the disposal of Astra Tech.
Net nance expense was 428 million in 2011 against 517 million in 2010 due to reduced interest payable on lower debt balances 46 million and a lower net pension interest expense of 55 million principally due to increased pension assets held by our dened benet schemes.
The 2011 Reported taxation charge of 2351 million 2010 2896 million consisted of a current tax charge of 2578 million 2010 3435 million and a credit arising from movements on deferred tax of 227 million 2010 539 million.
The 201 1 current year tax charge included a prior period current tax credit of 102 million 2010 charge of 370 million.
The Reported tax rate for 2011 was 19.0% 2010 26.4%.
The 2011 Reported tax rate beneted from the nontaxable gain on the disposal of Astra Tech and an adjustment in respect of prior periods following the announcement in March 2011 that HM Revenue and Customs in the UK and the US Internal Revenue Service had agreed the terms of an Advance Pricing Agreement regarding transfer pricing arrangements for AstraZenecas US business for the period from 2002 to the end of 2014 and a related valuation matter.
Excluding these benets the Reported tax rate for 2011 was 26.4%.
Total comprehensive income for 2011 increased by 1364 million to 9470 million.
This was driven by the increase in prot in 2011 of 1935 million offset by a decrease of 571 million in other comprehensive income principally due to 741 million of actuarial losses on our dened benet schemes arising from lower discount rates being applied in 201 1 to our longterm pension obligations reecting external market conditions.
Cash ow and liquidity  2011 All data in this section is on a Reported basis.
Cash generated from operating activities was 7 821 million in the year to 31 December 2011 compared with 10680 million in 2010.
The decrease of 2859 million was primarily driven by higher tax payments made in 2011 including a net amount of 1.1 billion in relation to the Advance Pricing Agreement between the UK and US governments tax authorities and the settlement of a related valuation matter an increase in trade and other receivables and higher contributions made to our UK dened benet pension fund.
Investment cash inows of 577 million in 2011 included the sale of Astra Tech 1772 million.
Cash outows on the purchase of tangible xed assets amounted to 839 million in 2011 in line with the previous year.
Net cash distributions to shareholders increased from 5471 million in 2010 to 9370 million in 2011 through dividend payments of 3764 million and net share repurchases of 5606 million.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 97 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview At 31 December 2011 outstanding gross debt interestbearing loans and borrowings was 9328 million 2010 9222 million.
Of this gross debt 1990 million was due within one year 2010 125 million.
Financial position  2011 All data in this section is on a Reported basis.
In 2011 net assets increased by 62 million to 23472 million.
The increase in net assets as a result of the 2011 Group prot of 10016 million was offset by dividends of 3752 million and share repurchases of 6015 million.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment decreased by 532 million to 6425 million in 2011.
Additions of 807 million 2010 808 million were offset by depreciation of 1068 million 2010 1076 million and disposals of 233 million 2010 73 million including 151 million of assets on the sale of Astra Tech.
Goodwill and intangible assets Our goodwill of 9862 million at 31 December 2011 2010 9871 million principally arose on the acquisition of MedImmune and the restructuring of our US joint venture with Merck in 1998.
No goodwill was capitalised in 2011.
Intangible assets amounted to 10980 million at 31 December 2011 2010 12158 million.
Intangible asset additions were 442 million in 2011 2010 1791 million amortisation was 911 million 2010 810 million and impairments totalled 553 million 2010 833 million.
113 million of intangible assets were disposed of on the sale of Astra Tech in 2011.
Intangible asset impairment charges recorded in 2011 included 285 million following the termination of development of olaparib for the maintenance treatment of serous ovarian cancer and an impairment of 150 million reecting a lower probability of success assessment for TC5214 based on the results of the rst two of four Phase III efcacy and tolerability studies.
Receivables payables and provisions In 2011 trade receivables increased by 383 million to 6630 million driven principally by higher gross sales in the US in December 201 1 and the way calendar working days fell at the 2011 year end.
Other receivables increased by 566 million to 1237 million at 31 December 2011 driven by an increase in our Seroquel IRrelated settlement funds.
Trade and other payables increased by 326 million in 2011 driven by increases in accruals of 177 million and rebates and chargebacks of 446 million offset by a decrease in other payables of 215 million.
The increase in rebates and chargebacks arose principally from increased managed care and group purchasing organisation rebates.
Further details of the movements on rebates and chargebacks are included from page 99.
The movement in provisions of 76 million in 2011 included 716 million of additional charges recorded in the year offset by 657 million of cash payments.
Included
2011 cash payments of 657 million included 377 million against our ongoing global restructuring initiative and 153 million related to legal matters.
Tax payable and receivable Net income tax payable in 201 1 decreased by 1521 million to 2334 million principally due to the payment of a net amount of 1.1 billion in relation to the Advance Pricing Agreement between the UK and US governments tax authorities and the settlement of a related valuation matter.
The tax receivable balance of 1056 million largely comprised tax owing to AstraZeneca from certain governments expected to be received on settlements of transfer pricing audits and disputes.
Net deferred tax liabilities reduced by 449 million in 2011.
Retirement benet obligations Net retirement benet obligations increased by 202 million in 2011 due to an increase in postretirement scheme obligations of 954 million driven by a reduction in the discount rate applied to longterm scheme obligations reecting present market conditions for corporate bonds offset by pension fund employer contributions made in the year of 733 million 2010 469 million.
Revised Core nancial measures As detailed in our announcement of 12 November 2012 with effect from our rst quarter results in 2013 the Group will update its denition of Core nancial measures to exclude all intangible asset amortisation charges and impairments except those for ISrelated intangibles.
As intangible assets acquired as a result of externalisation become an increasing proportion of the Groups asset base the new denition has been extended to provide better clarity of the impact from amortisation and impairment charges included in Reported results and in addition while recognising that nonGAAP measures differ between companies it will aid comparability of our results versus our peers.
The items excluded from Core results under the existing denition as disclosed in detail on page 88 remain a constituent part of the new denition.
The existing denition excludes from our Core numbers certain signicant items such as charges and provisions related to our global restructuring programmes amortisation and impairment of the signicant intangibles relating to our acquisition of MedImmune in 2007 and our exit arrangements with Merck in the US and other specied items.
In determining the adjustments to arrive at the Core result we use a set of established principles relating to the nature and materiality of individual items or groups of items excluding for example events which i are outside of the normal course of business ii are incurred in a pattern that is unrelated to the trends in the underlying nancial performance of our ongoing business or iii are related to major acquisitions to ensure that investors ability to evaluate and analyse the underlying nancial performance of our ongoing business is enhanced.
Adjustments between Reported and revised Core performance measures Under the revised denition of Core our Reported performance will be adjusted for Amortisation and impairments of intangible assets.
The denition of this item will be updated to include all amortisation and impairment charges for intangible assets except for those arising on ISrelated assets.
Adjusting for these items removes the volatility when impairments are booked on such assets and is intended to provide a better measure of underlying business performance.
It will be extended to cover all amortisation and impairments relating to product marketing and distribution rights and other intangibles incorporating those already excluded under the current denition relating to our acquisition of MedImmune and our exit arrangements with Merck.
The amortisation and impairment of ISrelated intangibles
Performance  Financial Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 98 are not included in the adjustment and will remain in Core.
Restructuring costs.
The denition for this item has not been changed.
These charges arise from the major restructuring programmes announced by the Group.
Legal charges and other charges.
The denition for this item has not been changed.
Legal payments charges and expenses related to settlements judgments and nes in the context of product liability litigation antitrust litigation patent litigation and government investigations will be excluded from the Core measures and the adjustment will be stated net of related insurance recoveries.
In the ordinary course of business external legal professional fees including those relating to IP protection costs and the costs of AstraZenecas inhouse legal function will remain in Core.
Professional fees directly attributable to AstraZenecas signicant acquisitions and other signicant business combination activity will continue to be excluded from
Other specied items deemed not to be in the ordinary course of business will continue to be excluded from Core.
Tax on adjustments.
The denition for this item has not been changed.
The Groups Reported tax rate adjusted for signicant oneoff items embedded within that rate is applied to all taxable Core adjustments.
Reconciliations of Existing Core to Revised Core The adjustments that will be made to our existing Core denition to arrive at our revised Core denition for use from 2013 onwards are detailed in the tables below.
2012 Reconciliation of Existing Core results to Revised Core results Revised Core additional adjustments Revised Core 2012 compared with 2011 2012 Existing
2012 Revised
CER growth % Total growth % Revenue 27973   27973 15 17 Cost of sales 5257 325  4932 Gross prot 22716 325  23041 15 17 Distribution costs 320   320 5 8 Research and development 4452 25 186 4241 4 5 Selling general and administrative costs 8541 152  8389 13 15 Other operating income and expense 1027 41  1068 29 26 Operating prot 10430 543 186 11159 17 20 Net nance expense 430   430 Prot before tax 10000 543 186 10729 18 20 Taxation 1885 107 45 2037 Prot for the period 8115 436 141 8692 15 17 Basic earnings per share  6.41 0.35 0.11 6.87 8 11 2011 Reconciliation of Existing Core results to Revised Core results Revised Core additional adjustments Revised Core 2011 compared with 2010 2011 Existing
2011 Revised
CER growth % Total growth % Revenue 33591   33591 2 1 Cost of sales 5972 129  5843 Distribution costs 346   346 1 3 Research and development 5033 27 527 4479 6 10 Selling general and administrative costs 9918 78 4 9836 2 1 Other operating income and expense 845   845 8 7 Operating prot 13167 234 531 13932 2 1 Net nance expense 428   428 Prot before tax 12739 234 531 13504 1 Taxation 2797 28 140 2965 Prot for the period 9942 206 391 10539 4 5 Basic earnings per share  7.28 0.15 0.29 7.72 10 11 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 99 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Financial risk management Financial risk management policies
Our risk management processes are described in the Managing risk section from page 74.
These processes enable us to identify risks that can be partly or entirely mitigated through the use of insurance.
We negotiate best available premium rates with insurance providers on the basis of our extensive risk management procedures.
In the current insurance market the level of cover is decreasing while premium rates are increasing.
Rather than simply paying higher premiums for lower cover we focus our insurance resources on the most critical areas or where there is a legal requirement and where we can get best value for money.
Risks to which we pay particular attention include business interruption Directors and Ofcers liability and property damage.
Insurance for product liability has not been available on commercially acceptable terms for several years and the Group has not held product liability insurance since February 2006.
Taxation
Tax risk management forms an integrated part of the Groups risk management processes.
Our tax strategy is to manage tax risks and tax costs in a manner consistent with shareholders best longterm interests taking into account both economic and reputational factors.
We draw a distinction between tax planning using articial structures and optimising tax treatment of business transactions and we engage only in the latter.
Treasury
The principal nancial risks to which the Group is exposed are those arising from liquidity interest rate foreign currency and credit.
The Group has a centralised treasury function to manage these risks in accordance with Boardapproved policies.
Specically liquidity risk is managed through maintaining access to a number of sources of funding to meet anticipated funding requirements including committed bank facilities and cash resources.
Interest rate risk is managed through maintaining a debt portfolio that is weighted towards xed rates of interest.
Accordingly the Groups net interest charge is not signicantly affected by movements in oating rates of interest.
We do not currently hedge the impact on earnings and cash ow of changes in exchange rates with the exception of the currency exposure that arises between the booking and settlement dates on nonlocal currency purchases and sales by subsidiaries and the external dividend.
Credit risk is managed through setting and monitoring credit limits appropriate for the assessed risk of the counterparty.
Our capital and risk management objectives and policies are described in further detail in Note 23 to the Financial Statements from page 175 and in the Risk section from page Sensitivity analysis of the Groups exposure to exchange rate and interest rate movements is also detailed in Note 23 to the Financial Statements from page 175.
Critical accounting policies and estimates Our Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU adopted IFRS and as issued by the IASB and the accounting policies employed are set out in the Group Accounting Policies section in the Financial Statements from page 146.
In applying these policies we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
The actual outcome could differ from those estimates.
Some of these policies require a high level of judgement because the areas are especially subjective or complex.
We believe that the most critical accounting policies and signicant areas of judgement and estimation are in revenue recognition research and development impairment testing of goodwill and intangible assets litigation postretirement benets taxation.
Revenue recognition Revenue is recorded at the invoiced amount excluding intercompany sales and value added taxes less movements in estimated accruals for rebates and chargebacks given to managedcare and other customers and product returns  a particular feature in the
The impact in the rest of the world is not signicant.
It is the Groups policy to offer a credit note for all returns and to destroy all returned stock in all markets.
Cash discounts for prompt payment are also deducted from sales.
Revenue is recognised at the point of delivery which is usually when title passes to the customer either on shipment or on receipt of goods by the customer depending on local trading terms.
Income from royalties and from disposals of IP  brands and product lines is included in other operating income.
Rebates chargebacks and returns in the US When invoicing sales in the US we estimate the rebates and chargebacks that we expect to pay.
These rebates typically arise from sales contracts with third party managedcare organisations hospitals longterm care facilities group purchasing organisations and various federal or state programmes Medicaid best price contracts supplemental rebates etc.
They can be classied as follows Chargebacks where we enter into arrangements under which certain parties typically hospitals the Department of Veterans Affairs Public Health Service Covered Entities and the Department of Defense are able to buy products from wholesalers at the lower prices we have contracted with them.
The chargeback is the difference between the price we invoice to the wholesaler and the contracted price charged by the wholesaler.
Chargebacks are paid directly to the wholesalers.
Regulatory including Medicaid and other federal and state programmes where we pay rebates based on the specic terms of agreements with the US Department of Health and Human Services and with individual states which include product usage and information on best prices and average market prices benchmarks.
Contractual under which entities such as third party managedcare organisations longterm care facilities and group purchasing organisations are entitled to rebates depending on specied performance provisions which vary from contract to contract.
The effects of these deductions on our US pharmaceuticals revenue and the movements on US pharmaceuticals revenue provisions are set out overleaf.
Accrual assumptions are built up on a productbyproduct and customerby customer basis taking into account specic contract provisions coupled with expected performance and are then aggregated into a weighted average rebate accrual rate for each of our products.
Accrual rates are reviewed and adjusted on a monthly basis.
There may be further adjustments when actual rebates are invoiced based on utilisation information submitted to us in the case of contractual rebates and claimsinvoices are received in the case of regulatory rebates and chargebacks.
We believe that we have made reasonable estimates for future rebates using a similar methodology to that of previous years.
Inevitably however such estimates involve judgements on aggregate future sales levels segment mix and the customers contractual performance.
The large increase in managedcare and group purchasing organisation rebates in 2011 was principally driven by the impacts of the Affordable Care Act.
See page 71 of the Geographical Review for more information.
The 2012 adjustment in respect of prior years includes renements of the provisions recorded for the Affordable Care Act.
Cash discounts are offered to customers to encourage prompt payment.
Accruals are calculated based on historical experience and are adjusted to reect actual experience.
Performance  Financial Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 100 Gross to net sales  US Pharmaceuticals Gross sales 20747 23613 22909 Chargebacks 2261 1958 2075 Regulatory  US government and state programmes 1426 2293 1949 Contractual  Managedcare and group purchasing organisation rebates 5597 5437 4755 Cash and other discounts 401 452 437 Customer returns 182 72 21 Net sales 10607 13125 13407 Movement in provisions  US Pharmaceuticals
1 January Provision for current year Adjustment in respect of prior years Returns and payments
31 December Chargebacks 395 2296 35 2343 313 Regulatory  US government and state programmes 1290 1585 159 1891 825 Contractual  Managedcare and group purchasing organisation rebates 1600 5578 19 5849 1348 Cash and other discounts 41 401  409 33 Customer returns 121 117 65 92 211 Total 3527 10250 110 10892 2775
1 January Provision for current year Adjustment in respect of prior years Returns and payments
31 December Chargebacks 523 2012 54 2086 395 Regulatory  US government and state programmes 1122 2364 71 2125 1290 Contractual  Managedcare and group purchasing organisation rebates 1194 5452 15 5031 1600 Cash and other discounts 41 452  452 41 Customer returns 133 75 3 84 121 Total 3077 10631 143 10038 3527
1 January Provision for current year Adjustment in respect of prior years Returns and payments
31 December Chargebacks 396 2107 32 1948 523 Regulatory  US government and state programmes 775 1984 35 1602 1122 Contractual  Managedcare and group purchasing organisation rebates 1447 4826 71 5008 1194 Cash and other discounts 41 438 1 437 41 Customer returns 177 22 1 65 133 Total 2895 9646 144 9320 3077 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 101 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview Industry practice in the US allows wholesalers and pharmacies to return unused stocks within six months of and up to 12 months after shelflife expiry.
The customer is credited for the returned product by the issuance of a credit note.
Returned products are not exchanged for products from inventory and once a return claim has been determined to be valid and a credit note has been issued to the customer the returned products are destroyed.
At the point of sale in the US we estimate the quantity and value of products which may ultimately be returned.
Our returns accruals in the US are based on actual experience.
Our estimate is based on the preceding 12 months for established products together with marketrelated information such as estimated stock levels at wholesalers and competitor activity which we receive via third party information services.
For newly launched products we use rates based on our experience with similar products or a predetermined percentage.
For products facing generic competition such as Seroquel IR in the US our experience is that we usually lose the ability to estimate the levels of returns from wholesalers with the same degree of precision that we can for products still subject to patent protection.
This is because we have limited or no insight into a number of areas the actual timing of the generic launch for example a generic manufacturer may or may not have produced adequate prelaunch inventory the pricing and marketing strategy of the competitor the takeup of the generic and in cases where a generic manufacturer has approval to launch only one dose size in a market of several dose sizes the likely level of switching from one dose to another.
Under our accounting policy revenue is recognised only when the amount of the revenue can be measured reliably.
Our approach in meeting this condition for products facing generic competition will vary from product to product depending on the specic circumstances.
The closing adjustment in respect of prior years beneted 2012 net US pharmaceuticals revenue by 1.0% 2011 increased revenue by 1.1% 2010 increased revenue by 1.1%.
However taking into account the adjustments affecting both the current and the prior year 201 1 revenue was reduced by 0.3% and 2010 revenue was not impacted by adjustments between years.
We have distribution service agreements with major wholesaler buyers which serve to reduce the speculative purchasing behaviour of the wholesalers and reduce shortterm uctuations in the level of inventory they hold.
We do not offer any incentives to encourage wholesaler speculative buying and attempt where possible to restrict shipments to underlying demand when such speculation occurs.
Sales of intangible assets A consequence of charging all internal RandD expenditure to the income statement in the year in which it is incurred which is normal practice in the pharmaceutical industry is that we own valuable intangible assets which are not recorded on the balance sheet.
We also own acquired intangible assets which are included on the balance sheet.
As a consequence of regular reviews of product strategy from time to time we sell such assets and generate income.
Sales of product lines are often accompanied by an agreement on our part to continue manufacturing the relevant product for a reasonable period often about two years while the purchaser constructs its own manufacturing facilities.
The contracts typically involve the receipt of an upfront payment which the contract attributes to the sale of the intangible assets and ongoing receipts which the contract attributes to the sale of the product we manufacture.
In cases where the transaction has two or more components we account for the delivered item for example the transfer of title to the intangible asset as a separate unit of accounting and record revenue on delivery of that component provided that we can make a reasonable estimate of the fair value of the undelivered component.
Where the fair market value of the undelivered component for example a manufacturing agreement exceeds the contracted price for that component we defer an appropriate element of the upfront consideration and amortise this over the performance period.
However where the fair market value of the undelivered component is equal to or lower than the contracted price for that component we treat the whole of the upfront amount as being attributable to the delivered intangible assets and recognise that part of the revenue upon delivery.
No element of the contracted revenue related to the undelivered component is allocated to the sale of the intangible asset.
This is because the contracted revenue relating to the undelivered component is contingent on future events such as sales and so cannot be anticipated.
Research and development Our business is underpinned by our marketed products and development portfolio.
The RandD expenditure on internal activities to generate these products is generally charged to prot in the year that it is incurred.
Purchases of IP and product rights to supplement our RandD portfolio are capitalised as intangible assets.
Further details of this policy are included in the Group Accounting Policies section of our Financial Statements from page 146.
Such intangible assets are amortised from the launch of the underlying products and are tested for impairment both before and after launch.
This policy is in line with practice adopted by major pharmaceutical companies.
Impairment testing of goodwill and intangible assets We have signicant investments in goodwill and intangible assets as a result of acquisitions of businesses and purchases of assets such as product development and marketing rights.
Details of the estimates and assumptions we make in our annual impairment testing of goodwill are included in Note 8 to the Financial Statements on page 158.
No impairment of goodwill was identied.
Impairment reviews have been carried out on all intangible assets that are in development and not being amortised all major intangible assets acquired during the year and all intangible assets that have had indications of impairment during the year.
Sales forecasts and specic allocated costs which have both been subject to appropriate senior management signoff are discounted using appropriate rates based on AstraZenecas riskadjusted pretax weighted average cost of capital.
Our weighted average cost of capital reects factors such as our capital structure and our costs of debt and equity.
In building to the range of rates used in our internal investment appraisal of future projects and capital investment decisions we adjust our weighted average cost of capital for other factors which reect without limitation local matters such as risk on a casebycase basis.
Performance  Financial Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 102 The majority of our investments in intangible assets and goodwill arose from the restructuring of the joint venture with Merck in 1998 the acquisition of MedImmune in 2007 and the payments to partially retire Mercks interests in our products in the US in 2008 and 2010.
Additions in 2012 have included intangible assets acquired through our new collaboration with BMS concerning Amylins portfolio of products our acquisition of Ardea and revised arrangements with Merck concerning the nal step in our exit arrangements.
The Group including acquisitions is considered a single cashgenerating unit for impairment purposes.
We are satised that the carrying values at 31 December 2012 are fully justied by estimated future cash ows.
The accounting for our arrangements with Merck and our Amylin collaboration with BMS are fully explained in Note 9 to the Financial Statements from page Further details of our acquisition of Ardea are included in Note 22 to the Financial Statements from page 173.
Further details of the estimates and assumptions we make in impairment testing of intangible assets are included in Note 9 to the Financial Statements.
Litigation
In the normal course of business contingent liabilities may arise from productspecic and general legal proceedings from guarantees or from environmental liabilities connected with our current or former sites.
Where we believe that potential liabilities have a less than 50% probability of crystallising or where we are unable to make a reasonable estimate of the liability we treat them as contingent liabilities.
These are not provided for but are disclosed in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 183.
In cases that have been settled or adjudicated or where quantiable nes and penalties have been assessed and which are not subject to appeal or other similar forms of relief or where a loss is probable more than 50% assessed probability and we are able to make a reasonable estimate of the loss we indicate the loss absorbed or the amount of the provision accrued.
Where it is considered that the Group is more likely than not to prevail or in the rare circumstances where the amount of the legal liability cannot be estimated reliably legal costs involved in defending the claim are charged to prot as they are incurred.
Where it is considered that the Group has a valid contract which provides the right to reimbursement from insurance or otherwise of legal costs andor all or part of any loss incurred or for which a provision has been established and we consider recovery to be virtually certain then the best estimate of the amount expected to be received is recognised as an asset.
Assessments as to whether or not to recognise provisions or assets and of the amounts concerned usually involve a series of complex judgements about future events and can rely heavily on estimates and assumptions.
AstraZeneca believes that the provisions recorded are adequate based on currently available information and that the insurance recoveries recorded will be received.
However given the inherent uncertainties involved in assessing the outcomes of these cases and in estimating the amount of the potential losses and the associated insurance recoveries we could in future periods incur judgments or insurance settlements that could have a material adverse effect on our results in any particular period.
The position could change over time and there can therefore be no assurance that any losses that result from the outcome of any legal proceedings will not exceed the amount of the provisions that have been booked in the accounts.
Although there can be no assurance regarding the outcome of legal proceedings we do not currently expect them to have a material adverse effect on our nancial position but they could signicantly affect our nancial results in any particular period.
Postretirement benets We offer postretirement benet plans which cover many of our employees around the world.
In keeping with local terms and conditions most of these plans are dened contribution in nature where the resulting income statement charge is xed at a set level or is a set percentage of employees pay.
However several plans mainly in the UK which has by far the largest single scheme the US and Sweden are dened benet plans where benets are based on employees length of service and nal salary typically averaged over one three or ve years.
The UK and US dened benet schemes were closed to new entrants in 2000.
All new employees in these countries are offered dened contribution schemes.
In applying IAS 19 we recognise all actuarial gains and losses immediately through reserves.
This methodology results in a less volatile income statement charge than under the alternative approach of recognising actuarial gains and losses over time.
Investment decisions in respect of dened benet schemes are based on underlying actuarial and economic circumstances with the intention of ensuring that the schemes have sufcient assets to meet liabilities as they fall due rather than meeting accounting requirements.
The trustees follow a strategy of awarding mandates to specialist active investment managers which results in a broad diversication of investment styles and asset classes.
The investment approach is intended to produce less volatility in the plan asset returns.
In assessing the discount rate applied to the obligations we have used rates on AA corporate bonds with durations corresponding to the maturities of those obligations except in Sweden where we have used rates on mortgage bonds as the market in high quality corporate bonds is insufciently deep.
In all cases the pension costs recorded in the Financial Statements are assessed in accordance with the advice of independent qualied actuaries but require the exercise of signicant judgement in relation to assumptions for future salary and pension increases longterm price ination and investment returns.
As detailed in our Accounting Policies section of the Financial Statements on page 146 the Group will adopt the amended IAS 19 from 1 January 2013.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 103 Strategy Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Performance Overview
Accruals for tax contingencies require management to make judgements and estimates in relation to tax audit issues and exposures.
Amounts accrued are based on managements interpretation of countryspecic tax law and the likelihood of settlement.
Tax benets are not recognised unless the tax positions are probable of being sustained.
Once
All such provisions are included in current liabilities.
Any recorded exposure to interest on tax liabilities is provided for in the tax charge.
AstraZeneca faces a number of transfer pricing audits in jurisdictions around the world and in some cases is in dispute with the tax authorities.
These disputes usually result in taxable prots being increased in one territory and correspondingly decreased in another.
Our balance sheet positions for these matters reect appropriate corresponding relief in the territories affected.
Further details of the estimates and assumptions we make in determining our recorded liability for transfer pricing audits and other tax contingencies are included in the Tax section of Note 25 to the Financial Statements on page 189.
SarbanesOxley Act Section 404 As a consequence of our NYSE listing AstraZeneca is required to comply with those provisions of the SarbanesOxley Act applicable to foreign issuers.
Section
404 of the SarbanesOxley Act requires companies annually to assess and make public statements about the quality and effectiveness of their internal control over nancial reporting.
Our approach to the assessment has been to select key transaction and nancial reporting processes in our largest operating units and a number of specialist areas such as nancial consolidation and reporting treasury operations and taxation so that in aggregate we have covered a signicant proportion of each of the key line items in our Financial Statements.
Each of these operating units and specialist areas has ensured that its relevant processes and controls are documented to appropriate standards taking into account in particular the guidance provided by the SEC.
We have also reviewed the structure and operation of our entity level control environment.
This refers to the overarching control environment including structure of reviews checks and balances that are essential to the management of a wellcontrolled business.
The Directors have concluded that our internal control over nancial reporting is effective at 31 December 2012 and the assessment is set out in the Directors Responsibilities for and Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting on page 140.
KPMG Audit Plc has audited the effectiveness of our internal control over nancial reporting at 31 December 2012 and as noted in the Auditors Reports on the Financial Statements and on Internal Control over Financial Reporting SarbanesOxley Act Section 404 on page 141 their report is unqualied.
Corporate Governance  The value of innovation AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 104 Our innovation takes many forms which offer signicant benets by adding value beyond the medicines themselves.
For example we are exploring new ways of increasing access to healthcare which take account of the different barriers to healthcare around the world and which are tailored locally to different patient needs.
Our broad market strategy in China means we are expanding the affordability of our medicines to reach an increasing number of physicians and hospitals in communities outside of the most afuent cities which do not currently have regular access to healthcare and high quality medicines.
Innovation means benefits beyond medical advances AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 105 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview We are active in pioneering publicprivate sector collaborations to identify pragmatic ways of overcoming barriers to healthcare at a global level.
Corporate Governance  Board of Directors as at 31 January 2013 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 106 1 Leif Johansson 61 NonExecutive Chairman of the Board Chairman of the Nomination and Governance Committee and member of the Remuneration Committee Elected as a Director in April 2012 and became NonExecutive Chairman of the Board on 1 June.
Leif Johansson is also the Chairman of global telecommunications company LM Ericsson a position he has held since April 2011.
From 1997 until 2011 he was Chief Executive of AB Volvo one of the worlds leading manufacturers of trucks buses construction equipment drive systems and aerospace components.
He spent a signicant part of his early career at AB Electrolux latterly as Chief Executive from 1994 to 1997 .
He was a NonExecutive Director of BMS from 1998 to September 2011 serving on the boards audit committee and compensation and management development committee.
He is Chairman of the European Round Table of Industrialists and the International Advisory Board of the Nobel Foundation.
He holds board positions at Svenska Cellulosa Aktiebolaget SCA and Ecolean AB.
He holds an MSc in engineering from Chalmers University of Technology Gothenburg and has been a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences since 1994.
He became Chairman of the Academy in 2012.
2 Pascal Soriot 53 Executive Director and Chief Executive Ofcer Pascal Soriot was appointed as a Director and as CEO in October.
From 2010 to September 2012 he served as Chief Operating Ofcer of Roche AGs pharmaceuticals division.
Prior to that he was CEO of Genentech a biologics business and led its successful merger with
He joined the pharmaceutical industry in 1986 and has worked in senior management roles throughout the world in a number of major companies since then.
He brings to AstraZeneca a signicant breadth of experience in both established and emerging markets strength of strategic thinking a successful track record of managing change and putting strategy into operation as well as the ability to lead a diverse organisation having lived in Australia Japan the US and Europe.
He is a doctor of veterinary medicine cole Nationale Vtrinaire dAlfort MaisonsAlfort and holds an MBA from L Institut Suprieur des Affaires JouyenJosas.
3 Simon Lowth 51 Executive Director and Chief Financial Ofcer Appointed as a Director and as CFO in November 2007  and served as Interim CEO from June to September 2012.
Simon
Lowth is also a NonExecutive Director of Standard Chartered PLC.
He was previously at ScottishPower Energy where he was Finance Director a position he left following completion of the sale of the company to Iberdrola S.
His move to ScottishPower followed 15 years experience with the global management consultancy McKinsey and Company where he advised leading multinational companies on a wide range of strategic nancial and operational issues.
He has an engineering degree from Cambridge University and an MBA from the London Business School.
4 Genevive Berger 58 NonExecutive Director and member of the Science Committee Elected as a Director in April 2012.
Genevive
Berger is Chief Science Ofcer at Unilever PLC and a member of the Unilever Leadership
She holds three doctorates in physics human biology and a medical doctorate.
She was appointed Professor of Medicine at Universit Pierre et Marie Curie Paris in 2006.
From 2003 to 2008 she was Professor and Hospital Practitioner at lHpital de la PitiSalptrire Paris.
Previous positions she has held include Director of the Biotech and AgriFood Department then Head of the Technology Directorate at the French Ministry of Research and Technology 19982000 Director General Centre National de la Recherche Scientique 20002003 and Chairman of the Health Advisory Board of the EU Commission 20062008.
She was a nonexecutive board member of Unilever from 2007 to 2008 before being appointed to her current position and was a NonExecutive Director of Smith and Nephew plc from 2010 to 2012.
5 Bruce Burlington 64 NonExecutive Director and member of the Audit Committee and the Science Committee Appointed as a Director in August 2010.
Bruce Burlington is a pharmaceutical product development and regulatory affairs consultant and brings extensive experience in those areas to the Board.
He is also a nonexecutive board member of Cangene Corporation and the International Partnership for Microbicides and a member of the scientic advisory boards of the International Medical Foundation and
Lundbeck AS.
Previously he spent 17 years with the FDA serving as director of the FDAs Center for Devices and Radiological Health as well as holding a number of senior roles in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.
After leaving the FDA he served in a series of senior executive positions at Wyeth now part of Pzer.
6 Graham Chipchase 50 NonExecutive Director and member of the Audit Committee Elected as a Director in April 2012.
Graham
Chipchase is the Chief Executive of global consumer packaging company Rexam PLC.
He was appointed to the position in 2010 after previous service at Rexam as Group Director Plastic Packaging 20052009 and Group Finance Director 20032005.
Prior to joining Rexam he was Finance Director of Aerospace Services at global engineering group GKN plc from 2001 to 2003.
After starting his career with Coopers and Lybrand Deloitte he held a number of nance roles in the industrial gases company The BOC Group plc now part of The Linde Group 19902001.
He is a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and holds an MA Hons in chemistry from Oriel College Oxford.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 107 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview 7 JeanPhilippe Courtois 52 NonExecutive Director and member of the Audit Committee Appointed as a Director in February 2008.
JeanPhilippe Courtois has close to 30 years experience in the global technology industry.
He is President of Microsoft International and a board member of PlaNet Finance.
Previously he was Chief Executive Ofcer and President of Microsoft EMEA and has served as cochairman of the World Economic Forums Global Digital Divide Initiative Task Force and on the European Commission Information and Communication Technology Task Force.
In 2009 he also served as an EU Ambassador for the Year of Creativity and Innovation and in 2011 was named as one of Techs Top 25 by The Wall Street Journal Europe.
8 Rudy Markham 66 NonExecutive Director Chairman of the Audit Committee member of the Remuneration Committee and the Nomination and Governance Committee Appointed as a Director in September 2008.
Rudy Markham takes a particular interest on behalf of the Board in SHE assurance.
He has signicant international business and nancial experience having formerly held a number of senior commercial and nancial positions worldwide with Unilever culminating in his appointment as Chief Financial Ofcer of
He is currently Chairman and Non Executive Director of Moorelds Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and a nonexecutive member of the boards of United Parcel Services
Standard Chartered PLC and Legal and General plc.
He is also a nonexecutive member of the board of the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Ofce a member of the supervisory board of CSM NV a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants and a Fellow of the Association of Corporate Treasurers.
He served as a NonExecutive Director of the UK Financial Reporting Council from 2007 to 2012.
9 Nancy Rothwell 57 NonExecutive Director Chairman of the Science Committee member of the Remuneration Committee and the Nomination and Governance Committee Appointed as a Director in April 2006.
Nancy
Rothwell oversees responsible business on behalf of the Board as is described more fully in the Responsible Business section from page 48.
She is a distinguished life scientist and academic and is the President and ViceChancellor of the University of Manchester.
She is also President of the Society of Biology and CoChair of the Prime Ministers Council for Science and
Previously she has served as President of the British Neuroscience Association and has been on the councils of the Medical Research Council the Royal Society the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council the Academy of Medical Sciences and Cancer Research UK.
10 Shriti Vadera 50 NonExecutive Director and member of the Audit Committee Appointed as a Director in January 2011.
Shriti
Vadera has signicant experience of emerging markets and knowledge of global nance and public policy.
She is a NonExecutive Director of BHP Billiton Plc and BHP Billiton Limited.
She advises funds governments and companies and has recently undertaken a number of international assignments including advising the Republic of Korea as Chair of the G20 the government of Dubai on the restructuring of Dubai World Temasek Holdings Singapore on strategy and Allied Irish Banks on restructuring and European policy.
She was Minister in the UK government from 2007 to 2009 most latterly in the Cabinet Ofce and Business Department working on the governments response to the nancial crisis.
From 1999 to 2007  she was on the Council of Economic Advisers HM Treasury focusing on business and international economic issues.
Prior to that she spent 14 years in investment banking with S G WarburgUBS in banking project nance and corporate nance specialising in emerging markets.
11 John Varley 56 Senior independent NonExecutive Director Chairman of the Remuneration Committee and member of the Nomination and Governance Committee Appointed as a Director in July 2006.
John
Varley was formerly Group Chief Executive of the Barclays Group having held a number of senior positions with the bank during his career including that of Group Finance Director.
He brings additional international executive business leadership experience to the Board.
He is also a NonExecutive Director of BlackRock Inc.
Tinto Limited Chairman of Business Action on Homelessness and of Marie Curie Cancer Care President of Business Disability Forum and Honorary President of the UK Drug Policy Commission.
12 Marcus Wallenberg 56 NonExecutive Director and member of the Science Committee Appointed as a Director in April 1999.
Marcus Wallenberg has international business experience across a broad range of industry sectors including the pharmaceutical industry from his directorship with Astra prior to 1999.
He is the Chairman of Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB AB Electrolux Saab AB and LKAB and a NonExecutive Director of Investor AB Stora Enso Oyj Temasek Holdings Limited and the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation.
Other ofcers of the Company at 31 January 2013 included members of the SET as set out on pages 108 and 109 and Adrian Kemp Company Secretary.
Corporate Governance  Senior Executive Team as at 31 January 2013 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 108 1 Pascal Soriot Chief Executive Ofcer See page 106.
2 Simon Lowth Chief Financial Ofcer See page 106.
3 Katarina Ageborg Chief Compliance Ofcer Katarina Ageborg was appointed Chief Compliance Ofcer in July 2011 and has overall responsibility for the design delivery and implementation of AstraZenecas compliance responsibilities.
Since joining AstraZeneca in 1998 she has held a series of senior legal roles supporting Commercial and Regulatory and most recently led the Global IP function from 2008 to 201 1.
Prior to joining AstraZeneca she established her own law rm in Sweden and worked as a lawyer practising on both civil and criminal cases.
4 Ruud Dobber Executive VicePresident Europe Ruud Dobber was appointed as Executive VicePresident Europe in January 2013 and leads AstraZenecas commercial operations in Europe.
In this capacity Ruud is responsible for sales marketing and commercial operations across AstraZenecas businesses in the 27 EU member states.
Ruud joined AstraZeneca in 1997 and has held a number of senior commercial roles including Regional Vice President of AstraZenecas European Middle East and African division and Regional Vice President for the Groups Asia Pacic region.
Since 2012 Ruud has been an Executive Committee Member of EFPIA.
In 2011 Ruud was the Chairman of the Asia division of Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America.
Ruud commenced his career as a scientist researching in the eld of immunology and ageing.
He holds a doctorate in immunology from the University of Leiden in the Netherlands.
5 Paul Hudson Executive VicePresident North America Paul Hudson was appointed Executive VicePresident North America in January 2013 and leads AstraZenecas commercial operations in North America.
In this capacity he is accountable for driving growth and maximising the contribution of North America to AstraZenecas global business.
Paul joined AstraZeneca in 2006 as VicePresident and Primary Care Director UK.
Pauls most recent role with AstraZeneca was President of AstraZenecas Japanese business.
He has served as a Standing Board Member of Japan Pharmaceuticals Manufacturers Association and EFPIA in Japan.
Previously Paul was President of AstraZenecas business in
Before AstraZeneca Paul worked for ScheringPlough where he held senior global marketing roles.
Paul received a degree in economics from Manchester Metropolitan University and a DipM from the UKs Chartered Institute of Marketing.
6 Bahija Jallal Executive VicePresident MedImmune Dr Bahija Jallal was appointed Executive VicePresident MedImmune in January 2013 and is responsible for biologics research development and clinical activities.
Bahija is tasked with advancing the biologic pipeline of drugs.
Bahija joined MedImmune as VicePresident Translational Sciences in 2006 and has held roles of increasing responsibility.
Prior to joining AstraZeneca Bahija worked with Chiron Corporation where she served as VicePresident Drug Assessment and
Bahija received a masters degree in biology from the Universit de Paris VII and her doctorate in physiology from the Universit Pierre et Marie Curie Paris.
She conducted her postdoctoral research at the MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsried
She is a member of the American Association of Cancer Research the American Association of Science the Pharmacogenomics Working Group and is a member of the Board of Directors of the Association of Women in Science.
7 Mark Mallon Executive VicePresident International Mark Mallon was appointed as Executive VicePresident International in January 2013 and is responsible for the growth and performance of AstraZenecas commercial businesses in regions including Asia Pacic Russia Latin America the Middle East and
Since joining AstraZeneca in 1994 Mark has held a number of senior sales and marketing roles including Regional VicePresident for Asia Pacic President of AstraZeneca China and head of marketing sales and commercial operations for AstraZeneca in Japan.
Mark has a degree in chemical engineering from the University of Pennsylvania and an MBA in marketing and nance from the Wharton School of Business.
8 Briggs Morrison Executive VicePresident Global Medicines Development Dr Briggs Morrison was appointed Executive VicePresident Global Medicines Development in January 2013 and leads our global latestage development organisation for both small molecules and biologics.
He joined AstraZeneca in 2012 from Pzer where he was Head of Medical Excellence overseeing development medical affairs safety and regulatory affairs for Pzers human health businesses.
Briggs has a track record of successfully developing novel medicines in roles at both Pzer and Merck.
Briggs has a biology degree from Georgetown University and a medical doctorate from the University of Connecticut.
Briggs has also undertaken an internship and residency in internal medicine at the Massachusetts General Hospital a fellowship in medical oncology at the DanaFarber Cancer Institute and a postdoctoral research fellowship in genetics at Harvard Medical School.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 109 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview 9 Menelas Pangalos Executive VicePresident Innovative
Menelas Mene Pangalos was appointed Executive VicePresident Innovative Medicines in January 2013 and leads AstraZenecas small molecule discovery research and early development activities.
Mene joined AstraZeneca from Pzer where he was Senior VicePresident and Chief Scientic Ofcer of Neuroscience Research.
Previously Mene held senior discovery and neuroscience roles at Wyeth and GSK.
He completed his undergraduate degree in biochemistry at the Imperial College of Science and Technology London and earned a doctorate in neurochemistry from the University of London.
He is a Visiting Professor of Neuroscience at Kings College London.
In the UK Mene sits on the Medical Research Council and the Innovation Board for the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry.
10 Jeff Pott General Counsel Jeff Pott was appointed General Counsel in January 2009 and has overall responsibility for all aspects of AstraZenecas Legal and IP function.
He joined AstraZeneca in 1995 and has worked in various litigation roles where he has had responsibility for IP  antitrust and product liability litigation.
Prior to joining AstraZeneca he spent ve years at the US legal rm Drinker Biddle and Reath LLP  where he specialised in pharmaceutical product liability litigation and antitrust advice and litigation.
He received his bachelors degree in political science from Wheaton College and his Juris Doctor Degree from Villanova University School of Law.
11 David Smith Executive VicePresident Operations and Information Services David Smith joined AstraZeneca in 2006 as Executive VicePresident Operations.
He leads AstraZenecas global manufacturing and supply organisation and is also responsible for the Safety Health and Environment Regulatory Compliance Procurement and Engineering functions and has overall responsibility for IS.
He spent his early career in pharmaceuticals initially with the Wellcome Foundation in the
He subsequently spent nine years in the consumer goods sector working for Este Lauder Inc. supply chain roles.
In 2003 he returned to the pharmaceutical sector and joined Novartis in Switzerland.
12 Lynn Tetrault Executive VicePresident Human Resources and Corporate Affairs Lynn Tetrault was appointed Executive Vice President Human Resources and Corporate Affairs in 2007  having previously been Vice President Corporate Affairs.
She has also held the role of VicePresident HR Global Drug Development and VicePresident HR in AstraZenecas US business following the merger between Astra and Zeneca.
She started her career in private law practice where she specialised in general corporate and healthcare law.
She joined Astra USA in 1993 as Associate General Counsel in the companys legal department.
She received her bachelors degree from Princeton University and her law degree from the University of Virginia Law School.
The SET position of Executive VicePresident Global Portfolio and Product Strategy is currently vacant pending the appointment of an individual for this role.
During 2012 Martin Mackay President Global RandD below left and Tony Zook Executive VicePresident Global Commercial Operations below right served as SET members.
With effect from 15 January 2013 these two roles were eliminated and the newlyconstituted SET shown above was appointed.
Martin and Tony left the Company at the end of February 2013.
Corporate Governance  Corporate Governance Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 110 Corporate Governance
Leif Johansson Chairman and Chairman of the Nomination and Governance Committee time for the Company.
My thanks go to John and Simon for their work in this regard and for their support during the transition to a new CEO.
Since his appointment Pascal has also met numerous investors.
He Simon and I supported by John Varley will work hard to maintain these contacts and a constructive and frank dialogue with our shareholders.
My third priority has been the annual review of AstraZenecas strategy.
Due to the timing of the CEO succession process this has run over a longer period than usual to enable Pascal to form his conclusions about AstraZenecas strengths weaknesses and the best strategy for its future success.
From a corporate governance perspective my aim has been to ensure that the review has been thorough that a good open and robust discussion about all aspects of the strategy has taken place at the Board table with management being challenged appropriately about their proposals and recommendations and that all Board members have felt able to and have in fact contributed fully to that discussion.
Leif Johansson
This Corporte Governance Report describes how the Group is organised including the overall structure and principal roles and responsibilities of the Board its Committees and the SET.
Board composition processes and responsibilities The Board comprises two Executive Directors the CEO and the CFO and 10 NonExecutive Directors.
The membership of the Board at 31 January 2013 and information about individual Directors is contained in the Board of Directors section on pages 106 and 107 .
All Directors are collectively responsible for the success of the Group.
In addition the NonExecutive Directors are responsible for exercising independent objective judgement in respect of Board decisions and for scrutinising and challenging management.
The NonExecutive Directors also have various responsibilities concerning the integrity of nancial information internal controls and risk management.
Corporate governance We have prepared this Annual Report with reference to the UK Corporate Governance Code published by the UK Financial Since joining the Board and becoming Chairman I have focused on three main priorities.
As Chairman of the Nomination and Governance Committee my rst priority was to lead a thorough search for a new CEO which started in April 2012.
The section on page 117 describing the work of the Nomination and Governance Committee gives more information about this and how the Committee and the Board approach succession planning generally.
I am delighted that we were able to recruit Pascal Soriot and appoint him as AstraZenecas new CEO with effect from 1 October.
Pascal stood out from a strong eld of candidates and has a number of attributes that made him the outstanding candidate.
Succession planning remains the main focus of the Nomination and Governance Committees work.
Alongside the CEO search I also spent a signicant amount of time following my appointment meeting shareholders in the UK Sweden and the US and listening to their comments and views.
I was supported in this by John Varley who became senior independent NonExecutive Director in April 2012 and Simon Lowth CFO who acted as Interim CEO for four months at a critical Directors nationalities Gender split of Directors Length of tenure of NonExecutive Directors years A Bruce Burlington 2 B Shriti Vadera 2 C Marcus Wallenberg 13 D JeanPhilippe Courtois 4 E Rudy Markham 4 F John Varley 6 Nancy Rothwell 6 Leif Johansson Genevive Berger and Graham Chipchase have served for less than one year A American 1 B British 6 C French 3 D Swedish 2 A Male 9 B Female 3 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 111 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview The membership and work of these Committees is described below.
In addition there may from time to time be constituted ad hoc Board Committees for specic projects or tasks.
In these cases the scope and responsibilities of the Committee are documented.
The Board provides adequate resources to enable each Committee to undertake its duties.
Reserved matters and delegation of authority The Board maintains and periodically reviews a list of matters that are reserved to and can only be approved by the Board.
These include the appointment termination and remuneration of any Director approval of the annual budget any item of xed capital expenditure or any proposal for the acquisition or disposal of an investment or business which exceeds 150 million the raising of capital or loans by the Company subject to certain exceptions the giving of any guarantee in respect of any borrowing of the Company and allotting shares of the
The matters that have not been expressly reserved to the Board are either delegated by the Board to its Committees or to the CEO.
The CEO is responsible to the Board for the management development and performance of our business in relation to those matters in respect of which he has been delegated authority from the Board.
Although the CEO retains full responsibility for the authority delegated to him by the Board he is responsible for establishing and chairs the SET which is the vehicle through which he exercises certain of that authority in respect of our business.
The roles of the Board the Board Committees the Chairman and the CEO are documented as are the Boards delegated authorities and reserved powers.
Operation of the Board The Board is responsible for setting our strategy and policies oversight of risk and corporate governance and also monitors progress towards meeting our objectives and annual plans.
The Board discharges these responsibilities through a programme of meetings that includes regular reviews of nancial performance and critical business issues and the formal annual strategy review day.
The Board also aims to ensure that a good dialogue with our shareholders takes place and that their issues and concerns are understood and considered.
The Board held 14 meetings in 2012 which included sessions to cover its usual annual strategy review.
Eight of those meetings were telephone meetings some convened at short notice at which Board changes and business development transactions were discussed and approved.
All of the meetings held in person took place in London UK.
The Board is currently scheduled to meet six times in 2013 and will meet at such other times as may be required to conduct business.
As part of the business of each Board meeting the CEO typically submits a progress report on each key business area giving details of progress against the goals the Board has approved.
To ensure that the Board has good visibility of the key operating decisions of the business members of the SET routinely attend Board meetings on a rotational basis and Board members regularly meet other senior executives throughout the year.
The Board also receives accounting and other management information about our resources and presentations from internal and external speakers on legal governance and regulatory developments.
At the end of Board meetings the NonExecutive Directors meet without the Executive Directors present to review and discuss any matters that have arisen during the meeting andor such other matters as may appear to the NonExecutive Directors to be relevant in properly discharging their duty to act independently.
Board effectiveness Composition of the Board succession planning and diversity The Nomination and Governance Committee and where appropriate the full Board regularly review the composition of the Board and the status of succession to both senior executive management and Boardlevel positions.
Directors have regular contact with and access to succession candidates for senior executive management positions.
Reporting Council FRC in June 2010.
This Corporate Governance Report together with other sections of this Annual Report describes how we apply the main principles of good governance in the UK Corporate Governance Code.
We have complied throughout the accounting period with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code which is available on the FRCs websitesite
The roles of Chairman and CEO are split.
Leif Johansson our NonExecutive Chairman is responsible for leadership of the Board.
Our CEO Pascal Soriot leads the SET and has executive responsibility for running our business.
The Board comprises 10 NonExecutive Directors including the Chairman and two Executive Directors the CEO Pascal Soriot and the CFO Simon Lowth.
All Directors are collectively responsible for our longterm success.
In addition the NonExecutive Directors are responsible for exercising independent objective judgement in respect of Board decisions and for scrutinising and challenging the actions of executive management.
The Board runs an annual strategy review process.
The CEO the CFO and the SET take the lead in developing our strategy which is then reviewed constructively challenged and approved by the Board.
John Varley who joined the Board as a NonExecutive Director in 2006 was appointed as our senior independent NonExecutive Director in April 2012.
The role of the senior independent NonExecutive Director is to provide a sounding board for the Chairman and to serve as an intermediary for the other Directors when necessary.
The senior independent NonExecutive Director is also available to shareholders if they have concerns that contact through the normal channels of Chairman or Executive Directors has failed to resolve or for which such contact is inappropriate.
There are four principal Board Committees the Audit Committee the Remuneration Committee the Nomination and Governance Committee and the Science Committee.
Corporate Governance  Corporate Governance Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 112 The Board aims to maintain a balance in terms of the range of experience and skills of individual Board members which includes relevant international business pharmaceutical industry and nancial experience as well as appropriate scientic and regulatory knowledge.
The biographies of Board members set out on pages 106 and 107 give more information about current Directors in this respect.
The
Board views gender nationality and cultural diversity among Board members as important considerations when reviewing the composition of the Board.
The Board recognises in particular the importance of gender diversity.
Currently 30% of the Companys NonExecutive Directors are women and they make up 25% of the full
Since the formation of AstraZeneca in 1999 the proportion of women Board members has been approximately 25%.
Although it has not set any specic measurable objectives the Board intends to continue with its current approach to diversity in all its aspects while at the same time seeking Board members of the highest calibre and with the necessary experience and skills to meet the needs of the Company and its shareholders.
Information
The following changes to the composition of the Board have occurred during the period covered by this Annual Report Louis Schweitzer and David Brennan formerly Chairman and CEO respectively retired from the Board on 1 June.
Leif Johansson was elected as a NonExecutive Director at the AGM on 26 April 2012 and appointed Chairman of the Board with effect from 1 June.
He was appointed Chairman of the Nomination and Governance Committee and as a member of the Remuneration Committee with effect from 26 April 2012.
Pascal Soriot was appointed CEO with effect from 1 October.
Simon Lowth served as Interim CEO with effect from 1 June and remained in this role until Pascal Soriots appointment following which he reverted to his position as CFO.
Michele Hooper retired from the Board at the end of the AGM on 26 April 2012.
John Varley was appointed as senior independent NonExecutive Director with effect from 26 April 2012.
Rudy Markham was appointed as Chairman of the Audit Committee and as a member of the Nomination and Governance Committee with effect from 26 April 2012.
He also remained in his role as a member of the Remuneration
Genevive Berger was elected as a NonExecutive Director and appointed as a member of the Science Committee with effect from 26 April 2012.
Graham Chipchase was elected as a NonExecutive Director and appointed as a member of the Audit Committee with effect from 26 April 2012.
Independence of the NonExecutive Directors During 2012 the Board considered the independence of each NonExecutive Director for the purposes of the UK Corporate Governance Code and the corporate governance listing standards of the NYSE Listing Standards.
With the exception of Marcus Wallenberg the Board considers that all of the NonExecutive Directors are independent.
Leif Johansson was considered by the Board to be independent upon his appointment as
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the test of independence is not appropriate in relation to the Chairman after his appointment.
Marcus Wallenberg was appointed as a Director of Astra in May 1989 and subsequently became a Director of the Company in 1999.
He is a NonExecutive Director of Investor AB which has a 4.13% interest in the issued share capital of the Company as at 31 January 2013.
Wallenberg family foundations remain Investor ABs largest shareholders in terms of votes controlled.
For these reasons the Board does not believe that Marcus Wallenberg can be determined independent under the UK Corporate Governance
However the Board believes that he has brought and continues to bring considerable business experience and makes a valuable contribution to the work of the Board.
In April 2010 he was appointed as a member of the Science Committee reecting his interest in innovation and RandD knowledge of the Board Committee membership Name Audit Remuneration
Governance ScienceIndependent Genevive Berger Bruce Burlington Graham Chipchase JeanPhilippe Courtois Leif Johansson Chair Simon Lowth na Rudy Markham Chair Nancy Rothwell Chair Pascal Soriot na Shriti Vadera John Varley Chair Marcus Wallenberg x As determined by the Board for UK Corporate Governance Code purposes.
Leif Johansson was considered by the Board to be independent upon his appointment as Chairman in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the test of independence is not appropriate in relation to the Chairman after his appointment.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 113 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview history of the Company and its scientic heritage and culture and his broad experience of other industries and businesses in which innovation and RandD are important determinants of success.
Conicts of interest The Articles enable the Directors to authorise any situation in which a Director has an interest that conicts or has the potential to conict with the Companys interests and which would otherwise be a breach of the Directors duty under section 175 of the Companies Act 2006.
The Board has a formal system in place for Directors to declare such situations to be considered for authorisation by those Directors who have no interest in the matter being considered.
In deciding whether to authorise a situation the nonconicted Directors must act in the way they consider in good faith would be most likely to promote the success of the Company and they may impose limits or conditions when giving the authorisation or subsequently if they think this is appropriate.
Situations considered by the Board and authorisations given are recorded in the Board minutes and in a register of conicts maintained by the Company Secretary and are reviewed annually by the Board.
The Board considers that this system continues to operate effectively.
Appointments to the Board The Nomination and Governance Committee section on page 117 gives information about the appointment process for new Directors.
Newly appointed Directors are provided with comprehensive documentation containing information about the Group and their role as NonExecutive Directors.
They also typically attend tailored induction programmes that take account of their individual skills and experience.
Time commitment Our expectation is that NonExecutive Directors should be prepared to commit about 15 days per annum as a minimum to the Groups business.
In practice Board members time commitment usually exceeds this minimum expectation when all the work that they undertake for the Group is considered particularly in the case of the Chairman of the Board and the Chairmen of the Board Committees.
As well as their work in relation to formal Board and Board Committee meetings the NonExecutive Directors also commit time throughout the year to meetings and telephone calls with various levels of executive management visits to AstraZenecas sites throughout the world and for new NonExecutive Directors induction sessions and site visits.
On occasions when a Director is unavoidably absent from a Board or Board Committee meeting for example where a meeting clashes with his or her existing commitments he or she still receives and reviews the papers for the meeting and typically provides verbal or written input ahead of the meeting usually through the Chairman of the Board or the Chairman of the Board Committee so that his or her views are made known and considered at the meeting.
In addition given the nature of the business to be conducted some Board meetings are convened at short notice which can make it difcult for some Directors to attend due to prior commitments.
Information and support The Company Secretary is responsible to the Chairman for ensuring that all Board and Board Committee meetings are properly conducted that the Directors receive appropriate information prior to meetings to enable them to make an effective contribution and that governance requirements are considered and implemented.
The Company maintained directors and ofcers liability insurance cover throughout 2012.
The Directors are also able to obtain independent legal advice at the expense of the Company as necessary in their capacity as Directors.
The Company has entered into a deed of indemnity in favour of each Board member since 2006.
These deeds of indemnity are still in force and provide that the Company shall indemnify the Directors to the fullest extent permitted by law and the Articles in respect of all losses arising out of or in connection with the execution of their powers duties and responsibilities as Directors of the Company or any of its subsidiaries.
This is in line with current market practice and helps us attract and retain highquality skilled Directors.
Board and Board Committee meeting attendance in 2012
Board scheduled
Audit Remuneration
Governance Science Genevive Berger David Brennan Bruce Burlington 6 6 8 8 7 7   7 7 Graham Chipchase JeanPhilippe Courtois 5 6 5 8 5 7 Michele Hooper Leif Johansson Simon Lowth 6 6 6 8 Rudy Markham 6 6 6 8 7 7 9 12 4 4 Nancy Rothwell 6 6 8 8  7 12 6 6 7 7 Louis Schweitzer Pascal Soriot Shriti Vadera 6 6 8 8 7 7 John Varley 6 6 8 8  12 12 6 6 Marcus Wallenberg 6 6 6 8    5 7 Note number in brackets denotes number of meetings during the year that Board members were entitled to attend.
The Board held eight unscheduled meetings by telephone during the year some convened at short notice at which Board changes and business development transactions were discussed and approved.
Genevive Berger was elected to the Board on 26 April 2012.
David Brennan retired from the Board on 1 June.
Graham Chipchase was elected to the Board on 26 April 2012.
Michele Hooper retired from the Board on 26 April 2012.
Leif Johansson was elected to the Board on 26 April 2012.
At the Chairmans request Simon Lowth absented himself from two of the eight unscheduled meetings at which Board changes were discussed.
Louis Schweitzer retired from the Board on 1 June.
Pascal Soriot was appointed to the Board on 1 October.
Corporate Governance  Corporate Governance Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 114 Performance evaluation During the year the Board conducted the annual evaluation of its own performance and that of its Committees and individual Directors.
The 2012 evaluation was conducted internally and involved a series of webbased questionnaires.
A draft report based on responses from the questionnaires was prepared and reviewed by the Chairman and the Company Secretary.
The nal report was circulated to the full Board and discussed at the Board meeting held in January 2013.
The evaluation covered a range of topics including the composition of the Board the effectiveness of its strategic oversight Board members involvement in the affairs of the Company outside Board meetings decision making and time management the nature and quality of the information and general support provided to the Board its approach to risk management and oversight of internal controls and succession planning and how effectively the Board prioritises matters.
Separate questionnaires covered the operation and effectiveness of the Boards Committees and relevant Board members those serving in the period January to April 2012 also responded to a questionnaire dealing specically with shareholder engagement.
The composition and dynamics of the Board were generally thought to be balanced and appropriate.
Information
Board meetings were generally felt to be wellstructured.
The expanded role of the Science Committee reviewing the RandD aspects of a number of business development and acquisition proposals on behalf of the Board was seen as a positive development.
However a number of areas were identied for improvement.
The importance of shareholder engagement and succession planning were highlighted by the performance evaluation.
The Boards visibility of major shareholders views will be improved.
The engagement of the new Chairman and more recently the new CEO with the Companys largest investors is contributing to this but in addition more structured and regular discussion on this topic and greater analystbroker insight at Boardlevel will be implemented.
In recent years the Boards overview of senior executive succession planning work has increased but needs to be further improved by the Board receiving more detailed information about the work of the Nomination and Governance Committee.
As part of the assessment process each Director had an individual discussion with the Chairman to discuss their contribution to the work of the Board and personal development needs.
Each Director continues to perform effectively and to demonstrate commitment to their role.
The Boards annual performance evaluation was last externally facilitated in 2011.
The Board intends to continue to comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code guidance that the evaluation should be externally facilitated at least every three years.
Reelection of Directors In accordance with Article 66 of the Articles all Directors retire at each AGM and may offer themselves for reelection by shareholders.
Accordingly all of the Directors will retire at the AGM in April 2013.
The Notice of AGM will give details of those Directors seeking reelection.
Accountability
Risk management and internal control The NonExecutive Directors have various responsibilities concerning the integrity of nancial information internal controls and risk management.
The Board has overall responsibility for our system of internal controls and risk management policies and is also responsible for reviewing their effectiveness.
During 2012 the Directors have continued to review the effectiveness of our system of controls risk management and our highlevel internal control processes.
These reviews have included an assessment of internal controls and in particular nancial operational and compliance controls and risk management and their effectiveness supported by management assurance of the maintenance of controls reports from GIA as well as the external auditor on matters identied in the course of its statutory audit work.
The system is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable not necessarily absolute assurance of effective operation and compliance with laws and regulations.
Underpinning these reviews is an annual letter of assurance process by which responsible managers conrm the adequacy of their systems of internal nancial and nonnancial controls their compliance with Group policies and relevant laws and regulations including the industrys regulatory requirements and that they have reported any control weaknesses through our continuous assurance process.
The internal control framework has been in operation throughout 2012 and continues to operate up to the date of the approval of this Annual Report.
The Directors believe that the Group maintains an effective embedded system of internal controls and complies with the Turnbull Report guidance and in the view of the Directors no signicant deciencies have been identied in the system.
Further information about the ways in which we manage our business risks is set out in the Risk section from page 74 which also contains a list of the principal risks and uncertainties that we face.
Remuneration
Information about our approach to remuneration and the role and work of the Remuneration Committee including our policy on executive remuneration is set out in the Directors Remuneration Report from page 122.
Relations with shareholders In our nancial and business reporting to shareholders and other interested parties by means of quarterly halfyearly and annual reports we aim to present a balanced and understandable assessment of our strategy nancial position and prospects.
We make information about the Group available to shareholders through a range of media including a fully integrated html corporate websitesite containing a wide range of data of interest to institutional and private investors.
We consider our website to be an important means of communication with our shareholders.
The Company has been authorised by shareholders to place shareholder communications such as the Notice of AGM and this Annual Report on the corporate website in lieu of sending paper copies to shareholders unless specically requested by shareholders.
While recognising and respecting the fact that some of our shareholders may have different preferences about how they receive information from us we will continue to promote the benets of electronic communication given the advantages that this has over traditional paperbased communications both in terms of the congurability and accessibility of the information provided and the consequent cost savings and reduction in environmental impact associated with reduced printing and distribution costs.
We have frequent discussions with institutional shareholders on a range of issues.
These include individual meetings with some of our largest institutional shareholders to seek their views.
Board
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 115 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview members are kept informed of any issues and receive regular reports and presentations from executive management and our brokers in order to assist them to develop an understanding of major shareholders views about the Group.
From time to time we conduct an audit of institutional shareholders to ensure that we are communicating clearly with them and that a highquality dialogue is being maintained.
The results of this audit are reported to and discussed by the full Board.
We also respond to individual ad hoc requests for discussions from institutional shareholders and analysts.
Our Investor Relations team acts as the main point of contact for investors throughout the year.
As discussed above the senior independent NonExecutive Director John Varley is also available to shareholders if they have concerns that contact through the normal channels of Chairman CEO andor CFO has failed to resolve or in relation to which such contact is inappropriate.
All shareholders including private investors have an opportunity at the AGM to put questions to members of the Board about our operation and performance.
Formal notication of the AGM is sent to shareholders at least one month in advance.
The Chairmen of the Board Committees ordinarily attend the AGM to answer questions raised by shareholders.
In line with the UK Corporate Governance Code details of proxy voting by shareholders including votes withheld are given at the AGM and are posted on our website following the AGM.
Audit Committee The members of the Audit Committee are Rudy Markham Chairman of the Audit Committee Bruce Burlington Graham Chipchase JeanPhilippe Courtois and Shriti Vadera and until her retirement at the 2012 AGM Michele Hooper.
They are or in the case of Michele Hooper were all NonExecutive Directors.
The Board considers each member to be independent under the UK Corporate Governance Code and under the general guidance and specic criteria of the Listing Standards concerning the composition of audit committees applicable to nonUS companies listed on the NYSE.
In April 2012 we submitted the required annual written afrmation to the NYSE conrming our full compliance with those standards.
For the purposes of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Board remains satised that at least one member of the Audit Committee has recent and relevant nancial experience.
At its meeting in December the Board determined that Rudy Markham and Graham Chipchase are audit committee nancial experts for the purposes of the SarbanesOxley Act.
The Deputy Company Secretary acts as secretary to the Audit Committee.
The core terms of reference of the Audit Committee include reviewing and reporting to the Board on matters relating to the audit plans of the external auditor and GIA as well as oversight of the work of the Global Compliance function our overall framework for internal control over nancial reporting and for other internal controls and processes our overall framework for risk management particularly nancial risks our accounting policies and practices our annual and quarterly nancial reporting including the critical estimates and judgements contained in our reporting our internal control over nancial reporting our Code of Conduct and whistleblower procedures compliance with the Corporate Integrity Agreement CIA.
The Audit Committee is responsible for notifying the Board of any signicant concerns of the external auditor or the VicePresident GIA arising from their audit work any matters that may materially affect or impair the independence of the external auditor any signicant deciencies or material weaknesses in the design or operation of our internal control over nancial reporting or other internal controls any serious issues of noncompliance and how the Audit Committee has discharged its responsibilities.
It oversees the establishment implementation and maintenance of our Code of Conduct and other related policies.
It monitors the Companys response to letters requesting information and investigations initiated by regulatory and governmental authorities such as the SEC and the US Department of Justice and the UK Financial Reporting Council pertaining to matters within the remit of the Audit Committees work.
It has established procedures for the receipt and handling of complaints concerning accounting or audit matters.
It recommends to the Board the appointment of the external auditor subject to the approval of the Companys shareholders at a general meeting.
Shareholders in a general meeting authorise the Directors to x the remuneration of the external auditor.
The Audit Committee reviews and approves the appointment and dismissal of the VicePresident GIA.
The Audit Committee maintains policies and procedures for the preapproval of all audit services and permitted nonaudit services undertaken by the external auditor the principal purpose of which is to ensure that the independence of the external auditor is not impaired.
The policies and procedures cover three categories of work audit services auditrelated services and tax services.
The policies dene the type of work that falls within each of these categories and the nonaudit services that the external auditor is prohibited from performing under the rules of the SEC and other relevant UK and US professional and regulatory requirements.
The preapproval procedures permit certain audit audit related and tax services to be performed by the external auditor during the year subject to fee limits agreed with the Audit Committee in advance.
The CFO supported by the VicePresident Group Finance monitors the status of all services being provided by the external auditor.
The procedures also deal with placing nonaudit work out for tender where appropriate.
Authority to approve work in excess of the preagreed fee limits is delegated to the Chairman of the Audit Committee together with one other Audit Committee member in the rst instance.
A standing agenda item at Audit Committee meetings covers the operation of the preapproval procedures and regular reports are provided to the full Audit Committee.
Fees paid to the auditor for audit auditrelated and other services are analysed in Note 27 to the Financial Statements on page 190.
The Audit Committee held seven scheduled meetings in 2012.
The individual attendance record of members of the Audit Committee is set out in the Board and Board Committee meeting attendance in 2012 table on page Following each Audit Committee meeting the Chairman of the Audit Committee reported to the Board on the principal matters covered at the meeting and minutes of the meetings were circulated to all Board members.
In addition the Chairman of the Audit Committee held regular scheduled calls between Audit Committee meetings with each of the VicePresident GIA the Chief Compliance Ofcer the CFO and the lead partner of the external auditor.
During 2012 and January 2013 the Audit Committee considered and discussed the following matters The key elements of the nancial statements and estimates and judgements contained in our nancial disclosures which were reviewed and various accounting matters considered.
These included the areas described in the Financial Review under the heading Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates with a focus on accounting issues relevant to litigation and taxation matters and goodwill impairment from page 99 and discussion was supported by papers prepared by management and the external auditor.
Corporate Governance  Corporate Governance Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 116 The reports received from the external auditor concerning its audit of the Financial Statements of the Group and from management GIA Global Compliance and the external auditor on the effectiveness of our system of internal controls and in particular our internal control over nancial reporting.
This included review and discussion of the results of the continuous assurance and annual letter of assurance processes.
The Audit Committee also reviewed quarterly activity reports of audit work carried out by GIA and the status of followup actions with management as well as reports from the Global Compliance function.
The systems and processes that management has developed pertaining to risk identication classication and mitigation.
Compliance with the applicable provisions of the SarbanesOxley Act.
In particular the Audit Committee regularly reviewed the status of compliance with the programme of internal controls over nancial reporting implemented pursuant to section 404 of the SarbanesOxley
The Audit Committee remained focused on ISIT controls in the context of the changes to the Groups ISIT environment described below.
Further information about this is set out in the SarbanesOxley Act Section 404 section on page 103.
Data about reports made by employees via the AZethics helpline online facilities and other routes regarding potential breaches of the Code of Conduct together with the results of inquiries into these matters.
Quarterly reports received from the US Compliance Ofcer responsible for monitoring the US business compliance with the CIA for more information about the obligations imposed on the Board by the CIA see below.
Regular progress updates from ISIT on the status of the transition from the existing outsource provider to the new providers.
Reports from the Group Treasury function and in particular reports concerning the Groups liquidity and cash position and the appropriateness of its cash management policies in the context of the current economic situation.
Going concern assessment and adoption of the going concern basis in preparing this Annual Report and the Financial
Other reports concerning the GIA Global Compliance and Finance functions including the internal audit plan and progress and plans of the Global Compliance function.
Reports from the General Counsel on the status of certain litigation matters and governmental investigations.
The amount of audit and nonaudit fees of the external auditor throughout 2012.
The Audit Committee was satised throughout the year that the objectivity and independence of the external auditor were not in any way impaired by the nature of the nonaudit work undertaken by the external auditor during the year the level of nonaudit fees charged for such work or any other facts or circumstances.
Further information about the audit and nonaudit fees for 2012 is disclosed in Note 27 to the Financial Statements on page 190.
The rotation of the lead partner of the external auditor.
In advance of the expiry of the permitted tenure of the lead audit partner Jimmy Daboo at the conclusion of the 2012 audit the Audit Committee oversaw a process whereby a number of potential successors were considered and Tony Cates was endorsed as his successor.
The Audit Committee also considered the external auditors proposed arrangements to ensure an effective handover of responsibilities.
A review and assessment of the Audit Committees performance which concluded that such performance was satisfactory.
In line with its normal practice the Audit Committee also held a number of private meetings without management present with the VicePresident GIA the Chief Compliance Ofcer the General Counsel and the Companys external auditor.
These meetings were held between Audit Committee members and those individuals separately from the main sessions of the Audit Committee which were also attended by the CEO the CFO the General Counsel and the VicePresident Group Finance.
In addition to its usual business as described above during 2012 members of the Audit Committee met individual managers or groups of managers on a number of occasions in order to gain a deeper insight into areas relevant to the Audit Committees work and to provide an opportunity to discuss specic areas of interest.
These included Considering the potential impact of the eurozone crisis on AstraZenecas operations in particular in Greece Italy and Spain.
Hearing from the regional nance directors of the Americas Asia Pacic and EMEA regions on the nancial objectives the local challenges and organisational structures in their respective regions and learning how the Group Finance organisation supports AstraZenecas network of local marketing companies.
Learning about AstraZenecas business processing outsourcing centre of excellence and the work it does to support the various outsourcing initiatives currently ongoing in the business as we seek to reduce our cost base.
Receiving regular updates from the ISIT team in connection with the transition from the Companys previous IT infrastructure outsourcing provider to its new providers.
Considering a presentation on the lessons learnt from the implementation of an enterprise resource planning IT system at our plant in Sweden which led to disruptions in our supply chain during the year.
Meeting with the Global Compliance Leadership Team which comprises representatives from the second line assurance functions in RandD Operations and Sales and Marketing.
Considering the risks associated with the Groups pension and other benet obligations and the steps taken to manage those risks.
Monitoring the operation of controls and reporting arrangements cognisant of the additional pressures on management during the tenure of the Interim CFO.
In addition to the quarterly reporting stipulated by the CIA as described above a number of other obligations required by the CIA were discharged by members of the Board and the Audit Committee during 2012.
For example all members of the Board completed the annual CIArequired training addressing the Code of Conduct and the elements of the CIA and the US compliance programme.
Furthermore the Board adopted a resolution signed by each member in respect of the second 12 month reporting period under the CIA.
The resolution summarised the Boards oversight of the US compliance programme and stated that to the best of the Boards knowledge AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP and AstraZeneca LP AstraZenecas principal US trading entities have implemented an effective US compliance programme to meet Federal healthcare programme FDA and CIA requirements.
In accordance with its normal practice the Audit Committee considered the performance of our external auditor KPMG Audit Plc KPMG.
It also considered KPMGs compliance with the independence criteria under the relevant statutory regulatory and ethical standards applicable to auditors and assessed its objectivity taking into account the level of challenge provided around the critical estimates and judgements involved in our nancial AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 117 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview reporting and the quality of our internal control over nancial reporting.
Having considered all these factors the Audit Committee unanimously recommended to the Board that a resolution for the reappointment of KPMG as the Companys external auditor for the year ending 31 December 2013 be proposed to shareholders at the AGM in April 2013.
Consistent with current market practice KPMGs services to the Company are provided pursuant to terms of engagement which are reviewed by the Audit Committee.
Neither these terms of engagement nor any other agreement include any contractual obligations under which the Directors would be prevented from appointing a different audit rm were they to consider this to be in the best interests of the Group.
The
Audit Committee through management continues to maintain contact and dialogue with other major audit rms who are familiar with the Groups business for succession purposes as required.
This is reported to the Audit Committee in order to ensure a smooth transition from the current auditor should this be necessary.
In December 2012 the Audit Committee reviewed the changes to the UK Corporate Governance Code with regard to putting the external audit contract out to tender at least every 10 years.
It noted that KPMG was rst appointed as sole external auditor to AstraZeneca in 2001 following a competitive tender.
The Audit Committee concluded that as the lead audit partner at KPMG is rotating in 2013 then in accordance with the transitional guidance issued by the FRC the audit would be put out to tender by 2018.
At the January 2013 meeting the CFO presented to the Audit Committee the conclusions of the CEO and the CFO following the evaluation of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures required by Item 15a of Form 20F at 31 December 2012.
Based on their evaluation the CEO and the CFO concluded that as at that date we maintain an effective system of disclosure controls and procedures.
There was no change in our internal control over nancial reporting that occurred during the period covered by this Annual Report that has materially affected or is reasonably likely to materially affect our internal control over nancial reporting.
The Audit Committee is currently scheduled to meet six times in 2013 and will meet at such other times as may be required.
The Audit Committees terms of reference are available on our websitesite Code of Conduct Our Code of Conduct the Code which is available on our websitesite applies worldwide to all fulltime and parttime AstraZeneca Directors ofcers employees and temporary staff.
Further information relating to the Code can be found in the Compliance section on page 47 .
A Group Finance Code of Conduct complements the Code.
It applies to the CEO the CFO the Groups principal accounting ofcers including key Finance staff in major overseas subsidiaries and all Finance function employees.
This reinforces the importance of the integrity of the Groups Financial Statements the reliability of the accounting records on which they are based and the robustness of the relevant controls and processes.
Remuneration Committee The principal role of the Remuneration Committee is to consider and set on behalf of the Board the remuneration including pension rights and compensation payments of Executive Directors and other senior executives.
It also considers and sets the remuneration of the Chairman in conjunction with the senior independent NonExecutive Director and in the absence of the Chairman.
No Director is involved in deciding his or her own remuneration.
More information is set out in the Directors Remuneration Report from page 122.
Nomination and Governance
The Nomination and Governance Committees role is to recommend to the Board any new Board appointments and to consider more broadly succession plans at Board level.
It continually reviews the composition of the Board using a matrix that records the skills and experience of current Board members and comparing this with the desired skills and experience it believes are appropriate to the Companys overall business and strategic needs both now and in the future.
Any decisions relating to the appointment of Directors are made by the entire Board based on the merits of the candidates and the relevance of their background and experience measured against objective criteria with care taken to ensure that appointees have enough time to devote to our business.
The Nomination and Governance Committee also advises the Board periodically on signicant developments in corporate governance and the Companys compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
During 2012 the members of the Nomination and Governance Committee were Louis Schweitzer Chairman of the Committee until 26 April 2012 and member until his retirement on 1 June Leif Johansson member and Chairman of the Committee from 26 April 2012 John Varley Rudy Markham from 26 April 2012 and Michele Hooper until her retirement on 26 April 2012.
Each of them is and in the case of each of Louis Schweitzer and Michele Hooper was a NonExecutive Director and considered independent by the Board.
Each of Louis Schweitzer and Leif Johansson was considered by the Board to be independent upon his appointment as Chairman in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the test of independence is not appropriate in relation to the Chairman after his appointment.
The
Company Secretary acts as secretary to the Nomination and Governance Committee.
The Nomination and Governance Committee considers both planned and unplanned unanticipated succession scenarios.
It was anticipated that Louis Schweitzer would retire from the Board in 2012 and consequently a thorough search for a new Chairman was started at the beginning of 2011.
Although Mr Schweitzer retired a few months earlier than originally envisaged succession plans were welladvanced and our new Chairman Leif Johansson joined the Board in April 2012 and became Chairman in June.
In the fourth quarter of 2010 in anticipation of the likelihood of David Brennan retiring within the next two years the Nomination and Governance Committee engaged the search rm Spencer Stuart to carry out a desktop exercise to identify potential external candidates for this position.
This work combined with a good overview of potential internal candidates as a result of the Boards normal work with and exposure to senior executives put the Nomination and Governance Committee in a position to react quickly to Mr Brennans decision in 2012 that he wished to retire.
A strong slate of internal and external candidates was identied who were thoroughly assessed over the summer of 2012 leading to the appointment of Pascal Soriot as CEO with effect from 1 October.
The Nomination and Governance Committee met six times in 2012.
Much of its work during the year naturally focused on the recruitment of Mr Soriot.
The
Committee engaged Spencer Stuart to assist it with the assignment.
Corporate Governance  Corporate Governance Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 118 The ad hoc Board Committee formed for the purpose of appointing a new Chairman of the Board also completed its work during 2012 and the appointment of Leif Johansson was announced by the Company on 1 March 2012.
He was elected as a Director at the AGM on 26 April 2012 and became Chairman with effect from 1 June.
This work was led by Michele Hooper in her capacity as senior independent NonExecutive Director and the search rm MWM Consulting was engaged to assist with the assignment.
The Nomination and Governance Committee also recommended to the Board the appointments of Genevive Berger and Graham Chipchase during the year as part of routine Board succession planning.
Professor Berger and Mr Chipchase were elected to the Board on 26 April 2012 and became members of the Science Committee and the Audit Committee respectively from the same date.
Professor Berger strengthens the Boards scientic and RandD knowledge and experience.
Mr Chipchase adds to the Boards international business leadership.
The Nomination and Governance Committee engaged MWM Consulting and The Zygos Partnership to assist it with the assignments to appoint Professor Berger and Mr Chipchase respectively.
Neither MWM Consulting nor The Zygos Partnership has any other connection to the Company.
Spencer Stuart undertakes executive search assignments for the Company periodically.
The individual attendance record of the Nomination and Governance Committees members is set out on page 113.
During the year the Nomination and Governance Committee also reviewed the composition of Board Committees in the light of the Board changes described above and recommended to the Board appropriate changes which are described in this Annual Report.
The Nomination and Governance Committees terms of reference are available on our websitesite Science Committee The Science Committees core role continues to be to provide assurance to the Board regarding the quality competitiveness and integrity of the Groups RandD activities by way of meetings and dialogue with our RandD leaders and other scientist employees visits to our RandD sites throughout the world and review and assessment of the approaches we adopt in respect of our chosen Therapy Areas scientic technology and RandD capabilities deployed decision making processes for RandD projects and programmes quality of our scientists career opportunities and talent development benchmarking against industry and scientic best practice where appropriate.
The Science Committee also reviews from time to time important bioethical issues that we face and assists in the formulation of and agrees on behalf of the Board appropriate policies in relation to such issues.
It may also consider from time to time future trends in medical science and technology.
The Science Committee does not review individual RandD projects.
However during 2012 the Science Committee did review on behalf of the Board the RandD aspects of a number of specic business development or acquisition proposals and advised the Board on its conclusions.
During 2012 the members of the Science Committee all of whom have a knowledge of or an interest in life sciences were Nancy Rothwell Chairman of the Science Committee Bruce Burlington Marcus Wallenberg and Genevive Berger from 26 April 2012.
The President Global RandD the Executive VicePresident Innovative Medicines the Executive VicePresident MedImmune and the Executive Vice President Global Medicines Development attended meetings of the Science Committee in 2012.
The VicePresident Strategy Portfolio and Performance RandD also attended all meetings and acted as secretary to the Science Committee.
The Science Committee met twice in person in 2012 in Cambridge and London UK and held ve meetings by telephone to review specic business development or acquisition proposals.
The Science Committees terms of reference are available on our websitesite US corporate governance requirements Our ADSs are traded on the NYSE and accordingly we are subject to the reporting and other requirements of the SEC applicable to foreign private issuers.
Section 404 of the SarbanesOxley Act requires companies to include in their annual report on Form 20F led with the SEC a report by management stating its responsibility for establishing internal control over nancial reporting and to assess annually the effectiveness of such internal control.
We have complied with those provisions of the SarbanesOxley Act applicable to foreign private issuers.
The Board continues to believe that the Group has a sound corporate governance framework good processes for the accurate and timely reporting of its nancial position and results of operations and an effective and robust system of internal controls.
We have established a Disclosure Committee further details of which can be found in the Disclosure Committee section on the page opposite.
The Directors assessment of the effectiveness of the internal control over nancial reporting is set out in the Directors Responsibilities for and Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting section in the Financial Statements on page 140.
We are required to disclose any signicant ways in which our corporate governance practices differ from those followed by US companies under the Listing Standards.
In addition we must comply fully with the provisions of the Listing Standards relating to the composition responsibilities and operation of audit committees applicable to foreign private issuers.
These provisions incorporate the rules concerning audit committees implemented by the SEC under the SarbanesOxley Act.
We have reviewed the corporate governance practices required to be followed by US companies under the Listing Standards and our corporate governance practices are generally consistent with those standards.
Business organisation Senior Executive Team The CEO is responsible for establishing and chairs the SET.
The SET normally meets once a month to consider and decide major business issues or as otherwise required by business needs.
Typically it also reviews in advance of submission to the Board those matters that are to be submitted to the Board for review and decision.
In addition to the CEO the CFO the General Counsel and the Chief Compliance Ofcer the SET comprises nine Executive VicePresidents representing Innovative Medicines small molecules MedImmune biologics Global Medicines Development North America Europe International Global Portfolio and Product Strategy Operations and Information Services and Human Resources and Corporate Affairs.
The Company Secretary acts as secretary to the SET.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 119 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview Portfolio Investment Board PIB The CEO is responsible for establishing and chairs the PIB a seniorlevel crossfunctional governance body which seeks to maximise the value of our internal and external RandD investments through robust transparent and wellinformed decisions that drive business performance and accountability.
Specically the PIB has responsibility for Reviewing the RandD portfolio by conducting an objective and transparent review of RandD performance product launch prole and alignment with corporate strategy.
The review is also an important step in reconrming the RandD three year budget.
Approving the business plans of the Innovative Medicines groups and the Global Medicines Development demand forecast by conrming the allocation of resources across earlystage and latestage elements of RandD as well as assessing licensing and acquisition opportunities.
Approving latestage internal and external investment decisions.
Monitoring environmental events that could have a major transformational or disruptive impact on our business.
In addition to the CEO the PIBs members in 2012 were the CFO the President Global RandD the Executive VicePresident Global Commercial Operations the Executive VicePresident Innovative Medicines the Executive VicePresident MedImmune the Executive VicePresident Global Medicines Development and the VicePresident Strategic Partnering and Business Development.
The PIB has a permanent secretary and typically meets at around the time of the monthly SET meetings or as otherwise required by business needs.
Disclosure Committee Our disclosure policy provides a framework for the handling and disclosure of inside information and other information of interest to shareholders and the investment community.
It also denes the role of the Disclosure Committee.
The members of the Disclosure Committee in 2012 were the CEO the CFO who chaired the Disclosure Committee the President Global RandD the General Counsel the VicePresident Corporate Affairs the VicePresident Investor Relations and the VicePresident Group Finance.
The Deputy Company Secretary acted as secretary to this Committee.
The
Disclosure Committee meets regularly to assist and inform the decisions of the CEO concerning inside information and its disclosure.
Periodically it reviews our disclosure controls and procedures and its own operation as part of work carried out to enable management and the Board to assure themselves that appropriate processes are operating for our planned disclosures such as our quarterly results announcements and scheduled investor relations events.
Disclosure of information to auditors The Directors who held ofce at the date of approval of this Annual Report conrm that so far as they are each aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware and each Director has taken all the steps that he or she ought to have taken as a Director to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditors are aware of that information.
Compliance and Group Internal Audit The role of the Global Compliance function is to manage and maintain the compliance programme infrastructure and to help embed a culture of ethics and integrity in the Group.
Global Compliance works closely with GIA with whom it provides assurance reporting to the Audit Committee.
During 2013 the Global Compliance function will continue to focus on ensuring the delivery of an aligned approach to compliance that addresses key risk areas across the business.
Further information can be found in the Compliance section from page 47 .
Global Compliance provides direct assurance to the Audit Committee on matters concerning compliance issues including the results of monitoring and auditing conducted by Global Compliance and an analysis of compliance breaches.
Complementing this GIA carries out a range of audits that include compliance related audits and reviews of the assurance activities of other Group assurance functions.
The results from these activities are reported to the Audit Committee.
GIA is an independent appraisal function that derives its authority from the Board through the Audit Committee.
Its primary role is to provide reasonable and objective assurance to the Directors regarding the adequacy and effectiveness of the Groups risk management and control framework and the internal controls over key business risks including nancial controls and compliance with laws regulations and policies.
GIA seeks to discharge the responsibilities set down in its charter by reviewing the processes for ensuring that key business risks are effectively managed the nancial and operational controls that help to ensure the Groups assets are properly safeguarded from losses including fraud the controls that help to ensure the reliability and integrity of management information systems the processes for ensuring compliance with policies and procedures external legislation and regulation.
In addition to fullling its primary remit of assurance to the Audit Committee GIA acts as a source of constructive advice and best practice assisting senior management to improve governance control compliance and risk management.
Other matters Corporate governance statement under the UK Disclosure and Transparency Rules DTR The disclosures that full the requirements of a corporate governance statement under the DTR can be found in this section and in other parts of this Annual Report as listed below each of which is incorporated into this section by reference Signicant holders of the Companys shares contained in the Shareholder Information section from page 203.
Articles contained in the Corporate Information section on page 208.
Amendments to the Articles contained in the Corporate Information section on page 208.
Subsidiaries and principal activities The Company is the holding company for a group of subsidiaries whose principal activities are described in this Annual
Principal subsidiaries and their locations are given in the Principal Subsidiaries section in the Financial Statements on page 191.
Corporate Governance  Corporate Governance Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 120 Branches and countries in which the Group conducts business In accordance with the Companies Act 2006 we disclose below our subsidiary companies that have representative or scientic branchesofces outside the UK AstraZeneca UK Limited Albania Algeria scientic ofce Angola Azerbaijan Belarus Bulgaria Chile Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Georgia Ghana scientic ofce Ireland Jordan Kazakhstan Macedonia Nigeria Romania Russia Saudi Arabia scientic ofce Serbia and Montenegro Slovenia Syria and Ukraine.
AstraZeneca AB Egypt scientic ofce Slovakia and the United Arab Emirates.
AstraZeneca Singapore Pte Limited
Distributions to shareholders and dividends for 2012 Our distribution policy comprises both a regular cash dividend and a share repurchase component further details of which are set out in the Financial Review on page 94 and Notes 20 and 21 to the Financial Statements on page 173.
The Companys dividends for 2012 of 2.80 178.6 pence SEK 18.34 per Ordinary Share amount to in aggregate a total dividend payment to shareholders of 3665 million.
Two of our employee share trusts AstraZeneca Share Trust Limited and AstraZeneca Quest Limited waived their right to a dividend on the Ordinary Shares that they hold and instead received a nominal dividend.
A shareholders resolution was passed at the 2012 AGM authorising the Company to purchase its own shares.
Pursuant to this resolution the Company repurchased and subsequently cancelled 57 .8 million Ordinary Shares with a nominal value of 0.25 each at an aggregate cost of 2635 million representing 4.6% of the closing total issued share capital of the
The Company suspended its share repurchase programme on 1 October as a prudent step to maintain exibility while the Board and the newlyappointed CEO completed the Companys annual strategy update.
During our share repurchase programmes that operated between 1999 and September 2012 a total of 615.2 million Ordinary Shares were repurchased and subsequently cancelled at an average price of 2777 pence per share for a consideration including expenses of 29352 million.
Going concern accounting basis Information on the business environment AstraZeneca operates in including the factors underpinning the industrys future growth prospects is included in the Directors Report.
Details of the product portfolio of the Group including patent expiry dates for key marketed products our approach to product development and our development pipeline are covered in detail with additional information by Therapy Area in the Directors Report.
The nancial position of the Group its cash ows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the Financial Review from page 86.
In addition Note 23 to the Financial Statements from page 175 includes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its nancial risk management objectives details of its nancial instruments and hedging activities and its exposures to credit market and liquidity risk.
Further details of the Groups cash balances and borrowings are included in Notes 13 and 14 to the Financial Statements from page 164.
The Group has considerable nancial resources available.
As at 31 December 2012 the Group had 9.8 billion in nancial resources cash balances of 7 .7 billion and undrawn committed bank facilities of 3 billion which are available until April 2017 with only 0.9 billion of debt due within one year.
The Groups revenues are largely derived from sales of products which are covered by patents which provide a relatively high level of resilience and predictability to cash inows although our revenue is expected to continue to be signicantly impacted by the expiry of patents over the medium term.
In addition recent government price interventions in response to budgetary constraints are expected to continue to adversely affect revenues in many of our mature markets.
However we anticipate new revenue streams from both recently launched medicines and products in development and the Group has a wide diversity of customers and suppliers across different geographic areas.
Consequently the Directors believe that overall the Group is well placed to manage its business risks successfully despite the current uncertain economic outlook.
After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Annual Report and Financial Statements.
Changes in share capital Changes in the Companys Ordinary Share capital during 2012 including details of the allotment of new shares under the Companys share plans are given in Note 20 to the Financial Statements from page 172.
Directors shareholdings The Articles require each Director to be the benecial owner of Ordinary Shares in the Company with an aggregate nominal value of 125 which currently represents at least 500 shares because each Ordinary Share has a nominal value of 0.25.
Such holding must be obtained within two months of the date of the Directors appointment.
At 31 December 2012 all of the Directors complied with this requirement and full details of each Directors interests in shares of the Company are set out in the Directors interests in shares section from page Information about the shareholding expectations of the Remuneration Committee in respect of Executive Directors and SET members and the Board in respect of NonExecutive Directors is also set out in the Directors Remuneration Report from page 122.
Political donations Neither the Company nor its subsidiaries made any EU political donations or incurred any EU political expenditure in 2012 and they do not intend to do so in the future in respect of which shareholder authority is required or for which disclosure in this Annual Report is required under the Companies Act 2006.
However to enable the Company and its subsidiaries to continue to support interest groups or lobbying organisations concerned with the review of government policy or law reform without inadvertently breaching the Companies Act 2006 which denes political donations and other political expenditure in broad terms a resolution will be put to shareholders at the 2013 AGM similar to that passed at the 2012 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 121 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview AGM to authorise the Company and its subsidiaries to make donations to political parties or independent election candidates make donations to political organisations other than political parties incur political expenditure up to an aggregate limit of 250000.
Corporate political contributions in the US are permitted in dened circumstances under the First Amendment of the US Constitution and are subject to both federal and state laws and regulations.
In 2012 the Groups US legal entities made contributions amounting in aggregate to 1759450 2011 1099450 to national political organisations statelevel political party committees and to campaign committees of various state candidates.
No corporate donations were made at the federal level and all contributions were made only where allowed by US federal and state law.
We publicly disclose details of our corporate US political contributionssiteresponsibility transparency .
The annual corporate contributions budget is reviewed and approved by the US General Counsel the US VicePresident Corporate Affairs and the President of our US business to ensure robust governance and oversight.
US citizens or individuals holding valid green cards exercised decision making over the contributions and the funds were not provided or reimbursed by any nonUS legal entity.
Such contributions do not constitute political donations or political expenditure for the purposes of the Companies Act 2006 and were made without any involvement of persons or entities outside the US.
Signicant agreements There are no signicant agreements to which the Company is a party that take effect alter or terminate on a change of control of the Company following a takeover bid.
There are no persons with whom we have contractual or other arrangements who are deemed by the Directors to be essential to our business.
Use of nancial instruments The Notes to the Financial Statements including Note 23 from page 175 include further information on our use of nancial instruments.
Creditor payment policy Our policy is to agree appropriate payment terms with all suppliers when agreeing to the terms of each transaction to ensure that those suppliers are made aware of the terms of payment and subject to their compliance to abide by the terms of payment.
A considerable part of the trade creditors balance continues to relate to the Merck account in the US which has particularly long contractual payment terms.
On 26 June 2012 AstraZeneca and Merck agreed to amend certain provisions of their ongoing Agreements with respect to the Second Option as detailed in Note 9 to the Financial Statements from page 161.
Our trade creditors balance excluding payments to Merck and other items not directly related to trade purchases in the US is our most accurate calculation of balances owed by the Companys subsidiaries to trade creditors at the balance sheet date.
This was equivalent to 56 days average purchases 2011 43 days 2010 57 days.
Historically we have also disclosed the total gure including any trade balances payable to Merck.
By including these items an average of 58 days is obtained 2011 50 days 2010 62 days.
The Company has no external trade creditors.
Annual General Meeting The Companys AGM will be held on 25 April 2013.
The meeting place will be in London UK.
A Notice of AGM will be sent to all registered holders of Ordinary Shares and where requested to the benecial holders of shares.
External auditor A resolution will be proposed at the AGM on 25 April 2013 for the reappointment of KPMG as auditor of the Company.
The external auditor has undertaken various nonaudit work for us during 2012.
More information about this work and the audit and nonaudit fees that we have paid are set out in Note 27 to the Financial Statements on page 190.
The external auditor is not engaged by us to carry out any nonaudit work in respect of which it might in the future be required to express an audit opinion.
As explained more fully in the Audit Committee section from page 115 the Audit Committee has established preapproval policies and procedures for audit and nonaudit work permitted to be carried out by the external auditor and has carefully monitored the objectivity and independence of the external auditor throughout 2012.
Directors Report The Directors Report which has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 comprises the following sections
Performance
Corporate Governance Development Pipeline Shareholder Information Corporate Information and has been signed on behalf of the Board.
A C N Kemp Company Secretary 31 January 2013 Corporate Governance  Directors Remuneration Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 122 Proposed changes to performance metrics but not to the rules nor the quantum of compensation opportunity of the PSP are under consideration.
The
Remuneration Committee will consult the Groups largest investors about the PSP proposals and will take those views into account before reaching its nal decision.
This consultation process will take place in the rst quarter of 2013 and before any awards are made under the PSP .
The Remuneration Committees intention in considering these changes is to ensure that the PSP continues to provide incentives for management to perform successfully against a balance of both nancial and nonnancial metrics.
Further information about the new PSP performance metrics will be made available at the AGM.
Shareholders will of course have an opportunity to vote on the new PSP arrangements as part of the vote on remuneration policy to be introduced by the new UK Department for Business Innovation and Skills executive remuneration proposals which we expect to be implemented with effect from 2014.
Given the Board changes during the year the Remuneration Committee gave careful consideration to a number of related remuneration matters.
In particular the remuneration package for our new CEO the arrangements for Simon Lowths four months service as Interim CEO and his return to the role of CFO and the arrangements relating to the retirement of our former CEO David Brennan.
We consulted with our major investors where appropriate on these matters and related information was provided to the market by way of announcements at the relevant times.
The arrangements are described in detail in this Remuneration Report.
Performance Share Plan PSP in March 2012 relating to performance over the period 2012 to 2014 inclusive which is lower principally but not solely because of patent expiry than the equivalent cash ow targets applicable to previous awards details are set out on pages Following Pascal Soriots appointment as CEO in October the Remuneration Committee has been reviewing the Companys remuneration framework.
The Remuneration Committee wishes to ensure that remuneration structures continue to be closely aligned with the Companys strategy and that they will support and drive achievement of our business objectives.
The Remuneration Committee is proposing a number of changes to both shortterm and longterm incentive arrangements for Executive Directors and other senior executives.
The composition of performance metrics for the annual bonus plan will be adjusted.
From 2013 they will be based on an integrated Group scorecard that includes both nancial and nonnancial performance metrics as well as reecting individual performance.
No changes are being made to the funding of the bonus pool the overall quantum at the Group or individual level or the payout curve.
The new integrated Group scorecard will be based on four key priorities Achieve scientic leadership Restore growth Achieve Group nancial targets and Ensure AstraZeneca is a great place to work with all but the last scorecard priority forming part of the nancial determination of the bonus outcome.
Targets for each category have been set for 2013.
The performance of AstraZeneca as set out in this Annual Report was mixed.
Revenues and prot were down versus prior year.
Although Core earnings per share and cash ow fell versus 2011 they both exceeded targets set at the beginning of the year.
Shareholders also had mixed fortunes.
Total shareholder return performance was weak.
But cash distributions including buybacks reected the strong cash ow generation which also supported the strengthening of the product pipeline through the acquisition of Ardea the collaboration with Amgen and the extension of our diabetes alliance with BMS.
We know that our shareholders expect pay appropriately to reect performance.
The Remuneration Committee has taken these diverse factors and expectations into account in making its judgements in 2012.
The business environment for the Company will continue to be challenging in 2013 and beyond in terms of the scal pressures on governments which in most markets have a direct affect on the Companys business the need to continue to address RandD productivity and the need to maintain a level of investment that is right for the future of AstraZeneca but which is also balanced against shareholders expectations for return on their investment in the Company.
The Remuneration Committee has to take a judicious view of performance stretch and reward.
So performance targets must be stretching but not so stretching as to compromise or weaken incentivisation.
For example we have increased for 2013 many of the revenue targets in priority areas Emerging Market sales and sales of Brilinta Brilique would be two cases in point.
But the environmental factors referred to above were also recognised by the Remuneration Committee in setting the free cash ow Directors Remuneration
John Varley NonExecutive Director and Chairman of the Remuneration Committee AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 123 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview There are a number of ways in which we seek to listen and respond to the views of shareholders on remuneration matters during the year including at the AGM and via consultation with the Companys largest investors about specic remuneration matters.
In the latter part of each year the Company usually hosts a meeting to which we invite our largest shareholders and seek their views on executive remuneration and corporate governance more broadly.
In previous years a number of NonExecutive Directors have been available to shareholders at that meeting including the Chairman of the Board myself as Chairman of the Remuneration Committee as well as other Board members.
Although we cancelled the meeting proposed to be held in December in anticipation of our dialogue with shareholders on remuneration matters in the rst quarter of 2013 we intend to continue to hold such meetings annually with the aim of maintaining a constructive discussion with shareholders on these topics.
Anticipating the coming into effect of the new regulations proposed by the UK Department for Business Innovation and Skills we have taken the opportunity to structure this 2012 Directors Remuneration Report to incorporate a number of the proposed features.
As a result this Remuneration Report has been prepared with separate sections that set out rst our remuneration policy Policy Report and second how that policy has been implemented in 2012 Implementation
We have not yet produced a Remuneration Report that is fully compliant with the proposed new regulations because they are still to be published in their nal form.
But our 2013 Remuneration Report will fully reect the new regulations and we will place resolutions before shareholders accordingly at the 2014 AGM.
As last year we have sought in this Remuneration Report to answer the question what have we paid our Executive Directors and why The answer to this question is largely contained in the Implementation Report which commences on page 127 .
To simplify the narrative and structure of this years Remuneration Report we have placed a lot of detailed disclosure including pensions the fees paid to the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors and facts and gures relating to the long term incentive plans in the Appendix from page 131.
We have taken into account Group and individual performance in 2012.
We are guided in our judgements by our compensation schemes and their rules.
But we know that we must exercise appropriate discretion to ensure that reward outcomes at AstraZeneca are appropriately consistent with the protection of your interests as our shareholders.
As ever we would welcome your feedback.
John Varley Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Corporate Governance  Directors Remuneration Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 124 Remuneration Committee membership The Remuneration Committee members are John Varley Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Leif Johansson Rudy Markham and Nancy Rothwell.
Leif Johansson was considered by the Board to be independent upon his appointment as Chairman of the Board in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the test of independence is not appropriate in relation to the Chairman after his appointment.
All other members of the Remuneration Committee are independent NonExecutive Directors.
The
Deputy Company Secretary acts as the secretary to the Remuneration Committee.
Terms of reference A copy of the Remuneration Committees terms of reference is available on our websitesite The Remuneration Committee conducted a review of its terms of reference during 2012.
A small number of minor changes were recommended to the Board principally to reect updated guidance issued by the Association of British Insurers in September.
The changes were approved by the Board in January 2013.
Main work of the Remuneration Committee during 2012 The Remuneration Committee met 12 times in 2012.
The individual attendance record of Remuneration Committee members is set out on page 113.
At the invitation of the Remuneration Committee except where their own remuneration was being discussed the CEO the Executive VicePresident Human Resources and Corporate Affairs the Global Head Reward and Employment and the VicePresident Global Compensation attended one or more Remuneration Committee meetings in 2012 and provided advice and services that materially assisted the Remuneration
In addition all meetings of the Remuneration Committee were attended by Carol Arrowsmith representing Deloitte LLP Deloitte the Remuneration Committees independent adviser.
The work of the Remuneration Committee focused on the following principal matters during 2012 Executive Directors remuneration arrangements on appointment change of role and retirement as described elsewhere in this Remuneration Report.
The terms of other senior executives remuneration packages on appointment promotion or termination.
The NonExecutive Chairmans remuneration arrangements on appointment.
The assessment of Group and individual performance against performance targets to determine the level of executive bonuses for performance during 2011 and to set executive bonus performance targets for 2012.
The assessment of performance against targets to determine the level of vesting in 2012 under the PSP  and the setting of PSP and AZIP performance thresholds for awards made in 2012.
The determination of individual awards made under the Groups main longterm incentive plans the PSP  the AZIP and the AstraZeneca Global Restricted Stock Plan to SET members and other participants.
The determination of restricted share awards to a number of senior executives under the AstraZeneca Restricted Share Plan.
Proposed changes to certain elements of shortterm and longterm incentive arrangements.
A review of Group reward data including CEO pay relative to average pay and average salary data analysed by gender and bonus data for the direct reports of SET members.
A review of the sources and robustness of market remuneration data provided to the Remuneration Committee.
A benchmarking review of the Remuneration Committees activities and policies against institutional investor guidelines.
A review of the shareholding requirements for Executive Directors and the shareholding levels of other SET members.
A review of the pension entitlements of Executive Directors and other SET members.
A review of the proportion of Executive Directors and SET members annual cash bonuses that are deferred into shares with a three year vesting period.
Consideration of the UK governments June proposals concerning executive pay.
A review of the performance of Deloitte the independent adviser to the Remuneration Committee.
The annual review of the performance of the Remuneration Committee.
The preparation review and approval in January 2013 of this Remuneration
Adviser to the Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee retains Deloitte represented by Carol Arrowsmith who provided independent advice on various matters considered by the Remuneration Committee in 2012.
The cost of this service to the Company in 2012 was 229260 including VAT.
During the year Deloitte also provided taxation advice and other specic nonaudit services to the
The Remuneration Committee reviewed the potential for conicts of interest and judged that there were no conicts.
Deloitte is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group which is responsible for the stewardship and development of the voluntary code of conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
The principles on which the code is based are transparency integrity objectivity competence due care and condentiality.
Deloitte adheres to the code.
Shareholder context At the Companys AGM in April 2012 the resolution to approve the Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 31 December 2011 was passed with 91.37% of the votes cast for the resolution and 8.63% of the votes cast against the resolution.
Basis of preparation of this
Remuneration Report
This Remuneration Report has been prepared in accordance with the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 Regulations and meets the relevant requirements of the Financial Services Authoritys Listing Rules.
As required by the Regulations a resolution to approve this Remuneration Report will be proposed at the AGM on 25 April 2013.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 125 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview Policy Report Key elements of remuneration policy Purpose and link to strategy Operation Performance measures Base salary Base salary is intended to be sufcient but no more than necessary to attract retain and develop highcalibre talent.
Based on conditions in the relevant market and recognising the value of an individuals sustained personal performance and contribution to the business taking account of the market rate for an individuals skills and experience.
Benchmarked periodically but not annually against external comparators.
Benets Noncash benets are designed to be sufcient but no more generous than necessary to attract retain and develop highcalibre talent.
Based on local median market practice.
Annual bonus The annual bonus rewards shortterm performance against specic Group and individual objectives.
An annual cash incentive opportunity determined by reference to an integrated Group scorecard and individual performance measured over a single nancial year of the Company relative to targets set at the beginning of each year.
The Remuneration Committee requires that certain percentages of the annual bonus are converted into stock to be held for three years before vesting.
The Group performance measures ensure that all eligible employees receive an element of reward based on the Groups overall nancial and nonnancial performance.
Individual goals are based on annual objectives.
More information about the performance measures for the 2012 annual bonus in respect of the Executive Directors is set out on page 129.
AstraZeneca
Performance
Share Plan PSP As described in the introduction to this
Remuneration Report
Remuneration Committee changes to performance metrics for the PSP are under consideration.
It is planned that consultation with shareholders and implementation of the changes will take place in 2013.
The information set out in this table refers to awards made under the PSP up to and including 2012.
The PSP rewards the outperformance of industry peers in terms of shareholder value creation measured by relative TSR and the generation of cash at levels to nance investment in the business debt repayment and the Companys shareholder distribution policy.
The PSP was approved by shareholders at the 2005 AGM and provides for the grant of awards over Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
The three year performance periods commence on 1 January in the year of the award.
The vesting date is the third anniversary of the date of the award.
In respect of any nancial year of the Company the maximum market value of shares that may in theory be put under an award under the PSP is 500% of a participants base salary which converts into an expected value of 250%.
The actual individual limits that apply under the PSP subject to this maximum are set by the Remuneration Committee from time to time.
In the event that employment ceases for anything other than a good leaver reason any unvested awards lapse unless the Remuneration Committee decides otherwise.
Fifty percent based on the relative TSR performance of the Company over the relevant three year performance period against a predetermined peer group of global pharmaceutical companies.
Fifty percent based on the achievement of a cumulative free cash ow target over the relevant three year performance period based on a sliding scale between a threshold target and an upper target.
More information about the PSPs performance measures is set out on page 129.
AstraZeneca Investment Plan AZIP The performance and holding periods of the AZIP are inuenced by the Groups targeted product development cycle reecting the longterm investment horizons that are a feature of the industry.
Dividendbased performance hurdles motivate the generation of returns for shareholders on a sustainable basis over an extended period of time.
The AZIP was approved by shareholders at the 2010 AGM and provides for the grant of awards over Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
The AZIP is operated over a four year performance period and a subsequent four year holding period.
Performance periods commence on 1 January in the year of the award.
Holding periods commence at the end of the performance period and end eight years from 1 January in the year of the award.
In respect of any nancial year of the Company the maximum market value of shares that may in theory be put under an award under the AZIP is 500% of a participants base salary which converts into an expected value of 500%.
The actual individual limits that apply under the AZIP subject to this maximum are set by the Remuneration Committee from time to time.
Clawback  the Remuneration Committee may claw back some or all of the shares that are the subject of a participants award at any time during the performance or the holding period if in the opinion of the Remuneration Committee acting fairly and reasonably this is warranted by underlying Company performance the occurrence of an event that causes or is very likely to cause reputational damage to the Company or serious misconduct by the participant.
A combination of dividend and dividend cover hurdles assessed over the relevant four year performance period.
More information about the AZIPs performance hurdles is set out on page 130.
Pension Provision of retirement benets.
Benchmarked against the relevant local employment market.
In respect of longterm incentive awards the current distribution between the PSP and the AZIP is in the ratio 75% to 25%.
Corporate Governance  Directors Remuneration Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 126 Performance evaluation process AstraZeneca conducts an annual performance evaluation process for all of its executives.
In the case of members of the Senior Executive Team this is conducted by the CEO.
In the case of the CEO this is conducted by the Chairman of the Board.
Recommendations are then made to the Remuneration Committee.
Those reviews take place relative to Group and individual objectives which are set at the beginning of each year.
Service contracts The notice periods and unexpired terms of Executive Directors service contracts at 31 December 2012 are shown in the table below.
Subject to the arrangements in respect of the rst 12 months of Pascal Soriots service which are described below either AstraZeneca or the Executive Director may terminate the service contract on 12 months notice.
It is the Remuneration Committees intention that in the event of early termination of an Executive Directors employment any compensation payable under hisher service contract should not exceed the salary and benets that would have been received had the contractual notice period been worked and this may be further reduced in line with the Executive Directors duty to mitigate losses.
None of the Executive Directors has any provision in their service contracts giving them a right to liquidated damages or an automatic entitlement to bonus for the duration of their notice period.
Executive Director Date of service contract Unexpired term at 31 December 2012 Notice period Pascal Soriot 27 August 2012 21 months Reducing to 12 months Simon Lowth 5 November 2007 12 months 12 months The notice period in Mr Soriots service contract is 24 months initially which is reducing by one month for each month of service and will stabilise at a 12 month notice period.
Policy on external appointments and retention of fees Subject to specic Board approval in each case Executive Directors and other SET members may accept external appointments as nonexecutive directors of other companies and retain any related fees paid to them provided that such appointments are not considered by the Board to prevent or reduce the ability of the executive to perform their role within the Group to the required standard.
Simon Lowth is a NonExecutive Director of Standard Chartered PLC.
In respect of this position he received fees of 130000 for his services in 2012.
Considering the wider employee context The Remuneration Committee sets overall remuneration policy and makes decisions about specic remuneration arrangements in the broader context of employee remuneration throughout the Group.
The Remuneration Committee annually reviews Group remuneration data including ratios of average pay to senior executive pay bonus data gender and geographical data in relation to base salaries and variable compensation and aggregate data about the shareholding levels of senior managers.
In reviewing the base salaries of Executive Directors and SET members the Remuneration Committee considers the overall level of any salary increases being awarded to employees across the Group in the relevant year.
Shareholder and broader context In all aspects of its work the Remuneration Committee considers both the external environment in which the Company operates and the guidance issued by organisations representing institutional shareholders.
It consults the Companys largest investors on general and specic remuneration and provides an annual opportunity for representatives of those investors to meet the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee and other Remuneration Committee and Board members.
The Remuneration Committee works with the Audit Committee to ensure that the Groups remuneration policies and practices achieve the right balance between appropriate incentives to reward good performance and managing risk in terms of employee behaviour and how the Company achieves its business objectives.
The annual bonus plan in which all employees participate contains goals relating to the demonstration of commitment to integrity with the aim of enhancing the Companys reputation and avoiding reputational damage.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 127 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview Implementation Report Implementation of remuneration policy in 2012 Pascal Soriot Mr Soriot joined AstraZeneca as CEO on 1 October.
In establishing his remuneration arrangements the Remuneration Committee sought to offer a package that was internationally competitive but pay no more than was necessary.
In doing so to the extent possible the Remuneration Committee put in place a framework that maintained broadly the same balance in terms of its constituent elements and overall quantum as for the previous CEO which the Remuneration Committee considers to be right for AstraZeneca and its shareholders.
At the time of Mr Soriots appointment as CEO certain share awards and payments which are described below were negotiated and agreed.
They were approved by the Remuneration Committee in order to compensate Mr Soriot for the forfeiture of unvested longterm incentive awards and forfeited 2012 bonus opportunity from his previous employer.
The principle governing the decision of the Remuneration Committee was that the buyout should be implemented predominantly in shares of AstraZeneca in circumstances where the vesting and in the case of the award under the AZIP  the holding period operate over several years.
The unvested longterm incentive awards from Mr Soriots previous employer were valued with the assistance of an independent third party using its standard methodology for such work and where relevant taking into account the extent to which such awards might have been expected to vest.
General information about annual bonus outcomes for performance in 2012 can be found on page 129.
In awarding Mr Soriots bonus for 2012 the Remuneration Committee recognised the strong start he had made since becoming CEO and his positive impact on the organisation.
2012 Notes Base salary 275000 The annual rate of base salary for the CEO in 2012 was 1100000.
Mr Soriot was appointed as CEO with effect from 1 October.
Benets 1017000 This sum is made up of 991000 being cash paid to compensate Mr Soriot in respect of his forfeited bonus opportunity for 2012 from his previous employer paid at his previous employers target bonus rate and prorated from 1 January 2012 to 30 September.
Mr Soriot is required to invest this sum after payment of income tax in AstraZeneca shares and 26000 being remaining cash following selection of benets within the Companys UK exible benets programme.
Annual bonus 335000 Mr Soriot was awarded a bonus for performance during 2012 of 122% of base salary out of a maximum possible award of 180% of base salary range 0%  180% with a target annual bonus of 100%.
This award was prorated from 1 October to 31 December to reect the date of Mr Soriots appointment as CEO.
Onethird of any pretax bonus must be deferred into Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
These are held for three years before being released.
The bonus is not pensionable.
Award of restricted shares 2000000 On 26 October Mr Soriot was granted an award of 69108 restricted Ordinary Shares at a price of 2894 pence per share by way of compensation for the loss of longterm incentives from his previous employer.
No performance conditions apply.
Vesting schedule for this award subject to Mr Soriots continued employment with the Company 40% on 1 October 2013 30% on 1 October 2014 30% on 1 October 2015.
Pension 66000 Cash payment equivalent to 24% of base salary time prorated to take account of Mr Soriots joining date in 2012 taken by Mr Soriot as a cash alternative to participation in a dened contribution pension scheme.
In addition to the award of restricted shares on 26 October Mr Soriot was also granted an award of 69108 Ordinary Shares at a price of 2894 pence per share under the AZIP also by way of compensation for the loss of longterm incentives from his previous employer.
This award is subject to a four year performance period 1 January 2012 to 31 December 2015 and a subsequent four year holding period 1 January 2016 to 31 December 2019.
The performance hurdles that apply to this award are that the annual dividend per share paid to holders of Ordinary Shares must increase from 2.80 over the four year performance period 2.80 being the fullyear dividend for 2011 and that dividend cover over the same period based on Reported earnings before restructuring costs does not fall below 1.5 times.
Corporate Governance  Directors Remuneration Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 128 Simon Lowth During 2012 at a time of considerable change within the Group Mr Lowth served as Interim CEO for the period 1 June to 30 September reverting to his previous role as CFO on 1 October.
To reect his additional responsibilities during his tenure as Interim CEO he was awarded a temporary increase in base salary.
General information about annual bonus outcomes for performance in 2012 can be found on the page opposite.
The Remuneration Committee also recognised Mr Lowths excellent performance as Interim CEO and his strong support to Mr Soriot in his new position as CEO in determining the quantum of his annual bonus award.
2012 Notes Base salary 740000 Base salary for the CFO in 2012 was 660000.
Temporary base salary increase effective from June to September inclusive period as Interim CEO was 20000 gross per month creating an annualised base pay gure of 900000.
This compares with the annualised salary of the outgoing CEO of 997223.
This temporary base salary increase was not pensionable.
Benets 103000 This sum is made up of 47000 being cash paid in respect of dividends accrued on Ordinary Shares which vested in 2012 having been deferred in 2009 in respect of Mr Lowths annual bonus awarded for performance in 2008 50000 being remaining cash following selection of benets within the Companys UK exible benets programme and 6000 for other benets including healthcare insurance.
Annual bonus a 554000 b 480000 Total 1034000 Mr Lowth was awarded a bonus for performance during his period as CFO during 2012 of 126% of base salary out of a maximum possible award of 150% of base salary range 0%  150% with a target annual bonus of 90%.
The annual bonus target was increased from 90% to 100% of base salary effective from June to September inclusive Mr Lowths period as Interim CEO in line with that applicable to the CEO.
For this period Mr Lowth was awarded a bonus of 160% range 0%  180% with a target annual bonus of 100%.
Onethird of any pretax bonus must be deferred into Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
These are held for three years before being released.
The bonus is not pensionable.
AstraZeneca
Performance
Share Plan PSP 897000 This sum is made up of 771000 being the estimated market value of Ordinary Shares which will vest in March 2013 in respect of the 2010 PSP award three year performance period 2010 to 2012 and 126000 being cash to be paid on the vesting of this award in respect of dividends accrued.
Pension 158000 Cash payment equivalent to 24% of base salary as CFO taken by Mr Lowth as a cash alternative to participation in a dened contribution pension scheme.
Estimated market value of 3153 pence per Ordinary Share based on the London Stock Exchange closing price on 30 January 2013.
David Brennan In April 2012 Mr Brennan informed the Board that he wished to retire.
Mr Brennan relinquished his responsibilities as a Director and as CEO on 1 June.
2012 Notes Base salary 499000 Base salary for the CEO in 2012 was at the rate of 997223.
Mr Brennan retired as CEO and as a Director on 1 June.
His employment with the Company ended on 30 June.
Pay in lieu of notice 914000 On leaving the Company at a date determined by the Board Mr Brennan received a lump sum payment in lieu of contractual notice representing 11 months base pay.
Benets 252000 This sum is made up of an allowance of up to 120000 for relocation costs under Mr Brennans contract 86000 being cash paid in respect of dividends accrued on Ordinary Shares which vested in 2012 having been deferred in 2009 in respect of Mr Brennans annual bonus awarded for performance in 2008 17000 allowance for professional fees legal and pensions advice in connection with Mr Brennans retirement 16000 for other benets including healthcare insurance and 13000 car allowance.
Annual bonus None awarded Mr Brennan informed the Remuneration Committee that he did not wish to be considered for a bonus in respect of that part of 2012 during which he was CEO.
The Remuneration Committee determined that no such bonus would be awarded and also that there should be no bonus award relating to the contractual notice period.
AstraZeneca
Performance
Share Plan PSP 1577000 This sum is made up of 1355000 being the estimated market value of Ordinary Shares which will vest in March 2013 in respect of the 2010 PSP award three year performance period 2010 to 2012 and being prorated from 7 May 2010 to 30 June 2012 to reect the period of Mr Brennans employment since the award was granted and 222000 being cash to be paid on the vesting of this award in respect of dividends accrued.
The Remuneration Committee determined that the share awards made to Mr Brennan in 2011 and 2012 under the PSP and the AZIP should be forfeited.
Pension Mr Brennans pension entitlement was provided through a combination of the AstraZeneca US Dened Benet Pension Plan and US dened contribution arrangements.
He had an accrued pension at 30 June of 1584000 1000000 per annum from his dened benet arrangements.
Full details can be found on page 131.
Estimated market value of 3153 pence per Ordinary Share based on the London Stock Exchange closing price on 30 January 2013.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 129 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview Variable elements of the CEOs and CFOs remuneration in 2012  additional disclosures Annual bonus outcomes for performance in 2012 For Executive Directors the principal drivers of annual bonus opportunity are EPS 27% weighting cash ow 9% weighting and scorecards Group and SET area 64% weighting.
For the CEO the average of all SET area scorecards is used to create an aggregate scorecard weighting.
For the CFO the average of Finance and Strategic Partnering and Business Development scorecards is used.
Reward driven by EPS and cash ow performance depends on EPS and cash ow outcomes versus targets set at the beginning of each year.
Reward driven by the scorecards depends on performance outcomes relative to goals in the areas of Values Pipeline and People set at the beginning of each year.
At constant exchange rates there were declines in revenue Core operating prot and EPS versus prior year.
However the Core EPS outcome and the cash ow outcome both exceeded the target set at the beginning of 2012.
That element of the bonus payout which was driven by EPS and cash ow performance therefore exceeded target.
In respect of the scorecards a number of factors were taken into consideration.
These include the supply problems described elsewhere in this Remuneration Report and the slower than expected uptake of BrilintaBrilique.
But they also include the strengthening of the pipeline through the acquisition of Ardea the collaboration with Amgen and the extension of our diabetes alliance with BMS through the inclusion of the Amylin product portfolio.
Both Forxiga and Zinforo were launched in Europe and we had a successful launch of Nexium in Japan.
These factors collectively drove a score relative to scorecard performance of slightly below target.
The outturn is that the total variable shortterm compensation of Executive Directors and other SET members in 2012 fell relative to the equivalent number in 2011.
The Remuneration Committee decided that Mr Soriots annual bonus should amount to 122% of base salary representing 68% of the potential maximum.
The Remuneration Committee decided that Mr Lowths annual bonus should be 140% of base salary representing 86% of the potential maximum.
Mr Brennan informed the Remuneration Committee that he did not wish to be considered for a bonus in respect of that part of 2012 during which he was CEO and the Remuneration Committee determined that no such bonus would be awarded.
Annual bonus deferral Part of the annual bonus of Executive Directors and other SET members is deferred into shares helping to align senior executives interests with those of shareholders.
The proportion currently deferred into shares is onethird of the pretax annual bonus for Executive Directors and onesixth for other SET members.
The shares are acquired on the open market at the prevailing market price and held for a period of three years from the date of acquisition before being delivered to individual Executive Directors and other SET members.
Performance measures under the PSP The vesting of PSP awards is contingent on performance against specied performance measures over the relevant three year performance period and continued employment with the Group.
Equal weighting is given to the two performance measures used relative TSR and cumulative free cash ow.
Relative TSR  Fifty percent of the award is based on the Groups relative TSR performance against a predetermined peer group of global pharmaceutical companies.
The peer group is Abbott BMS Eli Lilly and Company GSK Johnson and Johnson Merck Novartis Pzer HoffmannLa Roche Ltd and SanoAventis.
TSR measures share price growth and dividends reinvested in respect of a notional number of shares from the beginning of the relevant performance period to the end of it and ranks the companies in the peer group by reference to their TSR achieved over that period.
The rank which the Companys TSR achieves over the performance period will determine how many shares will vest under the relevant PSP award.
Payouts against performance in relation to TSR for PSP awards are expressed as a percentage of the maximum award currently payable shown within a range of 0% to 100% as set out in the table below.
TSR ranking of the Company % of the maximum PSP award that vests Below median 0% Median 25% Between median and upper quartile Pro rata Upper quartile 75% Signicantly above upper quartile 100% Although 100% of the maximum award may vest at the Remuneration Committees discretion if the Companys TSR performance is substantially better than that of the upper quartile of the comparator group the Company would need to have sustained a level of performance signicantly in excess of upper quartile over a period of years for the Remuneration Committee to be satised that the vesting of awards at this level was warranted.
In addition to the TSR performance target being met for each PSP award the Remuneration Committee has to satisfy itself that achievement of the TSR performance target is an appropriate reection of the Groups underlying nancial performance.
It has the discretion to prevent PSP awards from vesting or only allow them to vest partially where this in the judgement of the Remuneration Committee is warranted.
The TSR graphs on page 134 show for each PSP award how the Companys TSR performance has compared with the TSR for the companies in the comparator group from the rst day of the relevant performance period to 31 December 2012 and how the Company ranks against those other peer companies on this basis.
Cumulative free cash ow  Fifty percent of the award vests subject to the achievement of the free cash ow performance measure which operates as a cumulative cash ow target over the same three year performance period as the TSR performance measure.
The measure for the cash ow target is net cash ow before distributions subject to any further adjustments the Remuneration Committee chooses to make at its discretion and thus referred to as adjusted cumulative cash ow and the level of vesting is based on a sliding scale between a threshold cash ow target and an upper target.
Vesting levels in relation to the threshold target and the upper target are shown in the table overleaf.
Corporate Governance  Directors Remuneration Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 130 Adjusted cumulative cash ow  all PSP awards made before 2012 Adjusted cumulative cash ow  PSP awards made in 2012 % of the maximum PSP award that vests Less than 16 billion Less than 12 billion 0% 16 billion 12 billion 25% Between 16 billion and 23 billion Between 12 billion and 18 billion Pro rata 23 billion and above 18 billion and above 100% Cumulative cash ow is considered to be the most appropriate measure of cash ow performance because it relates to the residual cash available to nance additional investment in specic business needs debt repayments and our distribution policy.
The cash ow measure encompasses a number of important elements of operational and nancial performance and helps to align executives rewards with shareholder value creation.
The level of vesting of this element is based on a sliding scale against a target that is intended to represent a signicant challenge for the business.
It is intended that the Remuneration Committee should have the discretion to adjust but on an exceptional basis only the free cash ow target during the performance period for material factors that might otherwise distort the performance measure in either direction.
This allows performance to be assessed against targets that have been set on a consistent basis.
For example adjustments may be required to reect exchange rate movements signicant acquisitions or divestments and major legal and taxation settlements.
Any major adjustments to the calculation are disclosed to shareholders.
There is no retesting of performance.
Vesting of share awards made in 2010 under the PSP In 2012 the TSR ranking of the Company was below median and therefore none of the award will vest in respect of that element of the performance measure.
Fifty percent of the PSP award is based on free cash ow and in 2012 the Company achieved 95% of the free cash ow performance measure.
The PSP share awards made in 2010 in respect of the 2010 to 2012 performance period will therefore vest at 47% for SET members including Simon Lowth but excluding Pascal Soriot who does not hold any 2010 PSP awards.
For the former CEO David Brennan vesting of his 2010 PSP awards will be prorated from 7 May 2010 to 30 June 2012 to reect the period of his employment since the award was granted.
Performance hurdles under the AZIP The performance hurdles for the AZIP awards are shown in the table below.
Year in which AZIP award made Relevant four year performance period Dividend hurdle Dividend cover hurdle based on Reported earnings before restructuring costs 2010 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2013 That the annual dividend per share paid to holders of Ordinary Shares is increased from 2.30 over the performance period 2.30 being the full year dividend for 2009 That dividend cover does not fall below 1.5 times over the performance period 2011 1 January 2011 to 31 December 2014 That the annual dividend per share paid to holders of Ordinary Shares is increased from 2.55 over the performance period 2.55 being the full year dividend for 2010 That dividend cover does not fall below 1.5 times over the performance period 2012 1 January 2012 to 31 December 2015 That the annual dividend per share paid to holders of Ordinary Shares is increased from 2.80 over the performance period 2.80 being the full year dividend for 2011 That dividend cover does not fall below 1.5 times over the performance period The AZIP awards made to date remain outstanding other than those made to David Brennan in 2011 and 2012 which the Remuneration Committee determined should be forfeited.
Statement of Executive Directors shareholdings In addition to the shareholding requirements imposed by the Board on Executive Directors and SET members and shown in the table below under the Articles all Directors must within two months of their appointment acquire a benecial interest in at least 500 shares.
Pascal Soriot Simon Lowth Shareholding requirement for the CEO and CFO 300% of base salary 200% of base salary Total number of shares benecially owned as at 31 January 2013 3500 56960 Estimated market value of total number of shares benecially owned based on the London Stock Exchange closing price of 3153 pence per share on 30 January 2013 110000 1796000 Estimated market value of total number of shares benecially owned as a percentage of 2012 base salary 10% 272% Total number of shares subject to deferral 69108 29042 Total number of shares subject to performance conditions 69108 205397 The shareholding requirement for all other SET members is 125% of base salary.
Further information about Executive Directors shareholdings can be found from page 134.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 131 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview Appendix  Additional information
The Executive Directors pension arrangements disclosed in the Pension arrangements section below the Directors emoluments disclosed in the Directors emoluments in 2012 section from page 132 and the details of the Directors interests in Ordinary Shares disclosed in the Directors interests in shares section excluding the Benecial interests subsection from page 134 have been audited by KPMG Audit Plc.
Pension arrangements Pascal Soriot and Simon Lowth Pascal Soriot and Simon Lowth are eligible to join the AstraZeneca Group Self Invested Personal Pension UK Dened Contribution Plan UK DCP at a Company contribution rate of 24% of annual base salary or alternatively to take the Company contribution as a cash allowance.
Since joining AstraZeneca Mr Lowth has elected to take the cash allowance in lieu of a pension which during 2012 amounted to 158000 251000 201 1 153000 245000.
In respect of 2012 Mr Soriot made a similar election which amounted to 66000 105000.
In the event of a senior employee in the UK DCP including one who has taken the alternative cash allowance becoming incapacitated permanent health insurance cover provides continuation of a proportion of salary subject to the satisfaction of certain medical criteria.
In the event of death prior to retirement dependants are entitled to a lump sum secured from a multiple of 10 times salary capped at 4.3 million.
David Brennan David Brennan is a member of the AstraZeneca US Dened Benet Pension Plan US DBP.
Benets for members of the US DBP are delivered on a taxqualied basis with accrued benets that exceed specic limits under the US DBPs formula and the US Tax Code being delivered through a supplementary nonqualied plan.
The normal pension age under the US DBP is 65.
However on his retirement in 2012 Mr Brennan was eligible to take a pension or lump sum equivalent based on accrued service and nal pensionable pay ie without actuarial reduction due to his satisfaction of a condition in the pension plan relating to combined age and service exceeding 85 years.
Mr Brennans participation in the US DBP was subject to a service cap at 35 years service which was attained during his tenure as CEO and therefore service beyond 35 years is not shown in the table below.
During his tenure as a Director bonus payments were removed from the calculation of his pensionable pay under the US DBP .
Pension is payable to Mr Brennan in US dollars.
For ease of understanding the table below has been presented in both pounds sterling and US dollars using the exchange rates for 2012 set out on page 133.
Transfer values are calculated to be consistent with the value of the lump sum distribution equivalent to his deferred accrued pension annually.
David Brennan Dened benet arrangements Accrued pension at 1 January 2012 988 1565 Increase in accrued pension during year as a result of ination Adjustment to accrued pension as a result of salary increase relative to ination 12 19 Increase in accrued pension as a result of additional service Accrued pension at 30 June 2012 1000 1584 Employee contributions during 2012 Transfer value of accrued pension at 31 December 2011 14200 22488 Transfer value of accrued pension at 30 June 2012 14776 23400 Change in transfer value during the period less employee contributions 576 912 Age at 30 June 2012 Pensionable service years at 30 June Mr Brennans employment with AstraZeneca ended on 30 June 2012.
In addition to the US DBP  Mr Brennan as a US citizen was a contributing member of the US 401k savings plan.
He also participated in AstraZenecas Executive Deferred Compensation Plan EDCP which is operated as a supplemental nonqualied plan in respect of US employees should annual contributions exceed the limit applicable to contributions under the qualied 401k plan.
During 2012 total employer matching contributions of 47 000 30000 2011 96000 60000 were made to his 401k plan and EDCP .
Member contributions of 224000 355000 were paid through salary sacrice into the plans.
Corporate Governance  Directors Remuneration Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 132 Summary of other share plans AstraZeneca Global Restricted Stock Plan The AstraZeneca Global Restricted Stock Plan GRSP was introduced in 2010 and provides for the grant of restricted stock awards over the Companys Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
The GRSP is operated for below SETlevel employees only.
Typically awards are made in March each year and in relation for example to new appointments or promotions in August.
Awards under the GRSP do not involve the issue or allotment of new Ordinary Shares or ADSs but rely instead on the market purchase of Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
AstraZeneca Restricted Share Plan The AstraZeneca Restricted Share Plan RSP was introduced in 2008 and provides for the granting of restricted share awards to key employees excluding Executive Directors.
Awards are made on an ad hoc basis with variable vesting dates.
The RSP was used in 2012 to make awards totalling an aggregate of 643000 Ordinary Shares under the plan for the calendar year 2012 to a number of key senior executives in specic situations considered by the Remuneration Committee.
The Remuneration Committee has responsibility for agreeing any awards under the RSP and for setting the policy for the way in which the RSP operates.
Awards under the RSP do not involve the issue or allotment of new Ordinary Shares or ADSs but rely instead on the market purchase of Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
AstraZeneca Share Option Plan The AstraZeneca Share Option Plan SOP expired in May 2010.
Details of outstanding options granted to Executive Directors are shown in the table on page 137 .
The Remuneration Committee imposed performance conditions in respect of the exercise of such options by SET members including the Executive Directors which in the view of the Remuneration Committee were considered appropriately stretching.
In order for options to vest the EPS of the Group must increase at least in line with the UK Retail Prices Index plus 5% per annum on average over a three year period the base gure being the EPS for the nancial year preceding the date of grant with no retesting.
In addition since the review of executive remuneration in 2004 the Remuneration Committee has included a condition that if an event occurs which causes material reputational damage to the Company such that it is not appropriate for the options to vest and become exercisable the Remuneration Committee can make a determination to reect this.
No such determination was made in 2012.
Other plans In addition to the plans described above the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Plan and the AstraZeneca AllEmployee Share Plan are operated in the UK both of which are HM Revenue and Customs approved plans.
Executive Directors and certain other SET members are eligible to participate in these plans.
Dilution under share plans Other than the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Plan and the AstraZeneca AllEmployee Share Plan which operate in the UK only and the SOP  none of AstraZenecas share plans has a dilutive effect because they do not involve the issue or allotment of new Ordinary Shares or ADSs but rely instead on the market purchase of Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
Chairman
The Remuneration Committee determines the terms of service including remuneration of the Chairman.
The annual Board fees payable to the Chairman are set out in the table below.
In addition to the Chairmans fee a proportion of the ofce costs of the Chairman are reimbursed the sum paid in this respect in 2012 is set out in the Directors emoluments section below.
The Chairman receives no additional fee or allowance for Remuneration Committee membership.
The Chairman does not participate in the Groups incentive plans or pension or healthcare arrangements.
NonExecutive Directors None of the NonExecutive Directors has a service contract but all have letters of appointment.
In accordance with the Articles following their appointment Directors must retire at each AGM and may present themselves for election or reelection.
None of the NonExecutive Directors has any provision in their letter of appointment giving them a right to compensation payable upon early termination of their appointment.
They are not eligible for performancerelated bonuses or the grant of share awards or options.
No pension contributions are made on their behalf.
The annual Board fees applicable to NonExecutive Directors are set out below.
Under the Articles all Directors must within two months of their appointment acquire a benecial interest in at least 500 shares.
In addition to this mandatory shareholding requirement the Board encourages each NonExecutive Director to build up over time a shareholding in the Company with a value approximately equivalent to the basic annual fee for a NonExecutive Director 75000 or in the case of the Chairman approximately equivalent to his annual fee 500000.
NonExecutive Directors fees Chairmans fee 500000 Basic fee 75000 Senior independent NonExecutive Director 30000 Membership of the Audit Committee 20000 Membership of the Remuneration Committee 15000 Chairman of the Audit Committee or the Remuneration Committee Membership of the Science Committee 10000 Chairman of the Science Committee This fee is in addition to the fee for membership of the relevant Committee.
Directors emoluments in 2012 The aggregate remuneration excluding pension contributions and the value of shares under option and shares subject to share awards paid to or accrued for all Directors for services in all capacities during the year ended 31 December 2012 was 7 308000 11572000.
The remuneration of individual Directors is set out in the Directors remuneration tables opposite in pounds sterling and US dollars.
All salaries fees bonus and other benets for Directors are established in pounds sterling.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 133 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview Directors remuneration  pounds sterling
Salary and fees
Bonus
Shares
Taxable benets
Total
Total
Total
Leif Johansson 318 Pascal Soriot 275 223 112  1017 Simon Lowth 080 1785 1642 Genevive Berger 58  58 Bruce Burlington 105 105 98 33 Graham Chipchase 65 65 JeanPhilippe Courtois 95  95 95 80 Rudy Markham 124 124 110 90 Nancy Rothwell 107 107 107 96 Shriti Vadera 95  95 95 John Varley 130 130 110 99 Marcus Wallenberg 85  85 85 71 Former Directors Louis Schweitzer 208 David Brennan 499 11 1653 2163 3370 3044 Michele Hooper 48 Others  35 149 Total 2970 7308 6535 5880 Directors remuneration  US dollars
Salary and fees
Bonus
Shares
Taxable benets
Total
Total
Total
Leif Johansson 504 Pascal Soriot 436 353 177  1611 Simon Lowth 1172 1 3294 2857 2537 Genevive Berger 92     92 Bruce Burlington 166     166 157 51 Graham Chipchase 103     103 JeanPhilippe Courtois 150     150 152 124 Rudy Markham 196     196 176 139 Nancy Rothwell 169     169 171 148 Shriti Vadera 150     150 152 John Varley 206     206 176 153 Marcus Wallenberg 135     135 136 110 Former Directors Louis Schweitzer 329 David Brennan 790 17 2618 3425 5393 4705 Michele Hooper 76 Others  56 231 Total 4674 1444 723 27 4704 11572 10458 9088 These gures represent that portion of the 2012 bonuses required to be deferred into shares to be held for a three year period under the Deferred Bonus Plan.
Includes ofce costs of 19000 30000.
Relates to remaining cash following selection of benets within AstraZenecas UK exible benets programme and cash of 991000 1571000 paid to compensate Mr Soriot in respect of forfeited bonus opportunity for 2012 from his previous employer.
Relates to remaining cash following selection of benets within AstraZenecas UK exible benets programme and cash of 203000 322000 on the vesting of a PSP Share Award and 47000 74000 on the release of shares under the Deferred Bonus Plan in each case paid in respect of dividends accrued.
Part year only as ceased to be a Director on 1 June.
This gure includes a sum of 224000 355000 in respect of member contributions to the 401k plan and to the AstraZeneca Executive Deferred Compensation Plan which was paid into the plans by means of a salary sacrice see the section relating to David Brennan on page 131 for further details.
Part year only as employment ceased on 30 June.
Relates to 914000 1447000 payment in lieu of notice other allowances for professional fees a car allowance and cash of 498000 789000 on the vesting of a PSP Share Award and 86000 136000 on the release of shares under the Deferred Bonus Plan in each case paid in respect of dividends accrued.
Part year only as ceased to be a Director on 26 April 2012.
In the tables on this page and on the previous page salaries have been converted between pounds sterling and US dollars at the average exchange rate for the year in question.
These rates were
2012 0.631 2011 0.625 2010 0.647 Details of share options exercised by Directors and the aggregate of gains realised on the exercise of options and of awards under longterm incentive plans in the year are given in the Directors interests in shares section on page 134.
No Director has a family relationship with any other Director.
Transactions with Directors There were no material recorded transactions between the Group and the Directors during 2012 or 2011.
Corporate Governance  Directors Remuneration Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 134 Total shareholder return The Regulations require the inclusion of a graph showing TSR over a ve year period in respect of a holding of the Companys shares plotted against TSR in respect of a hypothetical holding of shares of a similar kind and number by reference to which a broad equity market index is calculated.
The Company is a member of the FTSE 100 Index and consequently for the purposes of this graph which is set out above we have selected the FTSE 100 Index as the appropriate index.
This graph is rebased to 100 at the start of the rolling ve year period.
We have also included a Pharmaceutical peers average which reects the TSR of the same comparator group used for the PSP graphs above.
The PSP requires that the TSR in respect of a holding of the Companys shares over the relevant performance period be compared with the TSR of a peer group of pharmaceutical companies as described on page 129.
The graphs above show how the Companys TSR performance has compared with the TSR for the relevant companies in the comparator group from the rst day in the relevant three year performance period in respect of each PSP award to 31 December 2012 and how the Company ranks against those other companies on this basis.
To alleviate any shortterm volatility the return index is averaged in the TSR calculations for each company over the three months prior to the start of the relevant performance period as stipulated in the PSP and for the purposes of the graphs above over the last three months of 2012.
Directors interests in shares Benecial interests The table opposite shows any change in the interests of the Directors including the interests of their Connected Persons as such term is dened in the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 in Ordinary Shares from 1 January 2012 to 31 December 2012 or on the date of resignation of such Director if earlier.
All such interests were benecial except as otherwise stated.
However interests in Ordinary Shares or ADSs that are the subject of PSP awards andor AZIP awards as well as Ordinary Shares or ADSs that are deferred under the annual bonus plan discussed in this Remuneration Report are not included in the Directors interests in shares table opposite but are shown in the relevant tables from page 135.
No Director or senior executive benecially owns or has options over 1% or more of the issued share capital of the Company nor do they have different voting rights from other shareholders.
None of the Directors has a benecial interest in the shares of any of the Companys subsidiaries.
Between 31 December 2012 and 31 January 2013 there was no change in the interests in Ordinary Shares shown in the table opposite.
AstraZeneca Pharmaceutical peers average FTSE 100 7tel175
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
TSR over a ve year period TSR  AstraZeneca compared with peer group 1 January 2011 to 31 December 2012 % AZ NOV JandJ GSK MRK BMS RCH AL SA LLY PFI TSR  AstraZeneca compared with peer group 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2012 % NOV RCH AZ JandJ GSK AL MRK SA BMS PFI LLY TSR  AstraZeneca compared with peer group 1 January 2012 to 31 December 2012 % GSK BMS AZ JandJ NOV AL RCH PFI LLY MRK SA Key AZ AstraZeneca AL Abbott Laboratories BMS BristolMyers Squibb GSK GlaxoSmithKline JandJ Johnson and Johnson LLY Eli Lilly MRK Merck NOV Novartis PFI Pzer RCH HoffmannLa Roche Ltd SA SanoAventis AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 135 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview Benecial interest in Ordinary Shares at 1 January 2012 or if later appointment date Change to benecial interest Benecial interest in Ordinary Shares at 31 December 2012 or if earlier resignation date Leif Johansson 25509 3000 28509 Pascal Soriot 3500 3500 Simon Lowth 54226 2734 56960 Genevive Berger Bruce Burlington 553 1000 1553 Graham Chipchase 650 850 1500 JeanPhilippe Courtois 2635  2635 Rudy Markham 2452  2452 Nancy Rothwell 1832 573 2405 Shriti Vadera 3000  3000 John Varley 1744 3700 5444 Marcus Wallenberg 63646  63646 Former Directors Louis Schweitzer 16615  16615 David Brennan 246174 60430 306604 Michele Hooper 2400  2400 Appointed as a Director on 26 April 2012.
Appointed as a Director on 1 October.
Ceased to be a Director on 1 June.
Ceased to be a Director on 26 April 2012.
Unitised stock plans David Brennan in common with other participating executives in the US has interests in the following plans which were awarded to him prior to him becoming CEO the AstraZeneca Executive Deferral Plan the AstraZeneca Executive Deferred Compensation Plan and the AstraZeneca Savings and Security Plan.
These are unitised stock plans into which the value of certain previous share incentive awards has been deferred and are not incentive awards in their own right.
Participants hold units in each plan which represent a longterm equity interest in the Company.
A unit comprises part cash and part ADSs.
The overall unit value can be determined daily by taking the market value of the underlying ADSs and adding the cash position.
The ADSs held within these units carry both voting and dividend rights.
David Brennan is deemed to have a notional benecial interest in these ADSs calculated by reference to the fund value and the closing price of ADSs.
Therefore the number of ADSs in which a notional benecial interest arises can vary daily as a consequence of stock price movements.
Unitised stock plan ADSs held at 1 January 2012 Net ADSs acquired during 2012 ADSs held at 1 June 2012 AstraZeneca Executive Deferral Plan 40002 1885 41887 AstraZeneca Savings and Security Plan 9022 391 9413 David Brennan ceased to be a Director on 1 June and ceased to be an employee of the Company on 30 June.
Performance Share Plan The interests of Directors at 31 December 2012 in Ordinary Shares that are the subject of awards under the PSP are shown below Number of shares Award price pence Price on vesting date pence Grant date Vesting date Performance period David Brennan 2009 Share Award 133347 2280 27.03.09 27.03.12 01.01.09  31.12.11 2010 Share Award 127520 2861 07.05.10 07.05.13 01.01.10  31.12.12 2011 Share Award 131075 2853 28.03.11 28.03.14 01.01.11  31.12.13 Total at 1 January 2012 391942 Partial vesting of 2009 Share Award Partial lapse of 2009 Share Award 2012 Share Award 133318 2805 30.03.12 30.03.15 01.01.12  31.12.14 Total at 1 June 2012 Simon Lowth 2009 Share Award 54276 2280 27.03.09 27.03.12 01.01.09  31.12.11 2010 Share Award 52009 2861 07.05.10 07.05.13 01.01.10  31.12.12 2011 Share Award 53459 2853 28.03.11 28.03.14 01.01.11  31.12.13 Total at 1 January 2012 159744 Partial vesting of 2009 Share Award Partial lapse of 2009 Share Award 2012 Share Award 70588 2805 30.03.12 30.03.15 01.01.12  31.12.14 Total at 31 December 2012 176056 UK date convention applies.
Share Awards granted in 2009 vested in 2012 at 78% based on the performance conditions and targets which are set out in the Performance measures under the PSP section from page 129.
Following certain mandatory tax deductions David Brennan became benecially interested in a net number of 49571 Ordinary Shares.
Following certain mandatory tax deductions Simon Lowth became benecially interested in a net number of 20320 Ordinary Shares.
Cash payments equivalent to dividends accruing over the vesting period are made at the date of vesting and are included in Other payments and allowances in the Directors remuneration tables on page 133.
David Brennan ceased to be a Director on 1 June and ceased to be an employee of the Company on 30 June.
The Remuneration Committee determined that the Share Awards made to David Brennan in 2011 and 2012 under the PSP should be forfeited on his ceasing to be employed by the Company.
The Share Award made in 2010 will vest on a pro rata basis to reect the period worked since the award of the shares but only if and to the extent that the relevant performance conditions are met.
Corporate Governance  Directors Remuneration Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 136 AstraZeneca Investment Plan The interests of Directors at 31 December 2012 in Ordinary Shares that are the subject of awards under the AZIP are shown below Number of shares Award price pence Grant date Vesting date Performance period David Brennan 2010 Share Award 21253 2861 07.05.10 01.01.18 01.01.10  31.12.13 2011 Share Award 21845 2853 28.03.11 01.01.19 01.01.11  31.12.14 Total at 1 January 2012 43098 2012 Share Award 22219 2805 30.03.12 01.01.20 01.01.12  31.12.15 Total at 1 June 2012 Simon Lowth 2010 Share Award 8668 2861 07.05.10 01.01.18 01.01.10  31.12.13 2011 Share Award 8909 2853 28.03.11 01.01.19 01.01.11  31.12.14 Total at 1 January 2012 17577 2012 Share Award 11764 2805 30.03.12 01.01.20 01.01.12  31.12.15 Total at 31 December 2012 29341 Pascal Soriot Total at 1 October 2012 2012 Share Award 69108 2894 26.10.12 01.01.20 01.01.12  31.12.15 Total at 31 December 2012 69108 UK date convention applies.
David Brennan ceased to be a Director on 1 June and ceased to be an employee of the Company on 30 June.
The Remuneration Committee determined that the Share Awards made to David Brennan in 2011 and 2012 under the AZIP should be forfeited on his ceasing to be employed by the Company.
The Share Award made in 2010 will vest on a pro rata basis to reect the period worked since the award of the shares but only if and to the extent that the relevant performance conditions are met.
Pascal Soriot was appointed as a Director on 1 October.
Deferred Bonus Plan As described on page 129 there is a requirement for Executive Directors and SET members to defer a certain proportion of any shortterm bonus payments into Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
The interests of Directors at 31 December 2012 in Ordinary Shares or ADSs that are the subject of awards under these arrangements are shown below Number of shares Award price pence Price on vesting date pence Grant date Vesting date David Brennan 2009 Award 17 992 2400 25.02.09 25.02.12 2010 Award 20718 2817.5 25.02.10 25.02.13 2011 Award 17 725 2977 25.02.11 25.02.14 Total at 1 January 2012 56435 Vesting of 2009 Award 17 992 2012 Award 15498 2851 24.02.12 24.02.15 Total at 1 June 2012 Simon Lowth 2009 Award 9775 2400 25.02.09 25.02.12 2010 Award 9760 2817 .5 25.02.10 25.02.13 2011 Award 10281 2977 25.02.11 25.02.14 Total at 1 January 2012 29816 Vesting of 2009 Award 9775 2012 Award 9001 2851 24.02.12 24.02.15 Total at 31 December 2012 29042 UK date convention applies.
Following certain mandatory tax deductions David Brennan became benecially interested in a net number of 8583 Ordinary Shares.
Following certain mandatory tax deductions Simon Lowth became benecially interested in a net number of 4692 Ordinary Shares.
Cash payments equivalent to dividends accruing over the vesting period are made at the date of vesting and are included in Other payments and allowances in the Directors remuneration tables on page 133.
David Brennan ceased to be a Director on 1 June and ceased to be an employee of the Company on 30 June.
The Remuneration Committee determined that the Share Awards made to David Brennan under the AstraZeneca Deferred Bonus Plan will vest in accordance with the normal vesting timetable at the end of the relevant three year retention periods.
Restricted share award On 26 October Pascal Soriot was granted an award of 69108 restricted shares at an award price of 2894 pence per share.
His employment with the Company commenced on 1 October and the restricted shares will vest subject to his continued employment with the Company as follows 40% will vest on 1 October 2013 30% will vest on 1 October 2014 30% will vest on 1 October 2015.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 137 Strategy Performance Financial Statements Additional Information Corporate Governance Overview Share option plans The interests of Directors who served during 2012 in options to subscribe for Ordinary Shares granted under the SOP are included in the following table.
None of the Directors in the table below holds options under the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Plan.
There were no grants of options made to Directors under any of the plans in 2012.
Number of
Shares under option
Ordinary
Share
First day exercisable Last day exercisable David Brennan At 1 January 2012  options over Ordinary Shares 592975 2375p 24.03.09 26.03.19 market price above option price Ordinary Shares 505244 2271p 19.05.09 26.03.19 market price at or below option price Ordinary Shares 87731 2975p 24.03.09 23.03.16 At 1 June 2012 options over Ordinary Shares 592975 market price above option price Ordinary Shares 353872 2062p 28.03.11 26.03.19 market price at or below option price Ordinary Shares 239103 2839p 24.03.09 29.03.17 At 1 January 2012  options over ADSs 253223 44.76 28.03.05 23.03.15 market price above option price ADSs 110987 40.35 24.03.08 23.03.15 market price at or below option price ADSs 142236 48.21 28.03.05 25.03.14 Lapsed 27 March 2012 75695 49.59 28.03.05 27.03.12 At 1 June 2012 options over ADSs 177528 market price above option price ADSs  na na na market price at or below option price ADSs 177528 42.70 26.03.07 23.03.15 Simon Lowth At 1 January 2012 65131 2280p 27.03.12 26.03.19 market price above option price 65131 2280p 27.03.12 26.03.19 market price at or below option price  na na na At 31 December 2012 65131 2280p 27.03.12 26.03.19 market price above option price 65131 2280p 27.03.12 26.03.19 market price at or below option price  na na na Vesting is subject to satisfying the relevant performance conditions set out in each of the relevant share option plans.
Further information on the performance conditions applicable to the SOP is set out in the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan section on page 132.
Exercise prices are weighted averages.
First and last exercise dates of groups of options within which period there may be shorter exercise periods.
UK date convention applies.
David Brennan ceased to be a Director on 1 June and ceased to be an employee of the Company on 30 June.
The Remuneration Committee determined that all unexercised options held by David Brennan should be exercised within two years of his ceasing to be employed by the Company with the exception of the option granted in 2009 which should be exercised before his cessation of employment.
Gains by Directors on exercise of share options The aggregate gains made by Directors on the exercise of share options during the year and the two previous years are set out below
Gains made by Directors on the exercise of share options Gains made by the highest paid Director 2011 882089 112254 2010 260182 11454 During 2012 the market price of Ordinary Shares or ADSs was as follows Stock Exchange Ordinary ShareADS market price at 31 December 2012 Range of the Ordinary Share ADS market price during 2012 London 2909.5p 2591p to 3111.5p Stockholm 306.4 SEK 286.2 SEK to 329.5 SEK New York 47.27 40.03 to 48.90 On behalf of the Board A C N Kemp Company Secretary 31 January 2013 Financial Statements  The value of innovation AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 138 Our presence contributes to the economic development of the communities in which we work building skills in these communities through local employment contributions through wages and taxes as well as capacity building through local procurement and collaborations with local partners.
For example in Russia we were the rst pharmaceuticals multinational to announce an investment in fullcycle manufacturing.
The factory currently being built and due to open in the Kaluga region in 2014 will manufacture a range of AstraZenecas medicines.
We are also committed to sharing our global RandD expertise with the Russian scientic community through research collaborations support programmes and clinical trials.
In support of this commitment we opened our rst Predictive Science Centre in Russia in St.
Petersburg in 2012.
Innovation means benefits for the communities in which we work AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 139 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview AstraZenecas total contribution to the Russian economy will see over 1.2 billion invested in the ve years from 201 1 supporting our goal to provide Russian patients access to our portfolio of lifesaving prescription medicines.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 140 The Directors assessed the effectiveness of AstraZenecas internal control over financial reporting as at 31 December 2012 based on the criteria set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission in Internal ControlIntegrated
Based on this assessment the Directors believe that as at 31 December 2012 the internal control over financial reporting is effective based on those criteria.
KPMG Audit Plc an independent registered public accounting firm has audited the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as at 31 December 2012 and as explained on page 141 has issued an unqualified report thereon.
The Directors are responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting.
AstraZenecas internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance over the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
Due to its inherent limitations internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risks that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Directors Responsibilities for and Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Parent Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Parent Company and enable them to ensure that its financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the Directors are also responsible for preparing a Directors Report Directors Remuneration Report and Corporate Governance Statement that complies with that law and those regulations.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Directors responsibility statement pursuant to DTR 4 The Directors confirm that to the best of our knowledge The Financial Statements prepared in accordance with the applicable set of accounting standards give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole.
The Directors Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the issuer and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
On behalf of the Board of Directors on 31 January 2013 Pascal Soriot
The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and Form 20F Information and the Group and Parent Company Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and Parent Company Financial Statements for each financial year.
Under that law they are required to prepare the Group Financial Statements in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the Parent Company Financial Statements in accordance with UK Accounting Standards and applicable law UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Parent Company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and Parent Company Financial Statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent for the Group Financial Statements state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU for the Parent Company Financial Statements state whether applicable UK Accounting Standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the Parent Company Financial Statements prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the Parent Company will continue in business.
Preparation of the Financial Statements and Directors Responsibilities AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 141 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview SarbanesOxley Act Section 404.
The Directors statement on internal control over financial reporting is set out on page 140.
KPMG Audit Plc has also reported separately on the Company Financial Statements of AstraZeneca PLC and on the information in the Directors Remuneration Report that is described as having been audited.
This audit report is set out on page 192.
The report set out below is provided in compliance with International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
KPMG Audit Plc has also issued reports in accordance with standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board in the US which will be included in the Annual Report on Form 20F to be filed with the US Securities and Exchange Commission.
Those reports are unqualified and include opinions on the Group Financial Statements and on the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as at 31 December 2012 Auditors Reports on the Financial Statements and on Internal Control over Financial Reporting SarbanesOxley Act Section 404 Separate opinion in relation to IFRSs as issued by the IASB As explained in the Group Accounting Policies section to the Group Financial Statements set out on pages 146 to 149 the Group in addition to complying with its legal obligation to apply IFRSs as adopted by the EU has also applied IFRSs as issued by the IASB.
In our opinion the Group Financial Statements comply with IFRSs as issued by the IASB.
Opinion on other matter prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the information given in the Directors Report for the financial year for which the Group Financial Statements are prepared is consistent with the Group Financial Statements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception We have nothing to report in respect of the following Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors Remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the Directors Statement set out on page 146 in relation to going concern the part of the Corporate Governance Statement on pages 110 to 121 relating to the Companys compliance with the nine provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code specified for our review and certain elements of the report to shareholders by the Board on Directors Remuneration.
Other matters We have reported separately on the Parent Company Financial Statements of AstraZeneca PLC for the year ended 31 December 2012 and on the information in the Directors Remuneration Report that is described as having been audited.
Jimmy Daboo Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of KPMG Audit Plc Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square London E14 5GL 31 January 2013 We have audited the Group Financial Statements of AstraZeneca PLC for the year ended 31 December 2012 set out on pages 142 to 191.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and in respect of the separate opinion in relation to IFRSs as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB on terms that have been agreed with the Company.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and in respect of the separate opinion in relation to IFRSs as issued by the IASB those matters that we have agreed to state to them in our report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Respective responsibilities of Directors and auditor As explained more fully in the Preparation of the Financial Statements and Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 140 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the Group Financial Statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the Group Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements A description of the scope of an audit of financial statements is provided on the Financial Reporting Councils website at frc. iteauditscopeukprivate.
Opinion on Financial Statements In our opinion the Group Financial Statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups affairs as at 31 December 2012 and of its profit for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
Independent Auditors Report to the Members of AstraZeneca PLC Financial Statements  Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 142
Revenue 1 27973 33591 33269 Cost of sales 5393 6026 6389 Gross profit 22580 27565 26880 Distribution costs 320 346 335 Research and development expense 2 5243 5523 5318 Selling general and administrative costs 2 9839 11161 10445 Profit on disposal of subsidiary 2 22  1483 Other operating income and expense telOperating profit 2 8148 12795 11494 Finance income telFinance expense 3 958 980 1033 Profit before tax 7718 12367 10977 Taxation 4 1391 2351 2896 Profit for the period 6327 10016 8081 Other comprehensive income Foreign exchange arising on consolidation 106 60 26 Foreign exchange differences on borrowings designated in net investment hedges 46 24 101 Fair value movements on derivatives designated in net investment hedges 76 Amortisation of loss on cash flow hedge 1 21 Net available for sale gains taken to equity 72 31 4 Actuarial loss for the period 18 85 741 46 Income tax relating to components of other comprehensive income 4 46 198 61 Other comprehensive income for the period net of tax 78 546 25 Total comprehensive income for the period 6405 9470 8106 Profit attributable to Owners of the Parent 6297 9983 8053 Noncontrolling interests 30 33 28 Total comprehensive income attributable to Owners of the Parent 6395 9428 8058 Noncontrolling interests 10 42 48 Basic earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share 5 4.99 7.33 5.60 Diluted earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share 5 4.98 7.30 5.57 Weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue millions 5 1261 1361 1438 Diluted weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue millions 5 1264 1367 1446 Dividends declared and paid in the period 21 3619 3752 3494 All activities were in respect of continuing operations. m means millions of US dollars.
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year ended 31 December Financial Statements  Consolidated Statement of Financial Position AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 143 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview
Assets
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 7 6089 6425 6957 Goodwill 8 9898 9862 9871 Intangible assets 9 16448 10980 12158 Derivative financial instruments 1telOther investments 1telOther receivables 12 352 Deferred tax assets 4 1111 1514 1475 34486 29324 30996 Current assets Inventories 11 2061 1852 1682 Trade and other receivables 12 7629 8754 7847 Other investments 10 823 4248 1482 Derivative financial instruments Income tax receivable 803 1056 3043 Cash and cash equivalents 13 7701 7571 1 1068 19048 23506 25131 Total assets 53534 52830 56127
Current liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings 14 901 1990 125 Trade and other payables 16 9221 8975 8661 Derivative financial instruments 15 3 9 8 Provisions 17 916 1388 1095 Income tax payable 2862 3390 6898 13903 15752 16787 Noncurrent liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings 14 9409 7338 9097 Deferred tax liabilities 4 2576 2735 3145 Retirement benefit obligations 18 2265 2674 2472 Provisions 17 428 474 843 Other payables 16 1001 385 373 15679 13606 15930 Total liabilities 29582 29358 32717 Net assets 23952 23472 23410
Capital and reserves attributable to equity holders of the Company Share capital 2telShare premium account 3504 3078 2672 Capital redemption reserve 153 139 107 Merger reserve 433 433 433 Other reserves 19 1374 1379 1377 Retained earnings 19 17961 17 894 18272 23737 23246 23213 Noncontrolling interests 215 226 197 Total equity 23952 23472 23410 The Financial Statements from page 142 to 191 were approved by the Board on 31 January 2013 and were signed on its behalf by Pascal Soriot Simon Lowth
Director
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at 31 December Financial Statements  Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 144
Share premium account
Merger reserve
Retained earnings
Non controlling interests
At 1 January 2010 363 2180 94 433 1392 16198 20660 161 20821 Profit for the period      8053 8053 28 8081 Other comprehensive income      Transfer to other reserves Transactions with owners Dividends   3494  3494 Issue of Ordinary Shares 2 492     494  494 Repurchase of Ordinary Shares 13  13   2604 2604  2604 Sharebased payments      99 99  99 Transfer from noncontrolling interests to payables        11 11 Dividend paid by subsidiary to noncontrolling interests        1 1 Net movement 11 492 13  15 2074 2553 36 2589 At 31 December 2010 352 2672 107 433 1377 18272 23213 197 23410 Profit for the period      9983 9983 33 10016 Other comprehensive income      555 555 9 546 Transfer to other reserves Transactions with owners Dividends   3752  3752 Issue of Ordinary Shares 3 406     409  409 Repurchase of Ordinary Shares 32  32   6015 6015  6015 Sharebased payments      37 37  37 Transfer from noncontrolling interests to payables        9 9 Dividend paid by subsidiary to noncontrolling interests        4 4 At 31 December 2011 323 3078 139 433 1379 17894 23246 226 23472 Profit for the period  6297 6297 30 6327 Other comprehensive income  98 98 20 78 Transfer to other reserves Transactions with owners Dividends  3619  3619 Issue of Ordinary Shares 3 426  429 429 Repurchase of Ordinary Shares 14  14   2635 2635  2635 Sharebased payments  79 79  79 Transfer from noncontrolling interests to payables        10 10 Dividend paid by subsidiary to noncontrolling interests        11 11 At 31 December 2012 312 3504 153 433 1374 17961 23737 215 23952 Amounts charged or credited to other reserves relate to exchange adjustments arising on goodwill.
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December Financial Statements  Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 145 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview
Cash flows from operating activities Profit before tax 7718 12367 10977 Finance income and expense telDepreciation amortisation and impairment 2518 2550 2741 Decreaseincrease in trade and other receivables 755 1108 10 Increasedecrease in inventories 150 256 88 Decreaseincrease in trade and other payables and provisions 1311 467 16 Profit on disposal of subsidiary 22  1483 Noncash and other movements 424 597 463 Cash generated from operations 9536 12368 13854 Interest paid 545 548 641 Tax paid 2043 3999 2533 Net cash inflow from operating activities 6948 7821 10680 Cash flows from investing activities Acquisitions of business operations 22 1187 348 Movement in shortterm investments and fixed deposits 3619 2743 125 Purchase of property plant and equipment 672 839 791 Disposal of property plant and equipment 199 102 83 Purchase of intangible assets 3947 458 1390 Disposal of intangible assets  210 Purchase of noncurrent asset investments 46 11 34 Disposal of noncurrent asset investments 43 5 Net cash received on disposal of subsidiary 22  1772 Dividends received 7 Interest received 145 171 174 Payments made by subsidiaries to noncontrolling interests 20 16 10 Net cash outflow from investing activities 1859 2022 2226 Net cash inflow before financing activities 5089 5799 8454 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from issue of share capital 429 409 494 Repurchase of shares 2635 6015 2604 Repayment of obligations under finance leases 17 Issue of loans 1980 Repayment of loans 1750 1741 Dividends paid 3665 3764 3361 Hedge contracts relating to dividend payments 48 Movement in shortterm borrowings 687 46 8 Net cash outflow from financing activities 4923 9321 7334 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents in the period 166 3522 1120 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the period 7434 10981 9828 Exchange rate effects 4 25 33 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the period 13 7596 7434 10981 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended 31 December Financial Statements  Group Accounting Policies AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 146 After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Annual Report and Financial Statements.
Estimates and judgements The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and judgements that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Judgements include classification of transactions between profit and the consolidated statement of financial position and the determination of operating segments while estimates focus on areas such as carrying values and estimated lives.
AstraZenecas management considers the following to be the most important accounting policies in the context of the Groups operations.
The accounting policy descriptions set out the areas where judgements and estimates need exercising the most significant of which are revenue recognition research and development including impairment reviews of associated intangible assets business combinations and goodwill litigation and environmental liabilities employee benefits and taxation.
Further information on estimates and critical judgements made in applying accounting policies including details of significant methods and assumptions used is included in Notes 4 6 8 9 18 22 and 25 in the Financial Statements.
Financial risk management policies are detailed in Note 23.
Revenue
Revenues comprise sales and income under copromotion and codevelopment agreements.
Income under copromotion and codevelopment agreements is recognised when it is earned as defined in the contract and can be reliably estimated.
In general this is upon the sale of the copromoted developed product or upon the delivery of a promotional or developmental service.
Revenues exclude intercompany revenues and valueadded taxes and represent net invoice value less estimated rebates returns and settlement discounts.
Revenues are recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to a third party.
In general this is upon delivery of the products to wholesalers.
In markets where returns are significant currently only in the US estimates of returns are accounted for at the point revenue is recognised.
In markets where returns are not significant they are recorded when returned.
For the US market we estimate the quantity and value of goods which may ultimately be returned at the point of sale.
Our returns accruals are based on actual experience over the preceding 12 months for established products together with marketrelated information such as estimated stock levels at wholesalers and competitor activity which we receive via third party information services.
For newly launched products we use rates based on our experience with similar products or a predetermined percentage.
When a product faces generic competition particular attention is given to the possible levels of returns and in cases where the circumstances are such that the level of returns and hence revenue cannot be measured reliably revenues are only recognised when the right of return expires which is generally on ultimate prescription of the product to patients.
Basis of accounting and preparation of financial information The Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention modified to include revaluation to fair value of certain financial instruments as described below in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU adopted IFRSs in response to the IAS regulation EC 16062002.
The Consolidated Financial Statements also comply fully with IFRSs as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board.
During the year the Group adopted the amendments to IFRS 7 Disclosures  Transfers of Financial Assets and IAS 12 Deferred Tax Recovery of Underlying Assets.
The adoption of the amendments did not have a significant effect on the Groups profit for the period net assets or cash flows.
The Company has elected to prepare the Company Financial Statements in accordance with UK Accounting Standards.
These are presented on pages 193 to 197 and the accounting policies in respect of Company information are set out on page 194.
The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented in US dollars which is the Companys functional currency.
In preparing their individual financial statements the accounting policies of some overseas subsidiaries do not conform with adopted
Therefore where appropriate adjustments are made in order to present the Consolidated Financial Statements on a consistent basis.
Basis for preparation of financial statements on a going concern basis Information on the business environment AstraZeneca operates in including the factors underpinning the industrys future growth prospects is included in the Directors Report.
Details of the product portfolio of the Group including patent expiry dates for key marketed products our approach to product development and our development pipeline are covered in detail with additional information by Therapy Area in the Directors Report.
The financial position of the Group its cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the Financial Review from page 86.
In addition Note 23 to the Financial Statements includes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and hedging activities and its exposures to credit market and liquidity risk.
Further details of the Groups cash balances and borrowings are included in Notes 13 and 14 of the Financial Statements.
The Group has considerable financial resources available.
As at 31 December 2012 the Group has 9.8bn in financial resources cash balances of 7.7bn and undrawn committed bank facilities of 3.0bn which are available until April 2017  with only 0.9bn of debt due within one year.
The Groups revenues are largely derived from sales of products which are covered by patents which provide a relatively high level of resilience and predictability to cash inflows although our revenue is expected to continue to be significantly impacted by the expiry of patents over the medium term.
In addition recent government price interventions in response to budgetary constraints are expected to continue to adversely affect revenues in many of our mature markets.
However we anticipate new revenue streams from both recently launched medicines and products in development and the Group has a wide diversity of customers and suppliers across different geographic areas.
Consequently the Directors believe that overall the Group is well placed to manage its business risks successfully despite the current uncertain economic outlook.
Group Accounting Policies AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 147 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview its share of expenses incurred.
The Group also recognises the assets associated with the jointly controlled operation that it controls and the liabilities it incurs under the jointly controlled operation collaboration agreement.
Employee benefits The Group accounts for pensions and other employee benefits principally healthcare under IAS 19 Employee Benefits.
In respect of defined benefit plans obligations are measured at discounted present value while plan assets are measured at fair value.
The operating and financing costs of such plans are recognised separately in profit current service costs are spread systematically over the lives of employees and financing costs are recognised in full in the periods in which they arise.
Actuarial gains and losses are recognised immediately in other comprehensive income.
Where the calculation results in a surplus to the Group the recognised asset is limited to the present value of any available future refunds from the plan or reductions in future contributions to the plan.
Payments to defined contribution plans are recognised in profit as they fall due.
Taxation
The current tax payable is based on taxable profit for the year.
Taxable profit differs from reported profit because taxable profit excludes items that are never taxable or tax deductible.
The Groups current tax assets and liabilities are calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Deferred tax is provided using the balance sheet liability method providing for temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation purposes.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the asset can be utilised.
This requires judgements to be made in respect of the availability of future taxable income.
No deferred tax asset or liability is recognised in respect of temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries branches and joint ventures where the Group is able to control the timing of reversal of the temporary differences and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The Groups deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated using tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset realised based on tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Accruals for tax contingencies require management to make judgements and estimates of exposures in relation to tax audit issues.
Tax benefits are not recognised unless the tax positions will probably be sustained.
Once considered to be probable management reviews each material tax benefit to assess whether a provision should be taken against full recognition of that benefit on the basis of potential settlement through negotiation andor litigation.
All provisions are included in current liabilities.
Any liability to interest on tax liabilities is provided for in the tax charge.
See Note 25 for further details.
Sharebased payments All plans are assessed and have been classified as equity settled.
The grant date fair value of employee share plan awards is calculated using a modified version of the binomial model.
In accordance with IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment the resulting cost is recognised in profit over the vesting period of the awards being the period in which the services are received.
The value of the charge is adjusted to reflect expected and actual levels of awards vesting except where the failure to vest is as a result of not meeting a market condition.
Cancellations of equity instruments are treated as an acceleration of the vesting period and any outstanding charge is recognised in profit immediately.
Research and development Research expenditure is recognised in profit in the year in which it is incurred.
Internal development expenditure is capitalised only if it meets the recognition criteria of IAS 38 Intangible Assets.
Where regulatory and other uncertainties are such that the criteria are not met the expenditure is recognised in profit and this is almost invariably the case prior to approval of the drug by the relevant regulatory authority.
Where however recognition criteria are met intangible assets are capitalised and amortised on a straightline basis over their useful economic lives from product launch.
At 31 December 2012 no amounts have met recognition criteria.
Payments to inlicence products and compounds from third parties for new research and development projects inprocess research and development generally taking the form of up front payments and milestones are capitalised.
Where payments made to third parties represent future research and development activities an evaluation is made as to the nature of the payments.
Such payments are expensed if they represent compensation for subcontracted research and development services not resulting in a transfer of intellectual property.
By contrast payments are capitalised if they represent compensation for the transfer of intellectual property developed at the risk of the third party.
Since acquired products and compounds will only generate sales and cash inflows following launch our policy is to minimise the period between final approval and launch if it is within AstraZenecas control to do so.
Assets capitalised are amortised on a straightline basis over their useful economic lives from product launch.
Under this policy it is not possible to determine precise economic lives for individual classes of intangible assets.
However lives range from three years to 20 years.
Intangible assets relating to products in development both internally generated and externally acquired are subject to impairment testing annually.
All intangible assets are tested for impairment when there are indications that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Any impairment losses are recognised immediately in profit.
Intangible
Business combinations and goodwill On the acquisition of a business fair values are attributed to the identifiable assets and liabilities and contingent liabilities unless the fair value cannot be measured reliably in which case the value is subsumed into goodwill.
Where fair values of acquired contingent liabilities cannot be measured reliably the assumed contingent liability is not recognised but is disclosed in the same manner as other contingent liabilities.
Goodwill is the difference between the fair value of the consideration and the fair value of net assets acquired.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions is capitalised and subject to an impairment review both annually and when there is an indication that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Between 1 January 1998 and 31 December 2002 goodwill was amortised over its estimated useful life such amortisation ceased on 31 December 2002.
The Groups policy up to and including 1997 was to eliminate goodwill arising upon acquisitions against reserves.
Under IFRS 1 Firsttime Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards and IFRS 3 Business Combinations such goodwill will remain eliminated against reserves.
Jointly controlled operations The Group has one arrangement over which it has joint control.
The form of this arrangement is a jointly controlled operation under IAS 31 Interests in Joint Ventures.
The Group recognises its share of income that it earns from the jointly controlled operation and Financial Statements  Group Accounting Policies AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 148 The Groups other financial instruments include cash and cash equivalents fixed deposits other investments bank and other borrowings derivatives.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand current balances with banks and similar institutions and highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less when acquired.
They are readily convertible into known amounts of cash and are held at amortised cost.
Fixed deposits Fixed deposits comprising principally funds held with banks and other financial institutions are initially measured at fair value plus direct transaction costs and are subsequently remeasured to amortised cost using the effective interest rate method at each reporting date.
Changes in carrying value are recognised in profit.
Other investments Where investments have been classified as held for trading they are measured initially at fair value and subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date.
Changes in fair value are recognised in profit.
In all other circumstances the investments are classified as available for sale  are initially measured at fair value including direct transaction costs and are subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date.
Changes in carrying value due to changes in exchange rates on monetary available for sale investments or impairments are recognised in profit.
All other changes in fair value are recognised in other comprehensive income.
Impairments are recorded in profit when there is a decline in the value of an investment that is deemed to be other than temporary.
On disposal of the investment the cumulative amount recognised in other comprehensive income is recognised in profit as part of the gain or loss on disposal.
Bank and other borrowings The Group uses derivatives principally interest rate swaps to hedge the interest rate exposure inherent in a portion of its fixed interest rate debt.
In such cases the Group will either designate the debt as fair value through profit or loss when certain criteria are met or as the hedged item under a fair value hedge.
If the debt instrument is designated as fair value through profit or loss the debt is initially measured at fair value with direct transaction costs being included in profit as an expense and is remeasured to fair value at each reporting date with changes in carrying value being recognised in profit along with changes in the fair value of the related derivative.
Such a designation has been made where this significantly reduces an accounting mismatch which would result from recognising gains and losses on different bases.
If the debt is designated as the hedged item under a fair value hedge the debt is initially measured at fair value with direct transaction costs being amortised over the life of the bonds and is remeasured for fair value changes in respect of the hedged risk at each reporting date with changes in carrying value being recognised in profit along with changes in the fair value of the related derivative.
Other interestbearing loans are initially measured at fair value with direct transaction costs being amortised over the life of the bond and are subsequently remeasured to amortised cost using the effective interest rate method at each reporting date.
Changes in carrying value are recognised in profit.
Derivatives
Derivatives are initially measured at fair value with direct transaction costs being included in profit as an expense and are subsequently Property plant and equipment The Groups policy is to write off the difference between the cost of each item of property plant and equipment and its residual value over its estimated useful life on a straightline basis.
Assets under construction are not depreciated.
Reviews are made annually of the estimated remaining lives and residual values of individual productive assets taking account of commercial and technological obsolescence as well as normal wear and tear.
Under this policy it becomes impractical to calculate average asset lives exactly.
However the total lives range from approximately 10 to 50 years for buildings and three to 13 years for plant and equipment.
All items of property plant and equipment are tested for impairment when there are indications that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Any impairment losses are recognised immediately in profit.
Borrowing costs The Group has no borrowing costs with respect to the acquisition or construction of qualifying assets.
All other borrowing costs are recognised in profit as incurred and in accordance with the effective interest rate method.
Leases
Leases are classified as finance leases if they transfer substantially all the risks and rewards incidental to ownership otherwise they are classified as operating leases.
Assets and liabilities arising on finance leases are initially recognised at fair value or if lower the present value of the minimum lease payments.
The discount rate used in calculating the present value of the minimum lease payments is the interest rate implicit in the lease.
Finance charges under finance leases are allocated to each reporting period so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the finance liability.
Rentals under operating leases are charged to profit on a straightline basis.
Subsidiaries
A subsidiary is an entity controlled directly or indirectly by AstraZeneca PLC.
Control is regarded as the power to govern the financial and operating policies of the entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities.
The financial results of subsidiaries are consolidated from the date control is obtained until the date that control ceases.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
The first in first out or an average method of valuation is used.
For finished goods and work in progress cost includes directly attributable costs and certain overhead expenses including depreciation.
Selling expenses and certain other overhead expenses principally central administration costs are excluded.
Net realisable value is determined as estimated selling price less all estimated costs of completion and costs to be incurred in selling and distribution.
Writedowns of inventory occur in the general course of business and are recognised in cost of sales.
Trade and other receivables Financial assets included in trade and other receivables are recognised initially at fair value.
Subsequent to initial recognition they are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method less any impairment losses.
Trade and other payables Financial liabilities included in trade and other payables are recognised initially at fair value.
Subsequent to initial recognition they are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Financial instruments The Groups financial instruments include interests in leases trade and other receivables and payables and rights and obligations under employee benefit plans which are dealt with in specific accounting policies.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 149 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview on the greater of its value in use and its fair value less cost to sell.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows adjusted for the risks specific to each asset are discounted to their present value using a discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the general risks affecting the pharmaceutical industry.
For the purpose of impairment testing assets are grouped together into the smallest group of assets that generates cash inflows from continuing use that are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets.
Impairment losses are recognised in profit.
International accounting transition On transition to using adopted IFRSs in the year ended 31 December 2005 the Company took advantage of several optional exemptions available in IFRS 1 Firsttime Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards.
The major impacts which are of continuing importance are detailed below Business combinations  IFRS 3 Business Combinations has been applied from 1 January 2003 the date of transition rather than being applied fully retrospectively.
As a result the combination of Astra and Zeneca is still accounted for as a merger rather than through purchase accounting.
If purchase accounting had been adopted Zeneca would have been deemed to have acquired Astra.
Cumulative exchange differences  the Group chose to set the cumulative exchange difference reserve at 1 January 2003 to zero.
Applicable accounting standards and interpretations issued but not yet adopted IFRS 9 Financial Instruments was reissued in October 2010.
It is applicable to financial assets and financial liabilities.
For financial assets it requires classification and measurement in either the amortised cost or the fair value category.
For a companys own debt held at fair value the standard requires the movement in the fair value as a result of changes in the companys own credit risk to be included in other comprehensive income.
It is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2015.
The standard has not yet been endorsed by the EU.
The adoption of IFRS 9 is not expected to have a significant impact upon the Groups net results or net assets.
IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statements IFRS 11 Joint Arrangements IFRS 12 Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities and IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement were issued in May 2011 along with consequential amendments to IAS 27 Separate Financial Statements and IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint
The new and revised standards were endorsed by the EU in December 2012 with an effective date of 1 January 2014 except for IFRS 13 which has an effective date of 1 January 2013 but with early adoption permitted.
The Group intends to adopt the new and revised standards from 1 January 2013.
The adoption is not expected to have a significant impact upon the Groups net results net assets or disclosures.
The amendments to IAS 19 Employee Benefits are effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2013 and were endorsed by the EU in June 2012.
The amendments result in a change to the methodology used in calculating the expected return on pension assets reported as finance income.
Finance income will be lower as a result.
On adoption prior period finance income will be restated with decreases of approximately 70m for 2012 and 85m for 2011.
The adoption of the IAS 19 amendments is not expected to have a significant impact on the Groups net assets.
The amendments to IAS 1 Presentation of Items in Other Comprehensive Income and amendments to IAS 32 and IFRS 7 on offsetting financial assets and liabilities are effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 July 2012 and 1 January 2014 IAS 32 and 1 January 2013 IFRS 7 respectively.
They are not expected to have a significant impact upon the Groups net results net assets or disclosures.
These amendments were endorsed by the EU in 2012. remeasured to fair value at each reporting date.
Changes in carrying value are recognised in profit.
Foreign currencies Foreign currency transactions being transactions denominated in a currency other than an individual Group entitys functional currency are translated into the relevant functional currencies of individual Group entities at average rates for the relevant monthly accounting periods which approximate to actual rates.
Monetary assets arising from foreign currency transactions are retranslated at exchange rates prevailing at the reporting date.
Exchange gains and losses on loans and on shortterm foreign currency borrowings and deposits are included within finance expense.
Exchange differences on all other foreign currency transactions are recognised in operating profit in the individual Group entitys accounting records.
Nonmonetary items arising from foreign currency transactions are not retranslated in the individual Group entitys accounting records.
In the Consolidated Financial Statements income and expense items for Group entities with a functional currency other than US dollars are translated into US dollars at average exchange rates which approximate to actual rates for the relevant accounting periods.
Assets and liabilities are translated at the US exchange rates prevailing at the reporting date.
Exchange differences arising on consolidation are recognised in other comprehensive income.
If certain criteria are met nonUS dollar denominated loans or derivatives are designated as net investment hedges of foreign operations.
Exchange differences arising on retranslation of net investments and of foreign currency loans which are designated in an effective net investment hedge relationship are recognised in other comprehensive income in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Foreign exchange derivatives hedging net investments in foreign operations are carried at fair value.
Effective fair value movements are recognised in other comprehensive income with any ineffectiveness taken to the income statement.
Gains and losses accumulated in the translation reserve will be recycled to profit when the foreign operation is sold.
Litigation and environmental liabilities Through the normal course of business AstraZeneca is involved in legal disputes the settlement of which may involve cost to the
Provision is made where an adverse outcome is probable and associated costs including related legal costs can be estimated reliably.
In other cases appropriate disclosures are included.
Where it is considered that the Group is more likely than not to prevail or in the rare circumstances where the amount of the legal liability cannot be estimated reliably legal costs involved in defending the claim are charged to profit as they are incurred.
Where it is considered that the Group has a valid contract which provides the right to reimbursement from insurance or otherwise of legal costs andor all or part of any loss incurred or for which a provision has been established the best estimate of the amount expected to be received is recognised as an asset only when it is virtually certain.
AstraZeneca is exposed to environmental liabilities relating to its past operations principally in respect of soil and groundwater remediation costs.
Provisions for these costs are made when there is a present obligation and where it is probable that expenditure on remedial work will be required and a reliable estimate can be made of the cost.
Provisions are discounted where the effect is material.
Impairment
The carrying values of nonfinancial assets other than inventories and deferred tax assets are reviewed at least annually to determine whether there is any indication of impairment.
For goodwill intangible assets under development and for any other assets where such indication exists the assets recoverable amount is estimated based Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 150 1 Product revenue information
Crestor 6253 6622 5691 Atacand 1009 1450 1483 SelokenToprolXL 918 986 1210 Onglyza 323 211 69 Plendil 252 256 255 Zestril 115 144 157 BrilintaBrilique 89 21 Byetta 74 Bydureon 37 Others 461 522 538 Total Cardiovascular 9531 10212 9403
Nexium 3944 4429 4969 LosecPrilosec 710 946 986 Others 198 161 133 Total Gastrointestinal 4852 5536 6088 Respiratory and Inflammation Symbicort 3194 3148 2746 Pulmicort 866 892 872 Rhinocort 177 212 227 Others 178 216 254 Total Respiratory and Inflammation 4415 4468 4099
Seroquel 2803 5828 5302 Local anaesthetics 540 602 605 Diprivan 291 294 322 Vimovo 65 34 5 Others 42 33 42 Total Neuroscience 3923 7204 6704
Zoladex 1093 1 179 1115 Faslodex 654 546 345 Iressa 611 554 393 Arimidex 543 756 1512 Casodex 454 550 579 Others 134 120 101 Total Oncology 3489 3705 4045 Infection and Other Synagis 1038 975 1038 Merrem 396 583 817 FluMist 181 161 174 Other Products 100 137 147 Total Infection and Other 1715 1856 2176 Astra Tech  386 535 Aptium Oncology 48 224 219 Total 27973 33591 33269 Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 151 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 2 Operating profit Operating profit includes the following items Research and development expense In 2012 research and development includes a 50m impairment following the decision by AstraZeneca not to pursue a regulatory filing for TC5214.
In 2011 research and development includes a 285m impairment charge related to the termination of development of the investigational compound olaparib for the maintenance treatment of serous ovarian cancer and 150m impairment charge related to the intangible assets held in relation to TC5214.
In 2010 research and development included a 445m impairment of intangible assets related specifically to motavizumab.
Further details of impairment charges for 2012 2011 and 2010 are included in Notes 7 and 9.
Selling general and administrative costs In 2012 selling general and administrative costs includes net legal provisions of 72m in respect of net legal provision charges relating to ongoing Seroquel franchise legal matters Average Wholesale Price litigation in the US the ToprolXL antitrust litigation and Nexium commercial litigation.
In 2011 selling general and administrative costs included 135m of net legal provision charges all of which were in respect of the ongoing Seroquel franchise legal matters Average Wholesale Price litigation in the US and the ToprolXL antitrust litigation.
In 2010 selling general and administrative costs included legal provision charges of 617m of which 592m was in respect of Seroquel franchise legal matters.
The current status of these matters is described in Note 25.
These provisions constituted our best estimate at that time of losses expected for these matters.
Also included within selling general and administrative costs in 2010 were gains of 791m arising from changes made to benefits under certain of the Groups postretirement benefit plans chiefly the Groups UK pension plan.
Further details of this gain are included in Note 18.
Profit on disposal of subsidiary The profit on disposal of subsidiary in 2011 of 1483m relates to the sale of the Astra Tech business to DENTSPLY International Inc.
Further details are included in Note 22.
Other operating income and expense
Income 659 610 522 Amortisation 92 51 59 Impairment  123 Net gain on disposal of property plant and equipment 8 33 66 Gains on disposal of product rights 255 Net loss on disposal of other intangible assets  1 Other income 140 226 307 Other expense  41 Other operating income and expense 970 777 712 Royalty amortisation and impairment relates to income streams acquired with MedImmune and from 2012 amounts relating to our arrangements with Merck.
Restructuring costs During 2012 the Group announced the third phase of its restructuring programme as approved by the SET.
The tables below show the costs that have been charged in respect of restructuring programmes by cost category and type.
Severance provisions are detailed in Note 17.
Cost of sales 136 54 144 Research and development expense 791 468 654 Selling general and administrative costs 631 639 404 Total charge 1558 1161 1202 Severance costs 819 403 505 Accelerated depreciation and impairment 328 290 299 Total charge 1558 1161 1202 Other costs are those incurred in designing and implementing the Groups various restructuring initiatives including internal project costs external consultancy fees and staff relocation costs.
Financial instruments Included within operating profit are the following net gains and losses on financial instruments.
Gainslosses on forward foreign exchange contracts 139 75 29 Lossesgains on receivables and payables 153 68 80 Gainslosses on available for sale current investments 12 22 2 2 29 53 Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 152 3 Finance income and expense Finance income Returns on fixed deposits and equity securities 18 99 Returns on shortterm deposits 24 37 33 Expected return on postemployment defined benefit plan assets 486 502 451 Fair value gains on debt interest rate swaps and investments  423 Finance expense Interest on debt and commercial paper 404 404 450 Interest on overdrafts finance leases and other financing costs 22 29 29 Interest on postemployment defined benefit plan liabilities 507 539 543 Fair value charges on debt interest rate swaps and investments 10 Net exchange losses 15 8 11 Total 958 980 1033 Net finance expense 430 428 517 Financial instruments Included within finance income and expense are the following net gains and losses on financial instruments.
Interest and fair value adjustments in respect of debt designated at fair value through profit or loss net of derivatives 18 6 5 Interest and changes in carrying values of debt designated as hedged items net of derivatives 16 17 18 Interest and fair value changes on fixed and shortterm deposits and equity securities 37 45 61 Interest on debt overdrafts finance leases and commercial paper held at amortised cost 397 405 452 Exchange losses on financial assets and liabilities 15 8 11 22m fair value losses 2011 10m fair value gains 2010 29m fair value gains on interest rate fair value hedging instruments and 21m fair value gains 2011 9m fair value losses 2010 29m fair value losses on the related hedged items have been included within interest and changes in carrying values of debt designated as hedged items net of derivatives.
All fair value hedge relationships were effective during the year.
27m fair value losses 2011 29m fair value gains 2010 33m fair value gains on derivatives related to debt instruments designated at fair value through profit or loss and 18m fair value gains 2011 26m fair value losses 2010 28m fair value losses on debt instruments designated at fair value through profit or loss have been included within interest and fair value adjustments in respect of debt designated at fair value through profit or loss net of derivatives.
Ineffectiveness on the net investment hedge taken to profit was nil 2011 nil 2010 nil.
4 Taxation Taxation recognised in the profit for the period in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income is as follows Current tax expense Current year 1761 2680 3065 Adjustment for prior years 79 102 370 1682 2578 3435 Deferred tax expense Origination and reversal of temporary differences 155 141 369 Adjustment to prior years 136 86 170 Taxation recognised in the profit for the period 1391 2351 2896 Taxation relating to components of other comprehensive income is as follows Current and deferred tax Foreign exchange arising on consolidation 14 12 29 Actuarial loss for the period 28 214 18 Sharebased payments 7 21 9 Net available for sale gains recognised in other comprehensive income 18 Deferred tax impact of reduction in Sweden and UK tax rates 84 53 23 Other 7 4 Taxation relating to components of other comprehensive income 46 198 61 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 153 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 4 Taxation continued Taxation has been provided at current rates on the profits earned for the periods covered by the Group Financial Statements.
The 2012 prior period current tax adjustment relates to a benefit of 259m arising from a number of tax settlements including settlement of a transfer pricing matter partially offset by an increase in provisions for other tax contingencies and tax accrual to tax return adjustments.
The 2011 prior period current tax adjustment relates to a benefit of 520m arising from a number of tax settlements partially offset by an increase in provisions for other tax contingencies and tax accrual to tax return adjustments.
The 2010 prior period current tax adjustment relates mainly to an increase in provisions for tax contingencies and double tax relief partially offset by a benefit of 342m arising from a number of tax settlements and tax accrual to tax return adjustments.
The 2012 prior period deferred tax adjustment relates to a benefit of 102m arising from a number of tax settlements including settlement of a transfer pricing matter and tax accrual to tax return adjustments.
The 2011 and 2010 prior period deferred tax adjustments relate mainly to tax accrual to tax return adjustments and a reclassification from deferred tax to current tax of amounts provided in relation to tax contingencies for prior periods.
To the extent that dividends remitted from overseas subsidiaries joint ventures and associates are expected to result in additional taxes appropriate amounts have been provided for.
No deferred tax has been provided for unremitted earnings of Group companies overseas as these are considered permanently employed in the business of these companies.
Unremitted earnings may be liable to overseas taxes andor UK taxation after allowing for double tax relief if distributed as dividends.
The aggregate amount of temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries and branches for which deferred tax liabilities have not been recognised totalled approximately 8655m at 31 December 2012 2011 9155m 2010 16768m.
Factors affecting future tax charges As a group involved in worldwide operations AstraZeneca is subject to several factors that may affect future tax charges principally the levels and mix of profitability in different jurisdictions transfer pricing regulations tax rates imposed and tax regime reforms.
It is the UK governments intention to enact legislation which will reduce the main rate of UK Statutory Corporation Tax to 21% by 2014.
In 2012 the UK government also enacted legislation as part of its programme of corporate tax reforms including the introduction of a patent box regime under which UK profits arising from certain UK owned patents will be subject to a reduced rate of UK Statutory Corporation Tax effective 1 April 2013.
The Swedish government has enacted legislation to reduce the Sweden Statutory Corporation Tax rate from 26.3% to 22% effective 1 January 2013.
Details of material tax exposures and items currently under audit and negotiation are set out in Note 25.
Tax reconciliation to UK statutory rate The table below reconciles the UK statutory tax charge to the Groups total tax charge.
Profit before tax 7718 12367 10977 Notional taxation charge at UK corporation tax rate of 24.5% 2011 26.5% 2010 28% 1891 3277 3074 Differences in effective overseas tax rates 83 340 333 Deferred tax credit relating to reduction in Sweden UK and other tax rates Unrecognised deferred tax asset 18 5 Items not deductible for tax purposes 116 71 12 Items not chargeable for tax purposes 29 32 36 Nontaxable gain arising from the Astra Tech disposal  389 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 215 188 200 Total tax charge for the year 1391 2351 2896 The 2012 item relates to the reduction in the Sweden Statutory Corporation Tax rate from 26.3% to 22% effective 1 January 2013 and the UK Statutory Corporation Tax rate from 25% the tax rate which was substantively enacted as effective from 1 April 2012 as at 31 December 2011 to the tax rate of 23% effective from 1 April 2013.
The 2011 item relates to the reduction in the UK Statutory Corporation Tax rate from 27% the tax rate which was substantively enacted as effective from 1 April 2011 as at 31 December 2010 to the tax rate of 25% effective from 1 April 2012.
The 2010 item relates to the reduction in the UK Statutory Corporation Tax rate from 28% to 27% effective from 1 April 2011.
The tax rate of 18% for the year ended 31 December 2012 is lower than the UK Statutory Corporation Tax rate of 24.5% mainly as a result of the 230m adjustment to deferred tax balances following substantive enactment of a reduction in the Sweden Statutory Corporation Tax rate from 26.3% to 22% effective 1 January 2013 the 240m release of a tax provision following the settlement of a transfer pricing matter and the difference in effective overseas tax rates as discussed below.
Excluding the effects of the oneoff benefits totalling 470m mentioned above the tax rate is 24.1%.
AstraZeneca is domiciled in the UK but operates in other countries where the tax rates and tax laws are different to those in the UK.
The impact of differences in effective overseas tax rates on the Groups overall tax charge is shown above.
Profits arising from our manufacturing operation in Puerto Rico are granted special status and are taxed at a reduced rate compared with the normal rate of tax in that territory under a tax incentive grant that expires in 2016.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 154 4 Taxation continued Deferred tax The movements in the net deferred tax balance during the year are as follows
Intangible
Pension and post retirement benefits
Untaxed reserves
Share schemes
Losses and tax credits carried forward
Total
Net deferred tax balance at 1 January 2010 208 2893 912 952 1474 470 129 71 231 3 1955 Other comprehensive income   46    4   1 41 Additions through business combinations Net deferred tax balance at 31 December 2010 83 2566 679 970 1531 548 127 66 271 19 1670 Other comprehensive income   159    9   4 154 Disposal of subsidiary undertaking Exchange 3 1 6 8 34 21   4 2 31 Net deferred tax balance at 31 December 2011 220 2384 691 999 1533 625 102 61 133 13 1221 Taxation expense 30 11 115 83 333 30 69 Other comprehensive income  46  10  5 51 Additions through business combinations Net deferred tax balance at 31 December 2012 229 2917 553 921 1284 600 57 59 411 24 1465 Untaxed reserves relate to taxable profits where the tax liability is deferred to later periods.
The deferred tax liability of 143m relates to the acquisition of Novexel.
The deferred tax adjustment of 37m relates to the Astra Tech disposal.
The deferred tax liability of 397m relates to the acquisition of Ardea.
Includes losses and tax credits carried forward which will expire within 15 to 20 years.
The net deferred tax balance before the offset of balances within countries consists of
Intangible
Pension and post retirement benefits
Untaxed reserves
Share schemes
Losses and tax credits carried forward
Total
Deferred tax assets at 31 December   558 127  271 25 3066 Deferred tax liabilities at 31 December 2010 440 2620 7 18 1531 10  66  44 4736 Net deferred tax balance at 31 December 2010 83 2566 679 970 1531 548 127 66 271 19 1670 Deferred tax assets at 31 December 027  647 102  133 32 3122 Deferred tax liabilities at 31 December 2011 209 2437 8 28 1533 22  61  45 4343 Net deferred tax balance at 31 December 2011 220 2384 691 999 1533 625 102 61 133 13 1221 Deferred tax assets at 31 December   656 57  411 36 3079 Deferred tax liabilities at 31 December 2012 124 2961 8 40 1284 56  59  12 4544 Net deferred tax balance at 31 December 2012 229 2917 553 921 1284 600 57 59 411 24 1465 Analysed in the statement of financial position after offset of balances within countries as Deferred tax assets 1111 1514 1475 Deferred tax liabilities 2576 2735 3145 Net deferred tax balance 1465 1221 1670 Unrecognised deferred tax assets Deferred tax assets of 120m have not been recognised in respect of deductible temporary differences 2011 169m 2010 128m because it is not probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the Group can utilise the benefits therefrom.
5 Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Sharetel Profit for the year attributable to equity holders m 6297 9983 8053 Basic earnings per Ordinary Share 4.99 7.33 5.60 Diluted earnings per Ordinary Share 4.98 7.30 5.57 Weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue for basic earnings millions 1261 1361 1438 Dilutive impact of share options outstanding millions 3 68 Diluted weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue millions 1264 1367 1446 There are no options warrants or rights outstanding in respect of unissued shares except for employee share option schemes.
The number of options outstanding and the weighted average exercise price of these options is shown in Note 24.
The earnings figures used in the calculations above are posttax.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 155 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 6 Segment information AstraZeneca is engaged in a single business activity of pharmaceuticals and the Group does not have multiple operating segments.
Our pharmaceuticals business consists of the discovery and development of new products which are then manufactured marketed and sold.
All of these functional activities take place and are managed globally on a highly integrated basis.
We do not manage these individual functional areas separately.
We consider that the SET is AstraZenecas chief operating decision making body as defined by IFRS 8.
The operation of the SET is principally driven by the management of the commercial operations RandD and manufacturing and supply.
The SET also includes Finance HR and Corporate Affairs Compliance and General Counsel representation.
All significant operating decisions are taken by the SET.
While members of the SET have responsibility for implementation of decisions in their respective areas operating decision making is at SET level as a whole.
Where necessary these are implemented through crossfunctional subcommittees that consider the Groupwide impact of a new decision.
For example product launch decisions would be initially considered by the SET and on approval passed to an appropriate subteam for implementation.
The impacts of being able to develop produce deliver and commercialise a wide range of pharmaceutical products drive the SET decision making process.
In assessing performance the SET reviews financial information on an integrated basis for the Group as a whole substantially in the form of and on the same basis as the Groups IFRS Financial Statements.
The high upfront cost of discovering and developing new products coupled with the relatively insignificant and stable unit cost of production means that there is not the clear link that exists in many manufacturing businesses between the revenue generated on an individual product sale and the associated cost and hence margin generated on a product.
Consequently the profitability of individual drugs or classes of drugs is not considered a key measure of performance for the business and is not monitored by the SET.
Resources are allocated on a Groupwide basis according to need.
In particular capital expenditure inlicensing and RandD resources are allocated between activities on merit based on overall therapeutic considerations and strategy under the aegis of the Groups Portfolio Investment Board to facilitate a Groupwide single combined discovery and development strategy.
The Groups acquisitions in the biologics area MedImmune and Cambridge Antibody Technology Group plc CAT have been integrated into the existing management structure of AstraZeneca both for allocation of resources and for assessment and monitoring of performance purposes.
As such although biologics is a relatively new technological area for the Group it does not operate as a separate operating segment.
Geographic areas The tables below show information by geographic area and for revenue and property plant and equipment material countries.
The figures show the revenue operating profit and profit before tax made by companies located in that areacountry together with segment assets segment assets acquired net operating assets and property plant and equipment owned by the same companies export sales and the related profit are included in the areacountry where the legal entity resides and from which those sales were made.
Revenue
UK
External 1843 1980 1952 IntraGroup 6939 9901 9957 8782 11881 11909 Continental Europe Belgium 293 343 331 France 1393 1799 1929 Germany 763 1121 1151 Italy 773 951 1000 Sweden 466 964 1157 Others 2003 2363 2440 IntraGroup 5067 5101 5144 11264 13330 13914 The Americas Canada 1069 1589 1492 US 11074 13745 14010 Others 1326 1452 1387 IntraGroup 2353 2819 2341 15822 19605 19230 Asia Africa and Australasia Australia 1050 1166 981 Japan 2748 2905 2458 China 1511 1261 1047 Others 1155 1264 1172 IntraGroup 70 70 67 6534 6666 5725 Continuing operations 42402 51482 50778 IntraGroup eliminations 14429 17 891 17 509 27973 33591 33269 Export sales from the UK totalled 8072m for the year ended 31 December 2012 2011 11056m 2010 10944m.
IntraGroup pricing is determined on an arms length basis.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 156 6 Segment information continued Operating profit Profit before tax Profit from UK 397 2221 3258 4 1803 3098 Continental Europe 3539 5210 4591 3522 5202 4581 The Americas 3705 4813 3278 3687 4828 2932 Asia Africa and Australasia 50tel534 366 Continuing operations 8148 12795 11494 7718 12367 10977 Noncurrent assets Total assets UK 2743 2941 3397 12316 15752 17 171 Continental Europe 3673 3785 4470 6796 6811 7596 The Americas 25767 20090 20808 30708 26673 28175 Asia Africa and Australasia 803 652 522 3714 3594 3185 Continuing operations 32986 27468 29197 53534 52830 56127 Assets acquired Net operating assets UK 350 414 314 2519 3361 3273 Continental Europe 379 344 1053 4006 4113 4827 The Americas 6760 314 1125 22940 18395 18795 Asia Africa and Australasia 229 177 107 2328 2380 2021 Continuing operations 7718 1249 2599 31793 28249 28916 2011 includes profit on disposal of Astra Tech see Note 22.
Noncurrent assets exclude deferred tax assets and derivative financial instruments.
Included in Assets acquired are those assets that are expected to be used during more than one period property plant and equipment goodwill and intangible assets.
Net operating assets exclude shortterm investments cash shortterm borrowings loans derivative financial instruments retirement benefit obligations and nonoperating receivables and payables.
Assets acquired in 2012 include those related to Amylin and Ardea see Notes 9 and 22.
Property plant and equipment UK 1353 1387 1628 Sweden 1183 1408 1647 US 2197 2309 2381 Rest of the world 1356 1321 1301 Continuing operations 6089 6425 6957 Geographic markets The table below shows revenue in each geographic market in which customers are located.
UK 668 866 1033 Continental Europe 7042 8896 9315 The Americas 13075 16484 16629 Asia Africa and Australasia 7188 7345 6292 Continuing operations 27973 33591 33269 Revenue is recognised at the point of delivery which is usually when title passes to the wholesaler.
Transactions with two wholesalers 2011 two 2010 two individually represented greater than 10% of total revenue.
The values of these transactions recorded as revenue were 3517m and 3155m 2011 4298m and 4170m 2010 4164m and 4129m.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 157 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 7 Property plant and equipment Land and buildings Plant and equipment Assets in course of construction Total property plant and equipment
At 1 January 2010 5336 8803 1029 15168 Capital expenditure 1telTransfer of assets into use 342 668 1010 Disposals and other movements 40 449 4 493 Exchange adjustments At 31 December 2010 5699 9293 591 15583 Capital expenditure 1telTransfer of assets into use 261 294 555 Disposals and other movements 62 738 10 686 Reduction on disposal of subsidiaries 87 170 15 272 Exchange adjustments 42 68 12 122 At 31 December 2011 5911 8779 620 15310 Capital expenditure 3telAdditions through business combinations 4 4 Transfer of assets into use 123 391 514 Disposals and other movements 370 1050 49 1469 Exchange adjustments At 31 December 2012 5850 8645 576 15071
At 1 January 2010 1967 5899 5 7861 Charge for year 302 774  1076 Impairment 220  22 Disposals and other movements 29 396 5 420 Exchange adjustments 32 55  87 At 31 December 2010 2274 6352  8626 Charge for year 271 815  1086 Disposals and other movements 62 542  604 Reduction on disposal of subsidiaries 22 99  121 Exchange adjustments 26 76  102 At 31 December 2011 2435 6450  8885 Charge for year 280 743  1023 Disposals and other movements 129 1116  1245 Exchange adjustments 82 237  319 At 31 December 2012 2668 6314  8982 Net book value At 31 December 2010 3425 2941 591 6957 At 31 December 2011 3476 2329 620 6425 At 31 December 2012 3182 2331 576 6089 There were no impairment charges in 2012 or 2011.
Impairment charges in 2010 were due to the termination of the Certriad copromotion with Abbott and various productivity initiatives.
These costs were recognised in cost of sales and research and development respectively.
The net book value of land and buildings comprised Freeholds 3122 3449 3395 Leaseholds 60 27 30 Included within plant and equipment are Information Technology assets held under finance leases with a net book value of 79m 2011 and 2010 nil.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 158 8 Goodwill
At 1 January 10186 10206 10228 Exchange and other adjustments 7 20 22 Additions through business combinations 30 At 31 December 10223 10186 10206 Amortisation and impairment losses At 1 January 324 335 339 Exchange and other adjustments 1 11 4 At 31 December 325 324 335 Net book value at 31 December 9898 9862 9871 For the purpose of impairment testing of goodwill the Group is regarded as a single cashgenerating unit.
The recoverable amount is based on value in use using discounted riskadjusted projections of the Groups pretax cash flows over 10 years which is considered by the Board as a reasonable period given the long development and lifecycle of a medicine.
The projections include assumptions about product launches competition from rival products and pricing policy as well as the possibility of generics entering the market.
In setting these assumptions we consider our past experience external sources of information including information on expected increases and ageing of the populations in our established markets and the expanding patient population in newer markets our knowledge of competitor activity and our assessment of future changes in the pharmaceutical industry.
The 10 year period is covered by internal budgets and forecasts.
Given that internal budgets and forecasts are prepared for all projections no general growth rates are used to extrapolate internal budgets and forecasts for the purposes of determining value in use.
No terminal value is included as these cash flows are more than sufficient to establish that an impairment does not exist.
The methods used to determine recoverable amounts have remained consistent with the prior year.
In arriving at value in use we disaggregate our projected pretax cash flows into groups reflecting similar risks and tax effects.
For each group of cash flows we use an appropriate discount rate reflecting those risks and tax effects.
In arriving at the appropriate discount rate for each group of cash flows we adjust AstraZenecas posttax weighted average cost of capital 7 .0% for 2012 2011 and 2010 to reflect the impact of relevant industry risks the time value of money and tax effects.
The weighted average pretax discount rate we used was approximately 10% 2011 10% 2010 10%.
As a further check we compare our market capitalisation to the book value of our net assets and this indicates significant surplus at 31 December 2012 and 31 December 2011 and 31 December 2010.
No goodwill impairment was identified.
The Group has also performed sensitivity analysis calculations on the projections used and discount rate applied.
The Directors have concluded that given the significant headroom that exists and the results of the sensitivity analysis performed there is no significant risk that reasonable changes in any key assumptions would cause the carrying value of goodwill to exceed its value in use.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 159 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 9 Intangible assets
Other
Software development costs
Cost
At 1 January 2010 14353 2304 1212 17869 Additions through business combinations 548   548 Additions  separately acquired 1017 20 206 1243 Disposals 239 2  241 Exchange and other adjustments 125 13 19 119 At 31 December 2010 15804 2335 1399 19538 Additions  separately acquired Reduction on disposal of subsidiaries  152  152 Exchange and other adjustments 94 9 4 107 At 31 December 2011 15899 2188 1634 19721 Additions through business combinations 1464   1464 Additions  separately acquired 5228 12 212 5452 Exchange and other adjustments 271 65 59 265 At 31 December 2012 22862 2135 1905 26902 Amortisation and impairment losses At 1 January 2010 3727 1148 768 5643 Amortisation for year 57telImpairment Disposals 1 1 Exchange and other adjustments 89 26 20 95 At 31 December 2010 5088 1425 867 7380 Amortisation for year 65telImpairment 552 1  553 Reduction on disposal of subsidiaries 39  39 Exchange and other adjustments 46 32 14 64 At 31 December 2011 6246 1474 1021 8741 Amortisation for year 1039 95 162 1296 Impairment Exchange and other adjustments At 31 December 2012 7659 1578 1217 10454 Net book value At 31 December 2010 10716 910 532 12158 At 31 December 2011 9653 714 613 10980 At 31 December 2012 15203 557 688 16448 Other intangibles consist mainly of licensing and rights to contractual income streams.
Amortisation charges are recognised in profit as follows
Other
Software development costs
Year ended 31 December 2010 Cost of sales 87   87 Research and development expense 24  24 Selling general and administrative costs Other operating income and expense 75  7tel810 Year ended 31 December 2011 Cost of sales 129   129 Research and development expense 27  27 Selling general and administrative costs Other operating income and expense 68  6tel911 Year ended 31 December 2012 Cost of sales 325   325 Research and development expense 25  25 Selling general and administrative costs Other operating income and expense 41 57  98 1039 95 162 1296 Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 160 9 Intangible assets continued Impairment charges are recognised in profit as follows
Other
Software development costs
Year ended 31 December 2010 Cost of sales 128   128 Research and development expense 571   571 Selling general and administrative costs 336 Other operating income and expense  128 Year ended 31 December 2011 Research and development expense 548 1  549 Selling general and administrative costs 4 4 Year ended 31 December 2012 Research and development expense 185 1  186 Selling general and administrative costs 7 Amortisation and impairment charges The 2012 impairment of product marketing and distribution rights includes a charge of 50m following the decision by AstraZeneca not to pursue a regulatory filing for TC5214 based on the final results of Phase III efficacy and tolerability studies of the compound as an adjunct therapy to an antidepressant in patients with major depressive disorder who do not respond adequately to initial antidepressant treatment.
The remaining 149m charge relates to the termination of other development projects during the year.
The 2011 impairment of product marketing and distribution rights includes a charge of 285m following the termination of development of the investigational compound olaparib for the maintenance treatment of serous ovarian cancer.
The 2011 impairment of product marketing and distribution rights also includes an impairment of 150m reflecting a lower probability of success assessment for TC5214 based on the results of the first two of four Phase III efficacy and tolerability studies.
The remaining 117m charge relates to the termination of other development projects during the year.
The 2010 impairment of product marketing and distribution rights results from the withdrawal of the biological licence application pending at the FDA for motavizumab 445m and the termination of the lesogaberan development 128m and other development projects in the year.
The 2010 impairment of other intangibles chiefly results from a reassessment of the future royalties expected to be received relating to the HPV cervical cancer vaccine.
The write downs in value of intangible assets other than those arising from termination of research and development activities were determined based on value in use calculations using discounted riskadjusted projections of the products expected cash flows over a period reflecting the patentprotected lives of the individual products.
The full period of projections is covered by internal budgets and forecasts.
In arriving at the appropriate discount rate to use for each product we adjust AstraZenecas posttax weighted average cost of capital 7.0% for 2012 2011 and 2010 to reflect the impact of risks and tax effects specific to the individual products.
The weighted average pretax discount rate we used was approximately 14% 2011 14% 2010 14%.
Significant assets
Carrying value Remaining amortisation period Advance payment Product marketing and distribution rights 386 6 years Partial retirement Product marketing and distribution rights 610 215 years First Option Product marketing and distribution rights 1428 1418 years Second Option Product marketing and distribution rights 1652 34 years Intangible assets arising from the acquisition of CAT Product marketing and distribution rights 251 3 and 8 years RSV franchise assets arising from the acquisition of MedImmune Product marketing and distribution rights 3618 13 years Intangible assets arising from the acquisition of MedImmune Licensing and contractual income 398 67 years Intangible assets arising from the acquisition of MedImmune Product marketing and distribution rights 548 19 years Intangible assets arising from the collaboration with BMS Product marketing and distribution rights 540 1011 years Bydureon weekly asset arising from the Amylin collaboration with BMS Product marketing and distribution rights 2502 18 years Other intangible assets arising from the Amylin collaboration with BMS Product marketing and distribution rights 779 1018 years Intangible assets arising from the acquisition of Novexel Product marketing and distribution rights 300 Not amortised Intangible assets arising from the acquisition of Ardea Product marketing and distribution rights 1464 Not amortised These assets are associated with the restructuring of the joint venture with Merck and Co.
Inc.
These assets arise from the collaboration agreement with BMS for Onglyza and Forxiga.
These assets arise from the collaboration agreement with BMS for the related Amylin products.
Assets in development are not amortised but are tested annually for impairment.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 161 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 9 Intangible assets continued Collaboration with BMS on Amylin products On 8 August 2012 BMS completed its acquisition of Amylin.
On that date AstraZeneca and BMS entered into collaboration arrangements based substantially on the framework of the existing diabetes alliance regarding the development and commercialisation of Amylins portfolio of products.
Under the terms of the collaboration the companies will jointly undertake the global selling and marketing activities in relation to the collaboration products.
BMS will undertake all manufacturing activities with AstraZeneca receiving collaboration product at cost.
Profits and losses arising from the collaboration will be shared equally.
The total consideration for AstraZenecas participation in the collaboration is 3.7bn including an amount of 135m relating to an option of AstraZeneca contained in the collaboration agreement to acquire certain additional governance rights in respect of the collaboration.
The Group notified BMS of its decision to exercise the option in August 2012 and the balance of 135m will be payable once applicable antitrust and competition approvals are received by AstraZeneca.
The Group expects to make this payment in the first half of 2013.
Upon such payment the additional governance rights of AstraZeneca granted by the option will become legally effective.
AstraZeneca considers that the key strategic and financial decisions over which the collaboration agreement and the governance rights that are subject to the option grant joint control represent the activities most relevant in affecting the success of the collaboration.
AstraZeneca accounts for the collaboration as a jointly controlled operation.
The Group has recognised a 50% share of collaboration revenues amounting to 128m cost of sales of 36m and other costs excluding amortisation of 133m in its income statement from 9 August 2012.
An amount of 165m was owed to BMS under this arrangement recorded within trade and other payables at 31 December 2012.
AstraZenecas payment to BMS for its participation in the collaboration primarily results in the purchase of intangible assets valued at 3358m related to the collaboration products Byetta exenatide injection and Bydureon exenatide extendedrelease for injectable suspensionexenatide 2mg powder and solvent for prolonged release suspension for injection that are approved for use in both the US and Europe Symlin pramlinitide acetate injection that is approved for use in the US and metreleptin a leptin analogue currently under review at the US Food and Drug Administration FDA for the treatment of diabetes andor hypertriglyceridaemia in patients with rare forms of inherited or acquired lipodystrophy.
In addition a prepayment of 0.4bn has been recognised representing payments in advance for collaboration products.
Arrangements with Merck In 1982 Astra set up a joint venture with Merck and Co.
Inc.
Inc.
In 1998 this joint venture was restructured the Restructuring.
Under the agreements relating to the Restructuring the Agreements a US limited partnership the Partnership was formed in which Merck is the limited partner and AstraZeneca is the general partner and AstraZeneca obtained control of the joint ventures business subject to certain limited partner and other rights held by Merck and its affiliates.
These rights provide Merck with safeguards over the activities of the Partnership and place limitations on AstraZenecas commercial freedom to operate.
The Agreements provide in part for Annual contingent payments and Termination arrangements which cause Merck to relinquish its interests in AstraZenecas products and activities in stages some of which are mandatory and others optional.
The termination arrangements and payments include the Advance Payment the Partial Retirement the TrueUp the Loan Note Receivable the First Option the Second Option.
AstraZeneca considers that the termination arrangements described above represent the acquisition in stages of Mercks interests in the Partnership and Agreement products including Mercks rights to contingent payments.
Once all payments are made AstraZeneca will have unencumbered discretion in its operations in the US market.
AstraZeneca anticipates that the benefits that accrue under all of the termination arrangements arise from The substantial freedom over products acquired or discovered after the merger of Astra and Zeneca in 1999 and Enhanced contributions from and substantial freedom over those products that have already been launched for example Prilosec Nexium Brilinta Pulmicort Symbicort Rhinocort and Atacand and those that are in development.
Economic benefits include relief from contingent payments and other cost efficiencies together with the strategic advantages of increased freedom to operate.
The intangible assets relating to purchased product rights are subject to impairment testing and would be partially or wholly impaired if a product is withdrawn or if activity in any of the affected therapy areas is significantly curtailed.
Annual Contingent Payments AstraZeneca makes ongoing payments to Merck based on sales of certain of its products in the US the contingent payments on the Agreement products.
Contingent payments in respect of Prilosec and Nexium will continue until the Second Option is exercised and consummated as discussed under Second Option below.
Contingent payments on all other agreement products have ceased as discussed under First Option below.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 162 9 Intangible assets continued Advance Payment The merger between Astra and Zeneca in 1999 triggered the first step in the termination arrangements.
Merck relinquished all rights including contingent payments on future sales to potential Astra products with no existing or pending US patents at the time of the merger.
As a result AstraZeneca now has rights to such products and is relieved of potential obligations to Merck and restrictions in respect of those products including annual contingent payments affording AstraZeneca substantial freedom to exploit the products as it sees fit.
At the time of the merger the Advance Payment of 967m was made.
The Advance Payment has been accounted for as an intangible asset and is being amortised over 20 years.
Although the rights obtained apply in perpetuity the period of amortisation of 20 years is used to reflect the typical timescale of development and marketing of a product.
Partial Retirement TrueUp and Loan Note Receivable On 17 March 2008 AstraZeneca made a net cash payment to Merck of approximately 2.6bn in connection with the Partial Retirement the TrueUp and the Loan Note Receivable.
This payment resulted in AstraZeneca acquiring Mercks interests in certain AstraZeneca products including Pulmicort Rhinocort Symbicort and ToprolXL AstraZeneca ceasing contingent payments on these products and AstraZeneca obtaining the ability to exploit these products and other opportunities in the Respiratory therapy area.
Intangible
These nonrefundable deposits were classified as intangible assets.
First Option On 26 February 2010 AstraZeneca exercised the First Option.
Payment of 647m to Merck was made on 30 April 2010.
This payment resulted in AstraZeneca acquiring Mercks interests in products covered by the First Option including Entocort Atacand Plendil and certain products in development at the time principally Brilinta and lesogaberan development of lesogaberan subsequently was discontinued.
Also on 30 April 2010 contingent payments on these products ceased with respect to periods after this date and AstraZeneca obtained the ability to exploit these products and other opportunities in the Cardiovascular and Neuroscience Therapy Areas.
These rights were valued at 1829m and were recognised as intangible assets from 26 February 2010 1 182m having been transferred from nonrefundable deposits to supplement the payment of 647m to Merck.
Of these rights 689m was allocated to contingent payment relief and 1140m to intangible assets reflecting the ability to fully exploit the products in the Cardiovascular and Neuroscience Therapy Areas.
The remaining nonrefundable deposits of 474m relate to benefits that would be secured upon AstraZeneca exercising the Second Option.
Second Option The Agreements provided that AstraZeneca may exercise a Second Option to purchase Mercks interests in the Merck affiliates that hold the limited partner and other rights referred to above.
Exercise of the Second Option would result in the repurchase by AstraZeneca of Mercks interests in Prilosec and Nexium in the US.
This option was exercisable by AstraZeneca in May to October of 2012 or in 2017 or if combined annual sales of the two products fell below a minimum amount.
On 26 June 2012 AstraZeneca and Merck agreed to amend certain provisions of the Agreements with respect to the Second Option.
The principal areas covered by the amendments are a change in the timing for AstraZeneca to exercise the Second Option and agreement on the valuation methodology for setting certain aspects of the option exercise price.
Under the amended Agreements Merck has granted to AstraZeneca a new Second Option exercisable by AstraZeneca between 1 March 2014 and 30 April 2014 with closing on 30 June 2014.
Options exercisable in 2017 or if combined annual sales fall below a minimum amount also remain available to AstraZeneca.
In addition to this revised timing for the Second Option AstraZeneca and Merck have also reached agreement on the valuation methodology for setting certain components of the option exercise price for a 2014 exercise.
In lieu of thirdparty appraisals the valuation for a 2014 exercise is now a fixed sum of 327m based on a shared view by AstraZeneca and Merck of the forecasts for sales of Nexium and Prilosec in the US market.
The agreed amount that would be payable on 30 June 2014 is subject to a trueup in 2018 that replaces a shared forecast with actual sales for the period from closing in 2014 to June 2018.
In addition the exercise price for the Second Option also includes a multiple of ten times Mercks average 1% annual profit allocation in the Partnership for the three years prior to exercise.
AstraZeneca currently expects this amount to be around 80m.
The component of the exercise price of the Second Option that includes the net present value of up to 5% of future US sales of Vimovo with the precise amount dependent on an annual sales threshold that has not yet been achieved and the timing of the option exercise will continue.
AstraZeneca believes that the amendments provide a greater degree of certainty to the valuation of the Second Option that is preferable to the previous arrangements and barring unforeseen circumstances AstraZeneca now intends to exercise the Second Option in 2014.
Under the amendments if AstraZeneca exercises in 2014 Mercks existing rights to manufacture Nexium and Prilosec would cease upon closing.
In connection with the amendments Merck also granted AstraZeneca flexibility to exploit certain commercial opportunities with respect to Nexium.
AstraZeneca now considers that exercise of the Second Option is virtually certain.
This judgement is supported by managements view that AstraZeneca is fully committed to exercising the Second Option in 2014 barring unforeseen circumstances external announcements of that intention constructively oblige AstraZeneca to exercise in 2014 barring unforeseen circumstances and the Second Option price is highly favourable giving economic compulsion for AstraZeneca to exercise in 2014.
As such AstraZeneca has applied an accounting treatment to reflect the Second Option as if the date of exercise were 26 June 2012 the date of amendment of the Agreements resulting in liabilities to Merck of approximately 1.5bn 1.1bn of which will be paid by way of monthly contingent payments between 1 July 2012 and 30 June 2014 and the balance as a lump sum on 30 June 2014 and a corresponding increase to intangible assets from that date.
These intangible assets and the 474m from the First Option detailed above in aggregate reflect the value of the ability to exploit opportunities in the Gastrointestinal Therapy Area and relief from contingent payments.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 163 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 10 Other investments Noncurrent investments Equity securities available for sale 19tel201 211 Current investments Equity securities and bonds available for sale 748 296 355 Equity securities held for trading 29 25 20 Fixed deposits 46 3927 1107 823 4248 1482 The equity securities and bonds available for sale in current investments of 748m 2011 296m 2010 355m are held in an escrow account.
Further details of this escrow account are included in Note 18.
Impairment charges of 2m in respect of available for sale securities are included in other operating income and expense in profit 2011 3m 2010 2m.
Equity securities and bonds available for sale and equity securities held for trading are held on the consolidated statement of financial position at fair value.
The fair value of listed investments is based on year end quoted market prices.
For unlisted investments cost is considered to approximate to fair value as detailed below.
Fixed deposits are held at amortised cost with carrying value being a reasonable approximation of fair value given their shortterm nature.
None of the financial assets or liabilities have been reclassified in the year.
Fair value hierarchy The table below analyses financial instruments contained within other investments and carried at fair value by valuation method.
The different levels have been defined as follows Level 1 quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly ie as prices or indirectly ie derived from prices.
Level 3 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data unobservable inputs.
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Equity securities and bonds available for sale 399  167 566 Equity securities held for trading 20   20 Total 419 tel Equity securities and bonds available for sale 338  159 497 Equity securities held for trading 25   25 Total 363 tel Equity securities and bonds available for sale 809  138 947 Equity securities held for trading 29   29 Equity securities available for sale which are analysed at Level 3 represent investments in private biotech companies.
In the absence of specific market data these unlisted investments are held at cost adjusted as necessary for impairments which approximates to fair value.
Hence carrying value is adjusted only for additions sales and permanent impairment and for no other movement.
Consequently in the current year no change has been made to the fair value of individual investments.
11 Inventories Raw materials and consumables 620 588 539 Inventories in process 876 645 665 Finished goods and goods for resale 565 619 478 2061 1852 1682 The Group recognised 3019m 2011 3447m 2010 3547m of inventories as an expense within cost of sales during the year.
Inventory writeoffs in the year amounted to 120m 2011 51m 2010 69m.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 164 12 Trade and other receivables Noncurrent other receivables Noncurrent other receivables of 352m 2011 nil 2010 nil consist of prepayments in relation to our jointly controlled operation with
Further details of this prepayment are included in Note 9.
Current trade and other receivables Amounts due within one year Trade receivables 5760 6696 6328 Less Amounts provided for doubtful debts Note 23 64 66 81 5696 6630 6247 Other receivables 750 1172 607 Prepayments and accrued income 923 725 733 7369 8527 7587 Amounts due after more than one year Other receivables 85 65 64 Prepayments and accrued income 17tel227 260 Trade and other receivables 7629 8754 7847 With the exception of a receivable of nil 2011 nil 2010 25m held within other receivables that arose on the acquisition of Novexel and the subsequent transaction with Forest and which is held at fair value see Note 22 all other financial assets are held on the consolidated statement of financial position at amortised costs with carrying value being a reasonable approximation of fair value.
The Novexelrelated receivable falls within level 3 of the fair value hierarchy as defined in Note 10.
13 Cash and cash equivalents Cash at bank and in hand 1304 1488 1750 Shortterm deposits 6397 6083 9318 Cash and cash equivalents 7701 7571 1 1068 Unsecured bank overdrafts 105 137 87 Cash and cash equivalents in the cash flow statement 7596 7434 10981 The Group holds 301m 2011 543m 2010 370m of cash and cash equivalents which is required to meet insurance solvency capital and security requirements and which as a result is not readily available for the general purposes of the Group.
Cash and cash equivalents are held on the consolidated statement of financial position at amortised cost.
Fair value approximates to carrying value.
14 Interestbearing loans and borrowings
Current liabilities Bank overdrafts On demand 105 137 87 Finance leases 22 5.4% Callable bond US dollars 2012  1769 Other loans Within one year 990 125 Noncurrent liabilities Finance leases 62 5.4% Callable bond US dollars 2012  1800 5.4% Callable bond US dollars tel837 5.125% Noncallable bond euros tel993 5.9% Callable bond US dollars 2017 1895 1896 1855 1.95% Callable bond US dollars 2019 995 7% Guaranteed debentures US dollars tel359 5.75% Noncallable bond pounds sterling tel535 6.45% Callable bond US dollars 2037 2717 2716 2718 4% Callable bond US dollars 2042 985 9409 7338 9097 All loans and borrowings above are unsecured except for finance leases which are secured against the Information Technology assets to which they relate see Note 7.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 165 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 14 Interestbearing loans and borrowings continued Set out below is a comparison by category of carrying values and fair values of all the Groups interestbearing loans and borrowings at 31 December 2012 31 December 2011 and 31 December 2010.
Instruments in a fair value hedge relationship
Amortised cost
Fair value Overdrafts   87 87 87 Loans due within one year   38 38 38 Loans due after more than one year 1659 1196 6242 9097 10022 Total 1659 1196 6367 9222 10147 Overdrafts   137 137 137 Loans due within one year 770  1083 1853 1891 Loans due after more than one year 899 1221 5218 7338 8765 Total 1669 1221 6438 9328 10793 Overdrafts   105 105 105 Finance leases due within one year   22 22 22 Finance leases due after more than one year   62 62 62 Loans due within one year   774 774 774 Loans due after more than one year 900 1204 7243 9347 10897 Total 900 1204 8206 10310 11860 Instruments designated as hedged items in fair value hedge relationships with respect to interest rate risk include a designated portion of the US dollars 5.9% callable bond repayable in 2017.
Instruments designated at fair value through profit or loss include the US dollar 5.4% callable bond repayable in 2014 and the US dollar 7% guaranteed debentures repayable in 2023.
Included within borrowings held at amortised cost are amounts designated as hedges of net investments in foreign operations of 1551m 2011 1505m 2010 1528m held at amortised cost.
The fair value of these borrowings was 1808m at 31 December 2012 2011 1752m 2010 1687m.
The fair value of fixedrate publicly traded debt is based on year end quoted market prices the fair value of floating rate debt is nominal value as mark to market differences would be minimal given the frequency of resets.
The carrying value of loans designated at fair value through profit or loss is the fair value this falls within the Level 1 valuation method as defined in Note 10.
For loans designated in a fair value hedge relationship carrying value is initially measured at fair value and remeasured for fair value changes in respect of the hedged risk at each reporting date.
All other loans are held at amortised cost.
A loss of 10m was made during the year on the fair value of bonds designated at fair value through profit or loss due to decreased credit risk.
A gain of 34m has been made on these bonds since designation due to increased credit risk.
Changes in credit risk had no material effect on any other financial assets and liabilities recognised at fair value in the Groups Financial Statements.
The change in fair value attributable to changes in credit risk is calculated as the change in fair value not attributable to market risk.
The amount payable at maturity on bonds designated at fair value through profit or loss is 1037m.
The interest rates used to discount future cash flows for fair value adjustments where applicable are based on market swap curves at the reporting date and were as followstel Loans and borrowings 0.6% to 2.0% 0.9% to 2.3% 0.7% to 4.0% Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 166 15 Derivative financial instruments Derivative financial instruments consist of interest rate swaps included in instruments designated at fair value if related to debt designated at fair value or instruments in a fair value hedge relationship if formally designated as in a fair value hedge relationship crosscurrency swaps included in instruments designated in net investment hedges and forward foreign exchange contracts included below in other derivatives.
Noncurrent assets
Current liabilities
Designated in a fair value hedge 164   164 Related to instruments designated at fair value through profit or loss 160   160 Other derivatives 9 8 1 31 December 2010 324 9 8 325
Current assets
Total
Designated in a fair value hedge 153 20  173 Related to instruments designated at fair value through profit or loss 189   189 Other derivatives 5 9 4 31 December 2011 342 25 9 358
Current assets
Total
Designated in a fair value hedge 151   151 Related to instruments designated at fair value through profit or loss 162   162 Designated as a net investment hedge 76   76 Other derivatives 31 3 28 31 December 2012 389 31 3 417 All derivatives are held at fair value and fall within Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy as defined in Note 10.
None of the derivatives have been reclassified in the year.
The fair value of interest rate swaps and crosscurrency swaps is estimated using appropriate zero coupon curve valuation techniques to discount future contractual cash flows based on rates at current year end.
The fair value of forward foreign exchange contracts is estimated by discounting the future contractual cash flows using appropriate yield curves based on market forward foreign exchange rates at the year end.
The majority of forward foreign exchange contracts for existing transactions had maturities of less than one month from year end.
The interest rates used to discount future cash flows for fair value adjustments where applicable are based on market swap curves at the reporting date and were as followstel Derivatives 0.6% to 2.0% 0.9% to 2.3% 0.7% to 4.0% 16 Trade and other payables Current liabilities Trade payables 2449 2155 2257 Value added and payroll taxes and social security 231 343 323 Rebates and chargebacks 2486 3285 2839 Accruals 3200 2474 2297 Other payables 855 718 945 9221 8975 8661 Noncurrent liabilities Accruals 710 113 104 Other payables 291 272 269 1001 385 373 With the exception of a payable of nil 2011 nil 2010 50m held within other payables that arose on the acquisition of Novexel and the subsequent transaction with Forest and which is held at fair value see Note 22 all other financial liabilities are held on the consolidated statement of financial position at amortised cost with carrying value being a reasonable approximation of fair value.
The Novexelrelated payable falls within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy as defined in Note 10.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 167 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 17 Provisions for liabilities and charges
Environmental
Employee benefits
Other
Total
At 1 January tel95 648 320 1686 Charge for year  1361 Cash paid 335 43  709 22 1109 Reversals 26   1 22 49 Exchange and other movements At 31 December tel127 562 471 1938 Charge for year 450 5 1telCash paid 377 32 17 153 78 657 Reversals 55    85 140 Exchange and other movements 13  16 4 6 5 At 31 December 2011 664 9tel1862 Charge for year  1096 Cash paid 853 27 20 513 63 1476 Reversals 65   18 91 174 Exchange and other movements 18 1719 36 At 31 December 2012 637 8tel1344 Due within one year 916 1388 1095 Due after more than one year 428 474 843 1344 1862 1938 AstraZeneca is undergoing a global restructuring initiative which involves rationalisation of the Global Supply Chain the Sales and Marketing Organisation IS and business support infrastructure and RandD.
Employee costs in connection with the initiatives are recognised in severance provisions.
Details of the environmental and legal provisions are provided in Note 25.
Employee benefit provisions include the executive deferred bonus plan.
Further details are included in Note 24.
Other provisions comprise amounts relating to specific contractual or constructive obligations and disputes.
No provision has been released or applied for any purpose other than that for which it was established.
18 Postretirement benefits
Background
The Company and most of its subsidiaries offer retirement plans which cover the majority of employees in the Group.
Many of these plans are defined contribution where AstraZenecas contribution and resulting charge is fixed at a set level or is a set percentage of employees pay.
However several plans mainly in the UK the US and Sweden are defined benefit where benefits are based on employees length of service and average final salary typically averaged over one three or five years.
The major defined benefit plans apart from the collectively bargained Swedish plan which is still open to employees born before 1979 have been closed to new entrants since 2000.
The major defined benefit plans are funded through legally separate fiduciaryadministered funds.
The cash funding of the plans which may from time to time involve special payments is designed in consultation with independent qualified actuaries to ensure that the assets together with future contributions should be sufficient to meet future obligations.
The funding is monitored rigorously by AstraZeneca and appropriate fiduciaries specifically with reference to AstraZenecas credit rating market capitalisation cash flows and the solvency of the relevant pension scheme.
Financing Principles 97% of the Groups defined benefit obligations at 31 December 2012 are in schemes within the UK the US Sweden or Germany.
In these countries the pension obligations are funded with reference to the following financing principles The Group has a fundamental belief in funding the benefits it promises to employees.
The Group considers its pension arrangements in the context of its broader capital structure.
In general it does not believe in committing excessive capital for funding while it has better uses of capital within the business nor does it wish to generate surpluses.
The pension funds are not part of the Groups core business.
The Group believes in taking some rewarded risks with the investments underlying the funding subject to a medium to longterm plan to reduce those risks if opportunities arise.
The Group recognises that deciding to hold certain investments may cause volatility in the funding position.
The Group would not wish to amend its contribution level for relatively small deviations from its preferred funding level because it is expected that there will be shortterm volatility but it is prepared to react appropriately to more significant deviations.
In the event that local regulations require an additional level of financing the Group would consider the use of alternative methods of providing this that do not require immediate cash funding but help mitigate exposure of the pension arrangement to the credit risk of the Group.
These principles are appropriate to AstraZenecas business at the present date should circumstances change they may require review.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 168 18 Postretirement benefits continued AstraZeneca has developed a funding framework to implement these principles.
This determines the cash contributions payable to the pension funds but does not affect the IAS 19 liabilities.
To reduce the risk of committing excess capital to pension funds liability valuations are based on the expected return on the actual pension assets rather than a corporate bond yield.
At present this puts a different lower value on the liabilities than IAS 19.
UK
With regard to the Groups UK defined benefit fund the above principles are modified in light of the UK regulatory requirements and resulting discussions with the Pension Fund Trustee.
The most recent full actuarial valuation was carried out at 31 March 2010.
The next valuation is due at 31 March 2013.
Under the agreed funding principles for the UK cash contributions will be paid to the UK Pension Fund to target a level of assets in excess of the current expected cost of providing benefits.
In addition AstraZeneca will make contributions to an escrow account which will be held outside of the UK Pension Fund.
The escrow account assets will be payable to the fund in agreed circumstances for example in the event of AstraZeneca and the Pension Fund Trustee agreeing on a change to the current longterm investment strategy.
The market value of the funds assets at the valuation date was 3129m 4832m equivalent representing 79% of the funds actuarially assessed liabilities Technical Provisions.
The Company agreed to fund the shortfall by making payments of 72.5m 112m a year until 31 December 2011 and then lump sum payments totalling 715m 1103m.
The first of these lump sum payments of 180m 278m was paid into the UK Pension Fund in December 2011 from existing investments held in escrow for the Pension Fund.
A further 300m 463m was paid into the UK Pension Fund during January 2012 from existing investments held in escrow and the balance will be paid in due course.
This is in addition to the contributions required to meet the ongoing benefits accruing in the region of 24m 37m per annum.
In 2011 132m 213m was paid into the escrow account and a further 230m 355m was paid in during January 2012.
At 31 December 2012 462m 748m of escrow fund assets are included within other investments see Note 10.
Under the agreed funding principles used to set the Technical Provisions the key assumptions as at 31 March 2010 are as follows longterm UK price inflation set at 3.8% per annum salary increases at 0% per annum as a result of pensionable pay levels being frozen in 2010 pension increases at 3.55% per annum and investment returns at 5.9% per annum.
During the first half of 2010 following consultation with its UK employees representatives AstraZeneca introduced a freeze on pensionable pay at 30 June 2010 levels for defined benefit members of the UK Pension Fund.
The defined benefit fund remains open to existing members and employees who choose to leave the defined benefit fund will retain a deferred pension in addition to being offered membership in a new Group Self Invested Personal Pension Plan.
The amendment to the UK defined benefit fund to freeze pensionable pay at 30 June 2010 levels represents an accounting curtailment of certain pension obligations.
The majority of members opted to remain in the defined benefit fund and continue benefit accrual with frozen pensionable pay.
In accordance with IAS 19 the scheme obligations were revalued by the scheme actuaries immediately prior to the change and assumptions reviewed at that date.
The resulting credit of 693m was recognised in profit in 2010.
Rest of Group The IAS 19 positions as at 31 December 2012 are shown below for each of the other countries with significant defined benefit plans.
These plans account for 92% of the Groups defined benefit obligations outside of the UK.
These plans are funded in line with the financing principles and contributions paid as prescribed by the funding framework.
The US defined benefits programme was actuarially revalued at 31 December 2012 when plan obligations were 1917m and plan assets were 1679m.
This includes obligations in respect of the nonqualified plan which is largely unfunded.
The Swedish defined benefits programme was actuarially revalued at 31 December 2012 when plan obligations were estimated to amount to 1889m and plan assets were 1125m.
The German defined benefits programme was actuarially revalued at 31 December 2012 when plan obligations amounted to 355m and plan assets were 23m.
On current bases it is expected that contributions excluding those in respect of past service cost during the year ending 31 December 2013 to the four main countries will be 537m.
Postretirement benefits other than pensions In the US and to a lesser extent in certain other countries AstraZenecas employment practices include the provision of healthcare and life assurance benefits for retired employees.
As at 31 December 2012 some 3528 retired employees and covered dependants currently benefit from these provisions and some 8893 current employees will be eligible on their retirement.
AstraZeneca accrues for the present value of such retiree obligations over the working life of the employee.
In practice these benefits will be funded with reference to the financing principles.
The cost of postretirement benefits other than pensions for the Group in 2012 was 16m 2011 12m 2010 18m.
Plan assets were 301m and plan obligations were 363m at 31 December 2012.
These benefit plans have been included in the disclosure of postretirement benefits under IAS 19.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 169 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 18 Postretirement benefits continued Financial assumptions Qualified independent actuaries have updated the actuarial valuations under IAS 19 of the major defined benefit schemes operated by the Group to 31 December 2012.
The assumptions used by the actuaries are chosen from a range of possible actuarial assumptions which due to the longterm nature of the schemes may not necessarily be borne out in practice.
These assumptions were as follows 2012 2011 UK Rest of Group UK Rest of Group Inflation assumption 3.1% 2.2% 3.2% 2.3% Rate of increase in salaries 3.4% 3.4% Rate of increase in pensions in payment 2.9% 1.1% 3.1% 0.9% Discount rate 4.5% 3.6% 4.8% 4.1% Longterm rate of return expected at 31 December Equities 7.5% 7.4% 7.5% 7.4% Bonds 4.2% 3.3% 4.5% 3.8% Others 2.8% 4.0% 2.8% 3.8% Rate of increase in medical costs initial rate 10.0% 8.2% 10.0% 9.0% Pensionable pay frozen at 30 June 2010 levels following UK fund changes.
The expected return on assets is determined with reference to the expected longterm level of dividends interest and other returns derived from the plan assets together with realised and unrealised gains or losses on the plan assets less any costs of administering the plan less any tax payable by the plan.
The expected returns are based on longterm market expectations and analysed on a regular basis to ensure that any sustained movements in underlying markets are reflected.
Demographic assumptions The mortality assumptions are based on countryspecific mortality tables.
These are compared to actual AstraZeneca experience and adjusted where sufficient data is available.
Additional allowance for future improvements in life expectancy is included for all major schemes where there is credible data to support this continuing trend.
The table below illustrates life expectancy assumptions at age 65 for male members retiring in 2012 and members expected to retire in 2032 2011 2011 and 2031 respectively.
Life expectancy assumption for a male member retiring at age 65 Countrytel 2031 Postretirement scheme deficit The assets and obligations of the defined benefit schemes operated by the Group at 31 December 2012 as calculated in accordance with IAS 19 Employee Benefits are shown below.
The fair values of the schemes assets are not intended to be realised in the short term and may be subject to significant change before they are realised.
The present value of the schemes obligations is derived from cash flow projections over long periods and is therefore inherently uncertain.
2012 2011
Rest of Group
UK
Rest of Group
Scheme assets Equities 2828 1147 3975 2221 1084 3305 Bonds 3280 1660 4940 2961 1382 4343 Others 742 336 107telTotal fair value of scheme assets 6850 3143 9993 5688 2831 8519 Present value of scheme obligations 7740 4524 12264 7042 4157 11199 Past service cost not yet recognised 66 66 Deficit in the scheme as recognised in the statement of financial position 890 1375 2265 1354 1320 2674 Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 170 18 Postretirement benefits continued Fair value of scheme assets 2012 2011
Rest of Group
UK
Rest of Group
At beginning of year 5688 2831 8519 5149 2618 7767 Expected return on scheme assets 34tel162 502 Expenses 5  5 7  7 Actuarial gainslosses 275 207 482 4 35 31 Settlements  61 61 Exchange 289 26 315  38 38 Employer contributions 58tel246 733 Participant contributions 8 8 93 12 Benefits paid 331 266 597 286 195 481 Scheme assets fair value at end of year 6850 3143 9993 5688 2831 8519 The actual return on the plan assets was a gain of 968m 2011 gain of 533m.
Movement in postretirement scheme obligations 2012 2011
Rest of Group
UK
Rest of Group
Present value of obligation in scheme at beginning of year 7042 4157 11199 6554 3691 10245 Current service cost 41 108 149 49 110 159 Past service cost 77 50 127 32 37 69 Participant contributions 8  8 9 3 12 Benefits paid 33tel195 481 Other finance expense 343 164 507 364 175 539 Expenses 5 5 7 7 Actuarial loss 224 343 567 328 444 772 Settlements and curtailments  111 111 5353 Exchange 341 79 420 15556 Present value of obligations in scheme at end of year 7740 4524 12264 7042 4157 11199 The obligation arises from the following plans 2012 2011
Rest of Group
UK
Rest of Group
Funded 7709 3961 11670 7016 3689 10705 Total 7740 4524 12264 7042 4157 11199 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income disclosures The amounts that have been charged to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income in respect of defined benefit schemes for the year ended 31 December 2012 are set out below 2012 2011
Rest of Group
UK
Rest of Group
Operating profit Current service cost 41 108 149 49 110 159 Past service cost 77 50 127 32 37 69 Settlements and curtailments 5050 5353 Total charge to operating profit 118 108 226 81 94 175 Finance expense Expected return on postretirement scheme assets 34tel162 502 Interest on postretirement scheme obligations 343 164 507 364 175 539 Net return 1 20 21 24 13 37 Charge before taxation 119 128 247 105 107 212 Other comprehensive income Difference between the actual return and the expected return on the postretirement scheme assets 275 207 482 4 35 31 Experience losses arising on the postretirement scheme obligations 12 147 159 11 10 21 Changes in assumptions underlying the present value of the postretirement scheme obligations 212 196 408 317 434 751 Actuarial gainslosses recognised 51 136 85 332 409 741 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 171 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 18 Postretirement benefits continued Included in total assets and obligations for the UK is 427m 2011 388m in respect of members defined contribution sections of the scheme.
Group costs in respect of defined contribution schemes during the year were 249m 2011 262m.
127m past service cost in 2012 relates predominantly to enhanced pensions on early retirement in the UK and Sweden.
50m settlements and curtailments credit in 2012 predominantly relate to a settlement credit of 30m recognised in the US where a proportion of deferred inactive participants who are not yet eligible for retirement elected to exchange their plan benefit for immediate cash lump sums and a 25m curtailment credit recognised in Sweden as a consequence of the Sdertlje site closure.
During 2011 the Group disposed of Astra Tech see Note 22 resulting in a curtailment gain of 44m.
Actuarial gains and lossestel 2009 2008
Present value of obligations m 7740 7042 6554 7055 5029 Fair value of scheme assets m 6850 5688 5149 4853 3835 Deficit in the scheme m 890 1354 1405 2202 1194 Experience adjustments on Scheme assets Amount m 275 4 244 293 1185 Percentage of scheme assets 4.0% 0.1% 4.7% 6.0% 30.9% Scheme obligations Amount m 224 328 221 1218 972 Percentage of scheme obligations 2.9% 4.7% 3.4% 17.3% 19.3% Rest of Group Present value of obligations m 4524 4157 3691 3591 3591 Fair value of scheme assets m 3143 2831 2618 2402 2013 Deficit in the scheme m 1381 1326 1073 1189 1578 Experience adjustments on Scheme assets Percentage of scheme assets 6.6% 1.2% 0.2% 7.5% 34.8% Scheme obligations Percentage of scheme obligations 7.6% 10.7% 1.8% 4.9% 8.9%
Present value of obligations m 12264 11199 10245 10646 8620 Fair value of scheme assets m 9993 8519 7767 7255 5848 Deficit in the scheme m 2271 2680 2478 3391 2772 Experience adjustments on Scheme assets Amount m 1885 Percentage of scheme assets 4.8% 0.4% 3.1% 6.5% 32.2% Scheme obligations Amount m 567 772 286 1042 653 Percentage of scheme obligations 4.6% 6.9% 2.8% 9.8% 7 .6% Transactions with pension schemes In 2011 the Group made loans to the UK and Swedish pension schemes to enable these schemes to manage their shortterm liquidity requirements.
The maximum balance outstanding in 2012 was 1m and the amount outstanding at 31 December 2012 was 1m.
Reserves
Included within the retained earnings reserve are accumulated actuarial gains and losses and related deferred tax balances.
Movements on this balance are as follows At 1 January 2447 1865 1800 Actuarial losses 85 741 46 Deferred tax 46 159 19 At 31 December 2578 2447 1865 The cumulative amount of actuarial losses before deferred tax recognised in other comprehensive income is 3308m 2011 3223m 2010 2482m.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 172 18 Postretirement benefits continued Discount rate sensitivity The following table shows the US dollar effect of a 1% change in the discount rate on the retirement benefits obligations in our four main defined benefit pension obligation countries.
2012 2011 1% 1% 1% 1% UK m 1028 1201 934 1088 Germany m 63 77 41 49 Total m 1685 2001 1503 1773 Sensitivity of medical cost assumptions Effect of change in medical cost assumption increasedecrease 2012 2011 1% 1% 1% 1% Current service and interest cost of net periodic postemployment medical costs m 11 11 Accumulated postemployment benefit obligation for medical costs m 11 12 10 10 19 Reserves Retained earnings The cumulative amount of goodwill written off directly to reserves resulting from acquisitions net of disposals amounted to 685m 2011 680m 2010 682m using year end rates of exchange.
At 31 December 2012 55555 shares at a cost of 4m have been deducted from retained earnings 2011 36177 shares at a cost of 2m 2010 57 717 shares at a cost of 3m.
There are no significant statutory or contractual restrictions on the distribution of current profits of subsidiaries joint ventures or associates undistributed profits of prior years are in the main permanently employed in the businesses of these companies.
The undistributed income of AstraZeneca companies overseas might be liable to overseas taxes andor UK taxation after allowing for double taxation relief if they were to be distributed as dividends see Note 4.
Cumulative translation differences included within retained earnings Balance at beginning of year 1760 1798 1656 Foreign exchange arising on consolidation 106 60 26 Exchange adjustments on goodwill recorded against other reserves 5 2 15 Foreign exchange differences on borrowings designated in net investment hedges 46 24 101 Fair value movement on derivatives designated in net investment hedges 76 Net exchange movement in retained earnings 141 38 142 Balance at end of year 1901 1760 1798 Other reserves The other reserves arose from the cancellation of 1255m of share premium account by the Company in 1993 and the redenomination of share capital 157m in 1999.
The reserves are available for writing off goodwill arising on consolidation and subject to guarantees given to preserve creditors at the date of the court order are available for distribution.
20 Share capital of the Company Allotted calledup and fully paid Issued Ordinary Shares 0.25 each 312 323 352 Redeemable Preference Shares 1 each  50000 The Redeemable Preference Shares carry limited class voting rights and no dividend rights.
This class of shares is capable of redemption at par at the option of the Company on the giving of seven days written notice to the registered holder of the shares.
The movements in the number of Ordinary Shares during the year can be summarised as follows
At 1 January 1292355052 1409023452 1450958562 Issues of shares 12241784 10739989 11756397 Repurchase of shares 57817288 127408389 53691507 At 31 December 1246779548 1292355052 1409023452 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 173 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 20 Share capital of the Company continued Share repurchases During the year the Company repurchased 57 .8m Ordinary Shares at an average price of 2879 pence per share 2011 127 .4m Ordinary Shares at an average price of 2932 pence per share 2010 53.7m Ordinary Shares at an average price of 3111 pence per share.
These shares were subsequently cancelled.
Share schemes A total of 12.2m Ordinary Shares were issued during the year in respect of share schemes 2011 10.7m Ordinary Shares 2010 11.8m Ordinary Shares.
Details of movements in the number of Ordinary Shares under option are shown in Note 24 details of options granted to Directors are shown in the Directors Remuneration Report from page 122.
Shares held by subsidiaries No shares in the Company were held by subsidiaries in any year.
21 Dividends to shareholders Per share Per share Per share Final 1.95 1.85 1.71 2495 2594 2484 Interim 0.90 0.85 0.70 1124 1158 1010 2.85 2.70 2.41 3619 3752 3494 The second interim dividend to be confirmed as final is 1.90 per Ordinary Share and 2369m in total.
This will be payable on 18 March 2013.
On payment of the dividends exchange gains of 3m 2011 gains of 3m 2010 gains of 19m arose.
These exchange gains are included in Note 3.
22 Acquisitions and disposals 2012 acquisitions
On 19 June 2012 AstraZeneca completed the acquisition of Ardea.
Ardea is a US San Diego California based biotechnology company focused on the development of small molecule therapeutics for the treatment of serious diseases.
AstraZeneca acquired 100% of Ardeas shares for cash consideration of 1268m.
The acquisition strengthens our research and development capabilities in the respiratory and inflammation therapy area.
In most business acquisitions there is a part of the cost that is not capable of being attributed in accounting terms to identifiable assets and liabilities acquired and is therefore recognised as goodwill.
In the case of the acquisition of Ardea this goodwill is underpinned by a number of elements which individually cannot be quantified.
Most significant among these is the premium attributable to a highly skilled workforce and established experience in the field of gout.
Ardeas results have been consolidated into the Groups results from 20 June 2012.
For the period from acquisition to 31 December 2012 Ardeas revenues were immaterial in the context of the Groups revenue and its loss after tax was 43m.
If the acquisition had taken effect at the beginning of the reporting period 1 January 2012 on a pro forma basis the revenue of the combined Group for 2012 would have been unchanged and the profit after tax would have been 6245m.
This pro forma information has been prepared taking into account any amortisation interest costs and related tax effects but does not purport to represent the results of the combined Group that actually would have occurred had the acquisition taken place on 1 January 2012 and should not be taken to be representative of future results.
Book value Fair value adjustment Fair value Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 1464 1464 Other 4 4 41464 1468 Current assets 199  199 Current liabilities 31 1 32 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax liabilities 397 397 Total assets acquired 172 1066 1238 Goodwill 30 Consideration 1268 Less Cash and cash equivalents acquired 81 Net cash outflow 1187 Acquisition costs arising on the acquisition of 12m were expensed within selling general and administrative costs in 2012.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 174 22 Acquisitions and disposals continued 2011 disposals Astra Tech On 31 August 2011 the Group completed the sale of the Astra Tech business to DENTSPLY International Inc.
On the loss of control the Group derecognised the assets and liabilities of the subsidiary.
The surplus arising on the loss of control is recognised in profit.
Astra Techs results were consolidated for the period until disposal and contributed 386m in 2011 2010 535m in revenue and 16m in 2011 2010 55m in profit after tax.
Noncurrent assets 281 Current assets 193 Current liabilities 104 Noncurrent liabilities 91 Net book value of assets disposed 279 Fees and other disposal costs 59 Exchange recycled on disposal 26 Profit on disposal 1483 Consideration 1795 Less Cash held in disposed undertaking 23 Net cash consideration 1772 The gain on disposal of Astra Tech is nontaxable.
2010 acquisitions
On 3 March 2010 AstraZeneca completed the acquisition of Novexel.
Novexel is a research company focused on the infection therapy area and is based in France.
This acquisition strengthens our research capabilities in the infection therapy area.
AstraZeneca acquired 100% of Novexels shares for an upfront consideration of 427m with additional consideration of up to 75m becoming payable to Novexel shareholders on the completion of certain development milestones.
At both the date of acquisition and at 31 December 2010 the fair value of this contingent consideration was 50m.
For the ten month period postacquisition to the end of 2010 and the full 2010 year Novexel had no revenues and its loss was immaterial.
Book value Fair value adjustment Fair value Noncurrent assets 1 548 549 Current assets 89  89 Current liabilities 18  18 Noncurrent liabilities 85 58 143 Total assets acquired 13 490 477
Fair value of total consideration 477 Less Fair value of contingent consideration 50 Total upfront consideration 427 Less Cash and cash equivalents acquired 79 Net cash outflow 348 Subsequent to the completion of the acquisition of Novexel AstraZeneca entered into a collaboration with Forest on the future codevelopment and commercialisation of two latestage antibiotic development programmes acquired with Novexel ceftazidimeNXL 104 CAZ104 and ceftarolineNXL 104 CEF104.
These antibiotic combinations utilise Novexels novel investigational betalactamase inhibitor NXL 104 to overcome antibiotic resistance and treat the increasing number of infections resistant to existing therapies.
In addition Forest acquired rights to CAZ104 in North America and bought down payment obligations to Novexel in relation to CEF104 from previous existing licence arrangements.
In consideration for these rights Forest paid Novexel then an AstraZeneca Group company a sum of 210m on 3 March 2010 and will also pay additional sums equivalent to half of any future specified development milestone payments that become payable by AstraZeneca.
This consideration is equivalent to the fair value attributed on acquisition to those assets and hence there was no profit impact from this divestment.
In 2011 the contingent consideration of 50m became fully payable.
The fair value of the remaining contingent consideration arising on the Novexel acquisition is nil.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 175 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 23 Financial risk management objectives and policies The Groups principal financial instruments other than derivatives comprise bank overdrafts finance leases loans current and noncurrent investments cash and shortterm deposits.
The main purpose of these financial instruments is to manage the Groups funding and liquidity requirements.
The Group has other financial assets and liabilities such as trade receivables and trade payables which arise directly from its operations.
The principal financial risks to which the Group is exposed are those of liquidity interest rate foreign currency and credit.
Each of these is managed in accordance with Boardapproved policies.
These policies are set out below.
The Group uses foreign currency borrowings foreign currency forwards crosscurrency swaps and interest rate swaps for the purpose of hedging its foreign currency and interest rate risks.
The Group may designate certain financial instruments as either fair value hedges or net investment hedges in accordance with IAS 39.
Key controls applied to transactions in derivative financial instruments are to use only instruments where good market liquidity exists to revalue all financial instruments regularly using current market rates and to sell options only to offset previously purchased options.
The Group does not use derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
Capital management The capital structure of the Group consists of shareholders equity Note 20 debt Note 14 and cash Note 13.
For the foreseeable future the Board will maintain a capital structure that supports the Groups strategic objectives through managing funding and liquidity risk optimising shareholder return maintaining a strong investmentgrade credit rating.
Funding and liquidity risk are reviewed regularly by the Board and managed in accordance with policies described below.
The Boards distribution policy comprises a regular cash dividend and subject to business needs a share repurchase component.
The Board regularly reviews its shareholders return strategy and in 2012 decided to suspend share repurchases in order to retain strategic flexibility.
In addition we are restating our dividend cover target in terms of reported earnings adjusted for restructuring costs intangible asset amortisation and impairments and other items as determined by the Group and are targeting two times cover on this measure.
The Groups net funds position loans and borrowings net of cash and cash equivalents current investments and derivative financial instruments has decreased from 2849m at the beginning of the year to a net debt position of 1369m at 31 December 2012 as a result of reduced operating cash inflows substantial investment activities and share repurchases in 2012 offset by reduced tax cash outflows and fixed deposits maturing in the year.
Liquidity risk The Board reviews the Groups ongoing liquidity risks annually as part of the planning process and on an ad hoc basis.
The Board considers shortterm requirements against available sources of funding taking into account forecast cash flows.
The Group manages liquidity risk by maintaining access to a number of sources of funding which are sufficient to meet anticipated funding requirements.
Specifically the Group uses US commercial paper committed bank facilities and cash resources to manage shortterm liquidity and manages longterm liquidity by raising funds through the capital markets.
The Group is assigned shortterm credit ratings of P1 by Moodys and A1 by Standard and Poors.
The Groups longterm credit rating is A1 negative outlook by Moodys and AA stable outlook by Standard and Poors.
In addition to cash and cash equivalents of 7 701m fixed deposits of 46m less overdrafts of 105m at 31 December 2012 the Group has committed bank facilities of 3.0bn available to manage liquidity.
At 31 December 2012 the Group has issued 1551m under a Euro Medium Term Note programme and 7 796m under a SECregistered programme.
The Group regularly monitors the credit standing of the banking group and currently does not anticipate any issue with drawing on the committed facilities should this be necessary.
The committed facilities of 3.0bn mature in April 2017 and were undrawn at 31 December 2012.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 176 23 Financial risk management objectives and policies continued The maturity profile of the anticipated future contractual cash flows including interest in relation to the Groups financial liabilities on an undiscounted basis and which therefore differs from both the carrying value and fair value is as follows
Bonds
Finance leases
Total nonderivative financial instruments
Cross currency swaps
Total
Within one year 128 518  8640 9286 120  120 9166 In one to two years  2268  373 2641 121  121 2520 In two to three years  423   423 87  87 336 In three to four years  1153   1153 69  69 1084 In four to five years  1379   1379 50  50 1329 In more than five years  10095   10095 192  192 9903 128 15836  9013 24977 639  639 24338 Effect of interest 3 7012   7015 639  639 6376 Effect of discounting fair values and issue costs  273   273 324  324 51 31 December 2010 125 9097  9013 18235 324  324 17911
Bonds
Finance leases
Total nonderivative financial instruments
Cross currency swaps
Total
Within one year 226 2267  8975 11468 117  117 11351 In one to two years  422  385 807 84  84 723 In two to three years  1152   1152 67  67 1085 In three to four years  1352   1352 49  49 1303 In four to five years  332   332 49  49 283 In more than five years  9764   9764 137  137 9627 226 15289  9360 24875 503  503 24372 Effect of interest 5 6490   6495 503  503 5992 Effect of discounting fair values and issue costs  308   308 362  362 54 31 December 2011 221 9107  9360 18688 362  362 18326
Bonds
Finance leases
Total nonderivative financial instruments
Cross currency swaps
Total
Within one year 881 484 23 9221 10609 85 12 97 10512 In one to two years  1214 23 1001 2238 67 12 79 2159 In two to three years  1435 23  1458 49 12 61 1397 In three to four years  393 21  414 49 12 61 353 In four to five years  2143 11  2154 48 12 60 2094 In more than five years  10766   10766 90 96 186 10580 881 16435 101 10222 27639 388 156 544 27095 Effect of interest 2 7340 17  7359 388 86 474 6885 Effect of discounting fair values and issue costs  252   252 313 6 319 67 31 December 2012 879 9347 84 10222 20532 313 76 389 20143 Where interest payments are on a floating rate basis it is assumed that rates will remain unchanged from the last business day of each year ended 31 December.
It is not expected that the cash flows in the maturity profile could occur significantly earlier or at significantly different amounts.
Market risk Interest rate risk The Group maintains a mix of fixed and floating rate debt.
The portion of fixed rate debt was approved by the Board and any variation requires Board approval.
A significant portion of the longterm debt entered into in 2007 in order to finance the acquisition of MedImmune has been held at fixed rates of interest.
The Group uses interest rate swaps and forward rate agreements to manage this mix.
At 31 December 2012 the Group held interest rate swaps with a notional value of 1.8bn converting the 5.4% callable bond maturing in 2014 and the 7% guaranteed debentures payable in 2023 to floating rates and partially converting the 5.9% callable bond maturing in 2017 to floating rates.
No new interest rate swaps were entered into during 2012 or 2011.
At 31 December 2012 swaps with a notional value of 0.75bn were designated in fair value hedge relationships and swaps with a notional value of 1.0bn related to debt designated as fair value through profit or loss.
Designated hedges are expected to be effective and therefore the impact of ineffectiveness on profit is not expected to be material.
The accounting treatment for fair value hedges and debt designated as fair value through profit or loss is disclosed in the Group Accounting Policies section from page 146.
The majority of surplus cash is currently invested in US dollar liquidity funds earning floating rates of interest.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 177 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 23 Financial risk management objectives and policies continued The interest rate profile of the Groups interestbearing financial instruments as at 31 December 2012 31 December 201 1 and 31 December 2010 is set out below.
In the case of current and noncurrent financial liabilities the classification includes the impact of interest rate swaps which convert the debt to floating rate.
Total
Fixed rate Floating rate
Fixed rate Floating rate
Fixed rate Floating rate Financial liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings Current 901 22 879 199tel 125 Noncurrent 9409 7306 2103 7338 5215 2123 9097 6242 2855 10310 7328 2982 9328 6214 3114 9222 6242 2980 Financial assets Fixed deposits 46  46 3927  3927 1107  1107 Cash and cash equivalents 7701  7701 7571  7571 1 1068  1 1068 7747  7747 11498  1 1498 12 175  12175 In addition to the financial assets above there are 7 924m 2011 8747m 2010 7 829m of other current and noncurrent asset investments and other financial assets on which no interest is received.
Foreign currency risk The US dollar is the Groups most significant currency.
As a consequence the Group results are presented in US dollars and exposures are managed against US dollars accordingly.
Translational
Approximately 62% of Group external sales in 2012 were denominated in currencies other than the US dollar while a significant proportion of manufacturing and research and development costs were denominated in pounds sterling and Swedish krona.
Surplus cash generated by business units is substantially converted to and held centrally in US dollars.
As a result operating profit and total cash flow in US dollars will be affected by movements in exchange rates.
This currency exposure is managed centrally based on forecast cash flows including the principal currencies of Swedish krona SEK pounds sterling GBP euro EUR Australian dollar AUD Canadian dollar CAD Japanese yen JPY Romanian leu RON and Russian ruble RUB.
The impact of movements in exchange rates is mitigated significantly by the correlations which exist between the major currencies to which the Group is exposed and the US dollar.
Monitoring of currency exposures and correlations is undertaken on a regular basis and hedging is subject to preexecution approval.
Where there is nonUS dollar debt and an underlying net investment of that amount in the same currency the Group applies net investment hedging.
As at 31 December 2012 5.4% of interestbearing loans and borrowings were denominated in pounds sterling and 9.6% of interestbearing loans and borrowings were denominated in euros.
Exchange differences on the retranslation of debt designated as net investment hedges are recognised in other comprehensive income to the extent that the hedge is effective.
Any ineffectiveness is taken to profit.
Exchange differences on foreign currency borrowings not designated in a hedge relationship are taken to profit.
During 2012 the Group entered into a crosscurrency swap to convert 750m of the 1.95% 2019 maturing bond into fixed Japanese yen debt.
This instrument was designated in a net investment hedge against the foreign currency risk of the Groups Japanese yen net assets.
Fair value movements on the revaluation of the crosscurrency swap are recognised in other comprehensive income to the extent that the hedge is effective.
Any ineffectiveness would be taken to profit.
Transactional
One hundred percent of the Groups major transactional currency exposures on working capital balances which typically extend for up to three months are hedged where practicable using forward foreign exchange contracts against individual Group companies reporting currency.
In addition the Groups external dividend which is paid principally in pounds sterling and Swedish krona is fully hedged from announcement to payment date.
Foreign exchange gains and losses on forward contracts transacted for transactional hedging are taken to profit.
The table below sets out the principal foreign exchange contracts outstanding at 31 December 2012 31 December 201 1 and 31 December 2010 along with the underlying gross exposure as defined above.
GBP
SEK
EUR
AUD
JPY
CAD
RON
RUB
Gross exposure 732 806 Forward exchange contracts 38 806 478 117 133 33 83 129 Net exposure 694 Gross exposure 1097 785 58tel112 230 Forward exchange contracts 1097 785 588 109 212 102 112 230 Net exposure Gross exposure 889 1055 Forward exchange contracts 889 1055 472 65 257 54 112 259 Net exposure The sterling hedge position as at 31 December 2010 was updated in early January 2011.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 178 23 Financial risk management objectives and policies continued Sensitivity analysis The sensitivity analysis set out below summarises the sensitivity of the market value of our financial instruments to hypothetical changes in market rates and prices.
The range of variables chosen for the sensitivity analysis reflects our view of changes which are reasonably possible over a oneyear period.
Market values are the present value of future cash flows based on market rates and prices at the valuation date.
For longterm debt an increase in interest rates results in a decline in the fair value of debt.
The sensitivity analysis assumes an instantaneous 100 basis point change in interest rates in all currencies from their levels at 31 December 2012 with all other variables held constant.
Based on the composition of our longterm debt portfolio as at 31 December 2012 a 1% increase in interest rates would result in an additional 30m in interest expense being incurred per year.
The exchange rate sensitivity analysis assumes an instantaneous 10% change in foreign currency exchange rates from their levels at 31 December 2012 with all other variables held constant.
The 10% case assumes a 10% strengthening of the US dollar against all other currencies and the 10% case assumes a 10% weakening of the US dollar.
Each incremental 10% movement in foreign currency exchange rates would have approximately the same effect as the initial 10% detailed in the table below and each 1% change in interest rates would have approximately the same effect as the 1% detailed in the table below.
31 December 2010 Interest rates Exchange rates 1% 1% 10% 10% Increasedecrease in fair value of financial instruments m 595 684 36 36 Impact on profit lossgain m   133 133 Impact on equity gainloss m   169 169 31 December 2011 Interest rates Exchange rates 1% 1% 10% 10% Increasedecrease in fair value of financial instruments m 654 777 15 15 Impact on profit lossgain m   190 190 Impact on equity gainloss m   175 175 31 December 2012 Interest rates Exchange rates 1% 1% 10% 10% Increasedecrease in fair value of financial instruments m 853 1005 12 12 Impact on profit lossgain m   231 231 Impact on equity gainloss m   243 243 There has been no change in the methods and assumptions used in preparing the above sensitivity analysis over the threeyear period.
Credit risk The Group is exposed to credit risk on financial assets such as cash balances including fixed deposits and cash and cash equivalents derivative instruments trade and other receivables.
The Group is also exposed in its net asset position to its own credit risk in respect of the 2023 debentures and 2014 bonds which are accounted for at fair value through profit and loss.
Trade and other receivables Trade receivable exposures are managed locally in the operating units where they arise and credit limits are set as deemed appropriate for the customer.
The Group is exposed to customers ranging from governmentbacked agencies and large private wholesalers to privately owned pharmacies and the underlying local economic and sovereign risks vary throughout the world.
Where appropriate the Group endeavours to minimise risks by the use of trade finance instruments such as letters of credit and insurance.
The Group establishes an allowance for impairment that represents its estimate of incurred losses in respect of specific trade and other receivables where it is deemed that a receivable may not be recoverable.
When the debt is deemed irrecoverable the allowance account is written off against the underlying receivable.
In the US sales to three wholesalers accounted for approximately 73% of US sales 2011 three wholesalers accounted for approximately 75% 2010 three wholesalers accounted for approximately 73%.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 179 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 23 Financial risk management objectives and policies continued The ageing of trade receivables at the reporting date was Not past due 5322 6249 5953 Past due 090 days 288 177 104 Past due 90180 days 41 82 67 Past due  180 days 45 122 123 5696 6630 6247 Movements in provisions for trade receivables Balance at beginning of year 66 81 81 Income statement credit  10 1 Amounts utilised exchange and other movements 2 5 1 Balance at end of year 64 66 81 The allowance for impairment has been calculated based on past experience and is in relation to specific customers.
Given the profile of our customers including large wholesalers and governmentbacked agencies no further credit risk has been identified with the trade receivables not past due other than those balances for which an allowance has been made.
Other financial assets The Group may hold significant cash balances as part of its normal operations with the amount of cash held at any point reflecting the level of cash flow generated by the business and the timing of the use of that cash.
The majority of excess cash is centralised within the Group treasury entity and is subject to counterparty risk on the principal invested.
This risk is mitigated through a policy of prioritising security and liquidity over return and as such cash is only invested in high credit quality investments.
Counterparty limits are set according to the assessed risk of each counterparty and exposures are monitored against these limits on a regular basis.
The majority of the Groups cash is invested in US dollar AAArated liquidity funds and shortterm bank deposits.
The most significant concentration of financial credit risk at 31 December 2012 was 6589m invested in five US dollar AAArated liquidity funds.
The liquidity fund portfolios are managed by the related external third party fund managers to maintain the AAA rating.
No more than 15% of fund value is invested within each individual fund.
There were no other significant concentrations of financial credit risk at the reporting date.
All financial derivatives are transacted with commercial banks in line with standard market practice.
The Group has agreements with some bank counterparties whereby the parties agree to post cash collateral for the benefit of the other equivalent to the market valuation of the derivative positions above a predetermined threshold.
The carrying value of such cash collateral held by the Group at 31 December 2012 was 230m 2011 21m 2010 13m.
24 Employee costs and share plans for employees Employee costs The average number of people to the nearest hundred employed by the Group is set out in the table below.
In accordance with the Companies Act 2006 this includes parttime employees.
Employees
UK 7900 8700 10100 Continental Europe 16100 19200 20100 The Americas 15300 18000 18300 Asia Africa and Australasia 14200 13900 13200 Continuing operations 53500 59800 61700 Geographical distribution described in the table above is by location of legal entity employing staff.
Certain staff will spend some or all of their activity in a different location.
The number of people employed by the Group at the end of 2012 was 51700 2011 57 200 2010 61100.
The costs incurred during the year in respect of these employees were Salaries 4192 4631 4837 Social security costs 664 783 693 Pension costs Other employment costs 362 496 408 5743 6400 6439 Pension costs excludes gains of 791m arising from changes made to benefits under certain of the Groups postretirement benefit plans.
Severance costs of 846m are not included above 2011 431m 2010 531m.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 180 24 Employee costs and share plans for employees continued The Directors believe that together with the basic salary system the Groups employee incentive schemes provide competitive and marketrelated packages to motivate employees.
They should also align the interests of employees with those of shareholders as a whole through longterm share ownership in the Company.
The Groups current UK Swedish and US schemes are described below other arrangements apply elsewhere.
Bonus plans The AstraZeneca UK Performance Bonus Plan Employees of participating AstraZeneca UK companies are invited to participate in this bonus plan which rewards strong individual performance.
Bonuses in respect of performance during 2012 will be paid in cash as they were in 2011 and 2010.
The Company also offers UK employees the opportunity to buy Partnership Shares Ordinary Shares.
Employees may invest up to 1500 over a 12 month accumulation period and purchase Partnership Shares in the Company with the total proceeds at the end of the period.
The purchase price for the shares is the lower of the price at the beginning or the end of the 12 month period.
In 2010 the Company introduced a Matching Share element in respect of Partnership Shares the first award of which was made in 2011.
Partnership Shares and Matching Shares are held in the HM Revenue and Customs HMRCapproved AllEmployee Share Plan.
At the Companys AGM in 2002 shareholders approved the issue of new shares for the purposes of the AllEmployee Share Plan.
The AstraZeneca Executive Annual Bonus Scheme This scheme is a performance bonus scheme for Directors and senior employees who do not participate in the AstraZeneca UK Performance Bonus Plan.
Annual bonuses are paid in cash and reflect both corporate and individual performance measures.
The
Remuneration Committee has discretion to reduce or withhold bonuses if business performance falls sufficiently short of expectations in any year such as to make the payment of bonuses inappropriate.
The AstraZeneca Deferred Bonus Plan This plan was introduced in 2006 and is used to defer a portion of the bonus earned under the AstraZeneca Executive Annual Bonus Scheme into Ordinary Shares in the Company for a period of three years.
The plan currently operates only in respect of Executive Directors and members of the SET.
Awards of shares under this plan are typically made in February each year the first award having been made in February 2006.
Sweden
In Sweden an allemployee performance bonus plan is in operation which rewards strong individual performance.
Bonuses are paid 50% into a fund investing in AstraZeneca equities and 50% in cash.
The AstraZeneca Executive Annual Bonus Scheme the AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan and the AstraZeneca Global Restricted Stock Plan all operate in respect of relevant AstraZeneca employees in Sweden.
US
In the US there are two allemployee shortterm or annual performance bonus plans in operation to differentiate and reward strong individual performance.
Annual bonuses are paid in cash.
There is also one senior staff longterm incentive scheme under which 76 participants may be eligible for awards granted as AstraZeneca ADSs.
AstraZeneca ADSs necessary to satisfy the awards are purchased in the market or funded via a share trust.
The AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan and the AstraZeneca Global Restricted Stock Plan operate in respect of relevant employees in the US.
Share plans The charge for sharebased payments in respect of share plans is 139m 2011 153m 2010 120m.
The plans are equity settled.
The AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan This plan was approved by shareholders in 2005 for a period of 10 years.
Generally awards can be granted at any time but not during a close period of the Company.
The first grant of awards was made in June 2005.
The main grant of awards in 2012 under the plan was in March with a further smaller grant in August.
Awards granted under the plan vest after three years and can be subject to the achievement of performance conditions.
For awards to all participants in 2012 except employees of MedImmune 50% of the award will vest subject to the performance of the Companys total shareholder return TSR compared with that of a selected peer group of other pharmaceutical companies and 50% will vest subject to the achievement of a net cash flow target.
A separate performance condition applies to employees of MedImmune.
The Remuneration Committee has responsibility for agreeing any awards under the plan and for setting the policy for the way in which the plan should be operated including agreeing performance targets and which employees should be invited to participate.
Further details of this plan can be found in the Directors Remuneration Report from page 122.
Shares
WAFV pence
Shares awarded in March 2010 2002 1495 22.38 Shares awarded in Maytel 21.48 Shares awarded in Augusttel 24.95 Shares awarded in November 2010 4 na 25.11 Shares awarded in March 2011 2964 1427 23.09 Shares awarded in Augusttel 23.33 Shares awarded in March 2012 3283 1403 22.41 Shares awarded in August 2012 38 1480 23.50 Weighted average fair value.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 181 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 24 Employee costs and share plans for employees continued The AstraZeneca Investment Plan This plan was introduced in 2010 and approved by shareholders at the 2010 AGM.
The main grant of awards in 2012 under the plan was in March with a further smaller grant in October.
Awards granted under the plan vest after eight years and are subject to performance conditions measured over a period of between three and eight years.
For awards granted in 2012 the performance conditions relate to the annual dividend paid to shareholders and dividend cover over a four year performance period.
The awards are then subject to a four year holding period before they can vest.
The Remuneration Committee has responsibility for agreeing any awards under the plan and for setting the policy for the way in which the plan should be operated including agreeing performance targets and which employees should be invited to participate.
Further details of this plan can be found in the Directors Remuneration Report from page 122.
Shares
WAFV pence
Shares awarded in May 2010 76 2575 38.66 Shares awarded in August 2010 15 2904 na Shares awarded in March 2011 95 2853 46.18 Shares awarded in August 2011 32841 na Shares awarded in Marchtel 44.82 Shares awarded in October 2012 69 2894 na The AstraZeneca Global Restricted Stock Plan This plan was introduced in 2010.
The main grant of awards in 2012 under the plan was in March with a further smaller grant in August.
This plan provides for the grant of restricted stock unit RSU awards to selected below SETlevel employees and is used in conjunction with the AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan to provide a mix of RSUs and performance shares.
Awards typically vest on the third anniversary of the date of grant and are contingent on continued employment with the Company.
The Remuneration Committee has responsibility for agreeing any awards under the plan and for setting the policy for the way in which the plan should be operated.
Shares
WAFV pence
Shares awarded in March 2010 2672 2989 44.75 Shares awarded in August 2010 83227 49.89 Shares awarded in March 2011 2706 2853 46.18 Shares awarded in August 2011 54 2841 46.65 Shares awarded in March 2012 2916 2805 44.82 Shares awarded in August 2012 26 2959 47.00 The AstraZeneca Restricted Share Plan This plan was introduced in 2008 and provides for the grant of restricted share awards to key employees excluding Executive Directors.
Awards are made on an ad hoc basis with variable vesting dates.
The plan has been used five times in 2012 to make awards to 161 employees.
The Remuneration Committee has responsibility for agreeing any awards under the plan and for setting the policy for the way in which the plan should be operated.
Shares
WAFV pence
Shares awarded in Februarytel 47 .70 Shares awarded in May 2010 25 2861 42.96 Shares awarded in Augusttel 49.89 Shares awarded in November 2010 27 na 50.21 Shares awarded in December 2010 20 na 48.30 Shares awarded in January 2011 22955 na Shares awarded in Februarytel 48.55 Shares awarded in March 2011 29 na 46.37 Shares awarded in May 2011 14 3052 50.45 Shares awarded in July 2011 21 3026 na Shares awarded in August 2011 27 2841 46.65 Shares awarded in November 2011 10 na 49.02 Shares awarded in February 2012 10 3067 48.20 Shares awarded in Marchtel 44.82 Shares awarded in July 2012 5na 46.94 Shares awarded in Augusttel 47 .00 Shares awarded in October na This is an award of restricted shares granted to Pascal Soriot under an arrangement the details of which are identical to the rules of the AstraZeneca Restricted Share Plan.
The fair values were determined using a modified version of the binomial model.
This method incorporated expected dividends but no other features into the measurements of fair value.
The grant date fair values of share awards disclosed in this section do not take account of service and nonmarket related performance conditions.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 182 24 Employee costs and share plans for employees continued Share option plans The charge for sharebased payments in respect of share options is 7m 201 1 37m 2010 53m which is comprised entirely of equity settled transactions.
At 31 December 2012 the only significant options outstanding were under the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan.
AstraZeneca Share Option Plan This is a share option plan for employees of participating AstraZeneca Group companies which was approved by shareholders at the Companys AGM in 2000 for a period of 10 years.
The first grant of options occurred in August 2000.
The final grant of options under the plan was in August 2009 since when no further grants have been or will be made.
Options are not transferable.
Options were granted over AstraZeneca Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
The price per Ordinary Share payable upon the exercise of an option is not less than an amount equal to the average of the middlemarket closing price for an Ordinary Share or ADS of the Company on the London or New York Stock Exchange on the three consecutive dealing days immediately before the date of grant or as otherwise agreed with HM Revenue and Customs.
Where the option is an option to subscribe the price payable upon exercise cannot be less than the nominal value of an Ordinary Share of the Company.
An option will normally be exercisable between three and 10 years following its grant provided any relevant performance condition has been satisfied.
Options may be satisfied by the issue of new Ordinary Shares or by existing Ordinary Shares purchased in the market.
The Remuneration Committee sets the policy for the Companys operation of the plan including as regards whether any performance targets will apply to the grant andor exercise of each eligible employees option.
Options normally lapse on cessation of employment.
Exercise is however permitted for a limited period following cessation of employment either for reasons of injury or disability redundancy or retirement or at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee and on an amalgamation takeover or windingup of the Company.
AstraZeneca Share Option Plan
WAEP pence Options outstanding at 1 January 2010 62398 2601 Options exercised 10144 2538 Options forfeited 3189 2470 Options outstanding at 31 December 2010 49065 2439 Options exercised 10408 2125 Options forfeited 3435 2933 Options outstanding at 31 December 2011 35222 2484 Options exercised 11648 2219 Options forfeited 3861 3128 Options outstanding at 31 December 2012 19713 2513 Range of exercise prices 1882 to 3335 Weighted average remaining contractual life 1468 days Options exercisable 19713 2513 Weighted average exercise price.
The fair value of options was estimated at the date of grant being prior to 1 January 2010 using the BlackScholes option pricing model based on weighted average exercise price expected volatility dividend yield riskfree interest rates and expected lives.
Expectations of early exercise were incorporated into the model.
The expected volatility was based on the historic volatility calculated based on the weighted average remaining life of the share options adjusted for any expected changes to future volatility due to publicly available information.
No other features of options granted were incorporated into the measurement of fair value.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 183 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 25 Commitments and contingent liabilities
Contracts placed for future capital expenditure on property plant and equipment and software development costs not provided for in these accounts 245 190 259 Guarantees and contingencies arising in the ordinary course of business for which no security has been given are not expected to result in any material financial loss.
Research and development collaboration payments The Group has various ongoing collaborations including inlicensing and similar arrangements with development partners.
Such collaborations may require the Group to make payments on achievement of stages of development launch or revenue milestones although the Group generally has the right to terminate these agreements at no cost.
The Group recognises research and development milestones as intangible assets once it is committed to payment which is generally when the Group reaches set trigger points in the development cycle.
Revenuerelated milestones are recognised as intangible assets on product launch at a value based on the Groups longterm revenue forecasts for the related product.
The table below indicates potential development and revenuerelated payments that the Group may be required to make under such collaborations.
Total
Under 1 year Years 1 and 2 Years 3 and 4 Years 5 and greater Future potential research and development milestone payments 312tel1550 Future potential revenue milestone payments 4337  5 40 4292 The table includes all potential payments for achievement of milestones under ongoing research and development arrangements.
Revenuerelated milestone payments represent the maximum possible amount payable on achievement of specified levels of revenue as set out in individual contract agreements but exclude variable payments that are based on unit sales eg royaltytype payments which are expensed as the associated sale is recognised.
The table excludes any payments already capitalised in the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012.
The future payments we disclose represent contracted payments and as such are not discounted and are not risk adjusted.
As detailed in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 75 the development of any pharmaceutical product candidate is a complex and risky process that may fail at any stage in the development process due to a number of factors including items such as failure to obtain regulatory approval unfavourable data from key studies adverse reactions to the product candidate or indications of other safety concerns.
The timing of the payments is based on the Groups current best estimate of achievement of the relevant milestone.
Environmental costs and liabilities The Groups expenditure on environmental protection including both capital and revenue items relates to costs which are necessary for implementing internal systems and programmes and meeting legal and regulatory requirements for processes and products.
They are an integral part of normal ongoing expenditure for carrying out the Groups research manufacturing and commercial operations and are not separated from overall operating and development costs.
There are no known changes in legal regulatory or other requirements resulting in material changes to the levels of expenditure for 2010 2011 or 2012.
In addition to expenditure for meeting current and foreseen environmental protection requirements the Group incurs costs in investigating and cleaning up land and groundwater contamination.
In particular AstraZeneca has environmental liabilities at some currently or formerly owned leased and third party sites.
In the US Zeneca Inc.
19 sites where Zeneca Inc. allocation schemes together US Environmental Consequences.
Similarly Stauffer Management Company LLC SMC which was established in 1987 to own and manage certain assets of Stauffer Chemical Company acquired that year andor its indemnitees have been named as PRPs or defendants at 28 sites where SMC is likely to incur US Environmental Consequences.
AstraZeneca has also given indemnities to third parties for a number of sites outside the US.
These environmental liabilities arise from legacy operations that are not currently part of the Groups business and at most of these sites remediation where required is either completed or nearing completion.
AstraZeneca has made provisions for the estimated costs of future environmental investigation remediation operation and maintenance activity beyond normal ongoing expenditure for maintaining the Groups RandD and manufacturing capacity and product ranges where a present obligation exists it is probable that such costs will be incurred and they can be estimated reliably.
With respect to such estimated future costs there were provisions at 31 December 2012 in the aggregate of 88m 201 1 92m 2010 1 19m mainly relating to the US.
Where we are jointly liable or otherwise have costsharing agreements with third parties we reflect only our share of the obligation.
Where the liability is insured in part or in whole by insurance or other arrangements for reimbursement an asset is recognised to the extent that this recovery is virtually certain.
It is possible that AstraZeneca could incur future environmental costs beyond the extent of our current provisions.
The extent of such possible additional costs is inherently difficult to estimate due to a number of factors including 1 the nature and extent of claims that may be asserted in the future 2 whether AstraZeneca has or will have any legal obligation with respect to asserted or unasserted claims 3 the type of remedial action if any that may be selected at sites where the remedy is presently not known 4 the potential for recoveries from or allocation of liability to third parties and 5 the length of time that the environmental investigation remediation and liability allocation process can take.
Notwithstanding and subject to the foregoing we estimate the potential additional loss for future environmental investigation remediation remedial operation and maintenance activity above and beyond our provisions to be in aggregate between 50m to 90m 2011 50m to 90m 2010 20m to 40m which relates solely to the US.
Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 184 IP claims include challenges to the Groups patents on various products or processes and assertions of noninfringement of patents.
A loss in any of these cases could result in loss of patent protection or loss of exclusivity on the related product.
The consequences of any such loss could be a significant decrease in product sales which could have a material adverse effect on our results.
The lawsuits filed by AstraZeneca for patent infringement against companies that have filed ANDAs in the US seeking to market generic forms of products sold by the Group prior to the expiry of the applicable patents covering these products typically also involve allegations of noninfringement invalidity and unenforceability of these patents by the ANDA filers.
In the event that the Group is unsuccessful in these actions or the statutory 30 month stay expires before a ruling is obtained the ANDA filers involved will also have the ability subject to FDA approval to introduce generic versions of the product concerned.
AstraZeneca has full confidence in and will vigorously defend and enforce its IP .
Over the course of the past several years including in 2012 a significant number of commercial litigation claims in which AstraZeneca is involved have been resolved particularly in the US thereby reducing potential contingent liability exposure arising from such litigation.
Similarly in part due to patent litigation and settlement developments greater certainty has been achieved regarding possible generic entry dates with respect to some of our patented products.
At the same time like other companies in the pharmaceutical sector and other industries AstraZeneca continues to be subject to government investigations around the world.
Patent Litigation Arimidex anastrozole Patentregulatory proceedings outside the US In March 2012 the Canadian Federal Court of Appeal dismissed Mylan Pharmaceuticals ULCs appeal against a decision prohibiting the Canadian Minister of Health from issuing it with a marketing authorisation.
There is no remaining Arimidex litigation in Canada.
Atacand Plus candesartan cilexetilhydrochlorothiazide Patentregulatory proceedings outside the US In Canada in February and May 2012 AstraZeneca settled notice of compliance proceedings with Cobalt Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Apotex Inc. circumstances.
Generic candesartan cilexetilhydrochlorothiazide entered the Canadian market in September 2012.
There is no remaining Atacand Plus litigation in Canada.
Crestor rosuvastatin calcium US patent litigationregulatory proceedings In December 2012 the US Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit affirmed the decision of the US District Court for the District of Delaware that the substance patent protecting Crestor is valid and enforceable.
The Federal Circuit also held that Apotex Corp.
Apotex was liable as a submitter and is therefore bound by the District Courts decision.
In January 2013 defendants Aurobindo Pharma Limited Teva Pharmaceuticals USA Inc.
Mylan Pharmaceuticals
Sun Pharmaceutical Industries LTD. of the Federal Circuits decision.
AstraZeneca is also engaged in patent litigation in the US District Court for the District of Delaware in which it contends that a 505b2 NDA for rosuvastatin zinc tablets infringes the substance patent for Crestor tablets.
In March 2012 the Court ruled that based on the NDA application alone it did not have subject matter jurisdiction over AstraZenecas claims for infringement of its patents relating to methods of using rosuvastatin compounds to treat certain cardiovascular conditions.
In November 2012 the Court ruled that Legal proceedings AstraZeneca is involved in various legal proceedings considered typical to its business including actual or threatened litigation andor actual or potential government investigations relating to employment matters product liability commercial disputes pricing sales and marketing practices infringement of IP rights the validity of certain patents and competition laws.
The more significant matters are discussed below.
Most of the claims involve highly complex issues.
Often these issues are subject to substantial uncertainties and therefore the probability of a loss if any being sustained and an estimate of the amount of any loss is difficult to ascertain.
Consequently for a majority of these claims it is not possible to make a reasonable estimate of the expected financial effect if any that will result from ultimate resolution of the proceedings.
In these cases AstraZeneca discloses information with respect to the nature and facts of the cases.
With respect to each of the legal proceedings described below other than those for which provision has been made we are unable to make estimates of the possible loss or range of possible losses at this stage other than as set forth in this section.
We also do not believe that disclosure of the amount sought by plaintiffs if known would be meaningful with respect to those legal proceedings.
This is due to a number of factors including 1 the stage of the proceedings in many cases trial dates have not been set and the overall length and extent of pretrial discovery 2 the entitlement of the parties to an action to appeal a decision 3 clarity as to theories of liability damages and governing law 4 uncertainties in timing of litigation and 5 the possible need for further legal proceedings to establish the appropriate amount of damages if any.
While there can be no assurance regarding the outcome of any of the legal proceedings referred to in this Note 25 based on managements current and considered view of each situation we do not currently expect them to have a material adverse effect on our financial position.
This position could of course change over time not least because of the factors referred to above.
In cases that have been settled or adjudicated or where quantifiable fines and penalties have been assessed and which are not subject to appeal or other similar forms of relief or where a loss is probable and we are able to make a reasonable estimate of the loss we indicate the loss absorbed or the amount of the provision accrued.
Further details of the legal provisions taken during the year are provided in Note 17.
Where it is considered that the Group is more likely than not to prevail legal costs involved in defending the claim are charged to profit as they are incurred.
Where it is considered that the Group has a valid contract which provides the right to reimbursement from insurance or otherwise of legal costs andor all or part of any loss incurred or for which a provision has been established and we consider recovery to be virtually certain the best estimate of the amount expected to be received is recognised as an asset.
Assessments as to whether or not to recognise provisions or assets and of the amounts concerned usually involve a series of complex judgements about future events and can rely heavily on estimates and assumptions.
AstraZeneca believes that the provisions recorded are adequate based on currently available information and that the insurance recoveries recorded will be received.
However given the inherent uncertainties involved in assessing the outcomes of these cases and in estimating the amount of the potential losses and the associated insurance recoveries we could in the future incur judgments or insurance settlements that could have a material adverse effect on our results in any particular period.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 185 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview Nexium esomeprazole magnesium US patent litigation In 2012 AstraZeneca entered into separate agreements with three generic companies settling AstraZenecas patent infringement action against each generic companys ANDA product.
As part of each settlement each generic company was granted a licence to enter the US market with its proposed ANDA version of generic esomeprazole magnesium on 27 May 2014 subject to regulatory approval or earlier in certain circumstances.
In January 2012 AstraZeneca received a Paragraph IV notice letter from Mylan Laboratories Ltd.
Mylan Laboratories.
In March 2012 AstraZeneca commenced a patent infringement action in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey against Mylan Laboratories regarding its generic ANDA product.
Trial against Mylan Laboratories may be scheduled in 2013.
In 2011 AstraZeneca commenced a patent infringement action in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey against Hanmi USA Inc. et al.
Hanmi in response to the filing of an NDA under 505b2 for FDA approval to market 20mg and 40mg esomeprazole strontium capsules.
Trial against Hanmi may be scheduled in 2013.
Patent proceedings outside the US AstraZeneca is involved in proceedings in several countries outside the US regarding patent andor regulatory exclusivity for Nexium including Australia Austria Belgium Brazil Canada China the Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Italy Latvia Lithuania Malaysia Mexico the Netherlands Norway Philippines Poland Portugal Singapore Slovenia Sweden Switzerland and
There is generic entry in many European markets.
In the European Patent Office EPO in June and July 2011 the Opposition Division revoked EP  the 461 patent which relates to Nexium and EP  the 460 patent which relates to Nexium i.
AstraZeneca appealed the Opposition Divisions decision.
In November 2012 separate EPO Technical Boards of Appeal granted AstraZenecas appeals and maintained both the 461 patent and the 460 patent.
In Canada in March 2012 AstraZeneca discontinued its notice of compliance proceeding pending with Mylan Pharmaceuticals ULC Mylan with respect to the Canadian Nexium substance patent number 2.290.963 after Mylan withdrew its notice of allegation.
Also in Canada in October 2012 the Federal Court prohibited Pharmascience Inc. for its esomeprazole magnesium product until May 2018.
Pulmicort Respules budesonide inhalation suspension US patent litigation AstraZenecas consolidated patent infringement lawsuits against various generic companies for infringement of US patents directed to methods of use and the formulation and form of active ingredient for Pulmicort Respules began trial on 7 November 2012 in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey.
Closing arguments are scheduled for 8 February 2013 and AstraZeneca expects a decision shortly thereafter.
Seroquel IR quetiapine fumarate US regulatory proceedings In March 2012 in response to the FDAs notice that generic Seroquel IR had been granted final approval AstraZeneca filed a lawsuit in the US District Court for the District of Columbia seeking a temporary restraining order to vacate these approvals and an injunction to enjoin any further approvals of generic quetiapine.
In June 2012 the Court denied AstraZenecas motion for summary judgment and granted the FDAs cross motion for summary judgment on the issue of exclusivity for Seroquel IR.
In July 2012 AstraZeneca appealed that ruling to the US Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
Generic quetiapine fumarate Seroquel IR entered the US market in March 2012. defendant Watson Laboratories Inc.
Watson was precluded from relitigating its defence of invalidity.
In December 2012 defendant EGIS Pharmaceuticals PLC was dismissed from the case by stipulation where it conceded the validity and enforceability of the Crestor substance patent and also agreed to be bound by any judgment against Watson.
Trial took place in December 2012 on the sole remaining issue of infringement of the substance patent.
The Court will render a decision after submission of posttrial briefs from both parties.
As previously reported in November 2011 AstraZeneca filed a Citizen Petition with the FDA in respect of Crestor requesting the FDA to withhold approval of any generic rosuvastatin drug product that omits from its labelling the diabetesrelated warning and adverse reaction information which AstraZeneca was required to include in Crestors labelling when the FDA approved Crestors primary prevention of cardiovascular disease indication.
In May 2012 the FDA denied the Petition.
AstraZeneca is also defending a patent infringement lawsuit filed in April 2011 in the US District Court for the District of South Carolina by Palmetto Pharmaceuticals LLC Palmetto which among other claims asserts that AstraZenecas Crestor sales induce infringement of a Palmetto patent.
Patent proceedings outside the US AstraZeneca is engaged in proceedings in Australia Brazil Canada Malaysia Mexico Portugal and Singapore regarding patent and or regulatory exclusivity for Crestor.
Generic drug manufacturers have commenced sales of generic rosuvastatin drug products in Brazil Canada Malaysia and Mexico.
In Australia as previously reported in 2011 AstraZeneca instituted proceedings against Apotex Pty Ltd asserting infringement of various formulation and method patents for Crestor.
In January 2012 AstraZeneca instituted similar proceedings against Watson Pharma Pty Ltd. and Actavis Australia Pty Ltd.
AstraZeneca was granted preliminary injunctions against all three parties.
A trial was held in October 2012 and a decision is pending.
In Canada in February 2012 AstraZeneca reached settlement with Pharmascience Inc.
PMS resolving the litigation regarding AstraZenecas Crestor substance patent and as part of the agreement PMS was permitted to enter the Canadian market on 2 April 2012 or earlier in certain circumstances.
Generic rosuvastatin calcium entered the Canadian market in April 2012.
Entocort EC budesonide US patent litigation In April 2012 the US Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit affirmed the US District Court for the District of Delawares decision that Mylan Pharmaceuticals Inc. not infringe AstraZenecas patent protecting Entocort EC.
LosecPrilosec omeprazole US patent litigation AstraZeneca continues litigation to recover patent infringement damages against Andrx Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Apotex Corp. and Apotex Inc.
Patent proceedings outside the US In Canada the AstraZeneca patent infringement proceeding against Apotex Inc. remains pending.
In May 2012 in Canada the Federal Court found AstraZeneca liable to Apotex Inc.
December 2003.
The actual amount of damages owing if any will be determined at a future date by a court reference procedure.
AstraZeneca has appealed the Federal Courts decision.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 186 Vimovo naproxenesomeprazole magnesium US patent litigation In January 2013 AstraZeneca and Pozen commenced a patent infringement action in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey in response to an ANDA challenge to seven patents listed in the Orange Book including the patent inlicensed from Pozen.
Three additional patentinfringement actions regarding generic versions of Vimovo are also pending in the Court.
Zestril lisinopril dihydrate Patentregulatory proceedings outside the US As previously disclosed in 1996 two of AstraZenecas predecessor companies Zeneca Limited and Zeneca Pharma Inc.
Merck and Co.
Inc.
Group commenced a patent infringement action in Canada against Apotex Inc.
Apotex alleging infringement of Merck Groups lisinopril patent.
In 2010 after having established Apotexs liability AstraZeneca and the Merck Group initiated proceedings to recover damages and that damages claim remains pending.
Product Liability Litigation Crestor rosuvastatin calcium AstraZeneca is defending 15 lawsuits in California state courts involving a total of 263 plaintiffs claiming physical injury from treatment with Crestor.
The lawsuits allege multiple types of injuries including diabetes mellitus various cardiac injuries rhabdomyolysis and liver and kidney injuries.
Fourteen cases have been consolidated into one coordinated proceeding in Los Angeles California.
Iressa gefitinib Between 2004 and 2008 seven claims were filed against AstraZeneca in Japan in the Osaka and Tokyo District Courts alleging that Iressa caused a fatal incidence of interstitial lung disease in Japanese patients.
As previously reported in November 2011 the Tokyo High Court reversed the Tokyo District Courts decision and ruled that neither AstraZeneca nor the Japanese Ministry of Health Labour and Welfare MHLW had any liability for any of the claims.
Following that decision on 25 May 2012 the Osaka High Court reversed the Osaka District Court decision and ruled that neither AstraZeneca nor the MHLW had any liability for any of the claims.
The plaintiffs have appealed both decisions to the Japanese Supreme Court.
Nexium esomeprazole magnesium As previously disclosed AstraZeneca has been named as a defendant in product liability lawsuits brought by plaintiffs alleging bone deterioration loss of bone density andor bone fractures caused by Nexium andor Prilosec in various federal and state courts in the US.
Currently there are approximately 1900 plaintiffs.
In December 2012 the US Judicial Panel on MultiDistrict Litigation ordered that the federal cases be coordinated for proceedings in the US District Court for the Central District of California.
Seroquel IR quetiapine fumarate With regard to Seroquel IR product liability litigation in the US AstraZeneca is aware of approximately 10 cases in active litigation in various jurisdictions.
Provisions associated with diabetesrelated claims were reduced by approximately 18m in 2012.
Four putative class actions were initiated in Canada in the provinces of Alberta British Columbia Ontario and Quebec alleging that AstraZeneca failed to provide adequate warnings in connection with an alleged association between Seroquel IR and the onset of diabetes.
Class certification was denied in the Ontario proceedings in 2012 and in Quebec in 2011.
Both decisions were appealed.
On
12 December 2012 the Quebec Court of Appeal approved plaintiffs motion to abandon the appeal of the lower courts decision to deny class certification.
Seroquel XR an extended release formulation of quetiapine fumarate US patent litigationregulatory proceedings In October 2011 the US District Court for the District of New Jersey conducted a trial in the patent infringement actions involving the Seroquel XR formulation patent against certain generic drug manufacturers.
In March 2012 the Court found the Seroquel XR formulation patent to be valid.
The Court also found that Anchen Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Osmotica Pharmaceutical Corporation Torrent Pharmaceuticals Limited Torrent Pharma Inc.
Mylan
Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Mylan Inc. formulation patent.
The decision has been appealed.
In July 2012 AstraZeneca settled its patent infringement action against Intellipharmaceutics Corp.
International Inc.
US District Court for the Southern District of New York by granting a licence to the Seroquel XR product patent effective 1 November 2016 or earlier in certain circumstances.
In July 2012 AstraZeneca received a Paragraph IV notice letter from Amneal Pharmaceuticals LLC Amneal relating to Seroquel XR.
In August 2012 AstraZeneca commenced a patent infringement action against Amneal and related Amneal entities in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey.
In January 2013 AstraZeneca settled its patent infringement action against Amneal by granting a licence to the Seroquel XR product patent effective 1 November 2016 or earlier in certain circumstances.
In September 2012 AstraZeneca received a Paragraph IV notice letter from Lupin Ltd.
Lupin relating to Seroquel XR.
In November 2012 AstraZeneca commenced a patent infringement action against Lupin in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey.
Patent proceedings outside the US In the Netherlands in March 2012 the District Court in the Hague upheld the validity of the formulation patent protecting Seroquel XR.
In the UK in March 2012 the UK High Court found the Seroquel XR formulation patent invalid.
In Spain in July 2012 the Commercial Court in Barcelona found the Seroquel XR formulation patent valid.
In Germany in September 2012 the Regional Court in Dsseldorf affirmed preliminary injunctions against Heumann Pharma GmbH and Co Heumann Verwaltungs GmbH Ratiopharm GmbH CT Arzneimittel GmbH and AbZ Pharma GmbH.
However in November 2012 the Federal Patent Court found the Seroquel XR patent invalid and outstanding injunctions have been lifted.
Generic versions of Seroquel XR have been launched in Austria Denmark Germany Italy Portugal UK Romania and elsewhere.
While AstraZeneca continues to have confidence in the patent protecting Seroquel XR and will continue to take appropriate legal action additional generic launches and adverse court rulings are possible.
Symbicort budesonideformoterol US patent litigation AstraZeneca is defending a complaint alleging patent infringement filed in the US District Court for the Eastern District of Texas by Accuhale LLC Accuhale.
Accuhale is purportedly the owner of US patent no.
5718355 which Accuhale alleges is infringed by sales of Symbicort.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 187 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview Other Commercial Litigation CoPayment Subsidy Litigation In March 2012 the New England Carpenters Health and Welfare Fund on behalf of a proposed class of payers that reimbursed consumers for Nexium and Crestor prescriptions as to which AstraZeneca subsidised the consumers copayment obligation brought an action against AstraZeneca in the US District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.
On 5 September 2012 the plaintiffs voluntarily dismissed their complaint against AstraZeneca while reserving the right to file a new complaint against AstraZeneca in the future.
Shionogi Arbitration Crestor Royalty Calculation In July 2012 Shionogi and Co.
Ltd initiated arbitration proceedings to resolve issues relating to the treatment of certain excise taxes and other specific items in the calculation of royalties on Crestor sales.
Nexium Settlement Antitrust Litigation AstraZeneca is a defendant in numerous nearly identical putative class actions alleging that AstraZenecas settlements of patent litigation relating to Nexium violated US antitrust law and various state laws.
In December 2012 the US Judicial Panel on MultiDistrict Litigation ordered that the cases be coordinated for proceedings in the US District Court for the District of Massachusetts.
Average Wholesale Price AWP litigation Of the various lawsuits against AstraZeneca and other pharmaceutical manufacturers involving allegations that by causing the publication of allegedly inflated wholesale list prices defendants caused entities to overpay for prescription drugs AstraZeneca remains in litigation with the Attorneys General of the states of Utah Wisconsin and as discussed below with the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
During 2012 settlements were reached with the Attorneys General of the states of Louisiana and Oklahoma and provisions were taken.
AstraZeneca prevailed in its appeal before the Commonwealth of Kentucky Court of Appeals.
In that case AstraZeneca sought reversal of the judgment against it in the case brought by the Attorney General of Kentucky and the corresponding award of damages and penalties.
Following the underlying 2009 trial a Kentucky jury found AstraZeneca liable under the Commonwealth of Kentuckys Consumer Protection and Medicaid Fraud statutes and awarded 14.72m in compensatory damages and 100 in punitive damages.
The trial court subsequently awarded an additional 5.4m in statutory penalties.
On 12 October 2012 the Kentucky Court of Appeals reversed the trial courts decision and held that AstraZeneca was not liable for damages.
The Court of Appeals remanded the case to the trial court for entry of judgment in favour of AstraZeneca.
On 13 November 2012 the Commonwealth filed its Motion for Discretionary Review appeal in the Kentucky Supreme Court.
There are no remaining AWP cases pending against MedImmune.
Medco qui tam litigation Schumann AstraZeneca has been named as a defendant in a lawsuit filed in Federal Court in Philadelphia under the qui tam whistleblower provisions of the federal and certain state False Claims Acts alleging overpayments by federal and state governments resulting from alleged false pricing information reported to the government and improper payments intended to influence the formulary status of Prilosec and Nexium to Medco and its customers.
The action was initially filed in September 2003 but remained under seal until July 2009 at which time AstraZeneca was served with a copy of the amended complaint following the US governments decision not to intervene in the case.
On 25 January 2013 the Court granted AstraZenecas motion and dismissed the case with prejudice.
With regard to insurance coverage for the substantial legal defence costs and settlements that have been incurred in connection with the Seroquel IR product liability claims in the US related to alleged diabetes andor other related injuries which now exceed the total amount of insurance coverage available disputes continue with insurers and legal proceedings have commenced in the UK about the availability of coverage under certain insurance policies.
These policies have aggregate coverage limits of 300m.
No insurance receivable can be recognised under applicable accounting standards at this time.
Commercial Litigation Crestor rosuvastatin calcium On 29 November 2012 a Motion to Certify a Claim as a Class Action and Related Statement of Claim were filed in Israel in the District Court in Tel Aviv  Jaffa against AstraZeneca and four other pharmaceutical companies.
With respect to AstraZeneca in addition to other causes of action the Statement of Claim alleges that AstraZeneca engaged in deception and failed to disclose material facts to consumers of Crestor regarding certain adverse events associated with the drug.
Nexium esomeprazole magnesium Of the various putative class actions in the US alleging that AstraZenecas promotion advertising and pricing of Nexium to physicians consumers and third party payers was unfair unlawful and deceptive only one case remains pending.
In the Massachusetts State Court case AstraZeneca reached an agreement in principle to settle the matter in September 2012 and a provision has been taken.
Plaintiffs motion for preliminary approval of the settlement will be heard by the Court on 5 February 2013.
The Delaware State Court case has been stayed since May 2005.
Seroquel quetiapine fumarate Of the various state law claims brought by state Attorneys General generally alleging that AstraZeneca made false andor misleading statements in marketing and promoting Seroquel AstraZeneca remains in litigation with the Attorney General of Mississippi.
In 2012 AstraZeneca settled the cases brought by the Attorneys General of the states of Montana New Mexico South Carolina and Utah and also finalised previously reported agreements in principle with Alaska and Arkansas.
In December 2012 AstraZeneca also agreed in principle to a settlement of similar claims with the Attorney General of Kentucky which was finalised in January 2013.
Provisions for the foregoing settlements were taken in 2012.
Synagis palivizumab In September 2011 MedImmune filed an action against Abbott International LLC Abbott in the Circuit Court for Montgomery County Maryland seeking a declaratory judgment in a contract dispute.
Abbotts motion to dismiss was granted.
In September 201 1 Abbott filed a parallel action against MedImmune in the Illinois State
Abbotts motion to hold the disputed funds in escrow was rejected.
In February 2012 the Court denied MedImmunes motion to dismiss and is expected to set a trial date for 2013.
ToprolXL metoprolol succinate AstraZeneca is defending antitrust claims in the US regarding the listing and enforcement of patents protecting ToprolXL.
In March 2013 the US District Court for the District of Delaware will hold a hearing to review the agreement in principle to settle the remaining claims alleged by the endpayers for which a provision was taken in 2012.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 188 Dutch National Competition Authority investigation In the Dutch National Competition Authority NMa investigation into alleged abuse of a dominant position the investigation team issued a report alleging foreclosure of generic versions of certain proton pump inhibitors other than esomeprazole.
The file has now been passed to the Legal Department of the NMa.
AstraZeneca completed its defence in April 2012 and awaits a decision by the Board of the NMa later in 2013.
Federal Trade Commission inquiry In 2012 AstraZeneca completed its response to the 2008 Civil Investigative Demand from the US Federal Trade Commission seeking information regarding the Nexium patent litigation settlement with Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd.
Seroquel quetiapine fumarate Attorney General of Texas investigation In July 2012 AstraZeneca received a civil investigative demand from the Office of the Attorney General for the State of Texas in connection with an investigation related to sales and marketing activities potentially involving Seroquel.
Synagis palivizumab As previously disclosed on 30 June 2011 MedImmune received a demand from the US Attorneys Office for the Southern District of New York requesting certain documents related to the sales and marketing activities of Synagis.
On 1 July 2011 MedImmune received a similar court order to produce documents from the Office of the Attorney General for the State of New York Medicaid and Fraud Control Unit pursuant to what the government attorneys advised was a joint investigation.
MedImmune has accepted receipt of these requests and is coordinating with the government offices to provide the appropriate responses and cooperate with any related investigation.
In May 2012 MedImmune received a subpoena duces tecum from the Office of Attorney General for the State of Florida Medicaid and Fraud Control Unit requesting certain documents related to the sales and marketing activities of Synagis.
MedImmune has accepted receipt of the request and is coordinating with the Florida government to provide the appropriate responses and cooperate with any related investigation.
AstraZeneca is unaware of the nature or focus of the investigation however based on the nature of the requests it appears to be similar to the inquiries from the State of New York and Department of Justice which is mentioned above.
Other government investigationsproceedings Foreign Corrupt Practices Act In connection with an investigation into Foreign Corrupt Practices Act issues in the pharmaceutical industry AstraZeneca has received inquiries from the US Department of Justice and the SEC regarding among other things sales practices internal controls certain distributors and interactions with healthcare providers and other government officials in several countries.
AstraZeneca is cooperating with these inquiries.
AstraZeneca is investigating indications of inappropriate conduct in certain countries including China.
Resolution of this matter could involve the payment of fines andor other remedies.
Average Manufacturers Price qui tam litigation Streck AstraZeneca is one of several manufacturers named as a defendant in a lawsuit filed in the US Federal Court in Philadelphia under the qui tam whistleblower provisions of the federal and certain state False Claims Acts alleging inaccurate reporting of Average Manufacturers Prices to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
The action was initially filed in October 2008 but remained under seal until May 2011 following the US governments decision not to intervene in the case with regard to certain manufacturers including AstraZeneca.
As to AstraZeneca the Court dismissed plaintiffs claims both state and federal for all Average Manufacturer Price submissions made before 1 January 2007 but denied AstraZenecas motion to dismiss all claims regarding submissions made after 1 January 2007.
Drug importation and antitrust litigation As previously disclosed in August 2004 Californian retail pharmacy plaintiffs filed an action in the Superior Court of California alleging a conspiracy by AstraZeneca and other pharmaceutical manufacturer defendants to set the price of drugs sold in California at or above the Canadian sales price for those drugs and otherwise restrict the importation of pharmaceuticals into the US.
After the court granted the defendants motion for summary judgment and that decision was affirmed on appeal in October 2012 the plaintiffs filed a petition for review by the California Supreme Court which was denied.
Employment  wagehour litigation On 18 June 2012 the US Supreme Court in Christopher vs.
SmithKline Beecham Corporation GSK handed down a decision concerning whether pharmaceutical sales representatives are exempt from overtime pay regulations under the US Department of Labors outside sales exemption.
The decision favoured GSK and by implication AstraZeneca and the pharmaceutical industry as a whole.
As a result of the Christopher decision the final wage and hour class action lawsuits against AstraZeneca were dismissed in October 2012.
Government investigationsproceedings Except as otherwise noted the precise parameters of the following inquiries are unknown and AstraZeneca is not in a position at this time to predict the scope duration or outcome of these matters including whether they will result in any liability to AstraZeneca.
LosecPrilosec omeprazole European Commission case In December 2012 the Court of Justice of the EU ruled on the crossappeals from the General Court of the EUs judgment regarding the European Commissions 2005 decision fining AstraZeneca 60m reduced to 52.5m by the General Court for abuse of a dominant position regarding omeprazole.
The Court of Justice dismissed all of the crossappeals and confirmed the judgment of the General Court in all material respects.
No further appeals are possible.
Nexium esomeprazole magnesium Department of JusticeAttorney General of Texas investigation AstraZeneca has received a subpoena from the Department of Justice and a Civil Investigative Demand issued by the Attorney General of Texas in connection with an investigation of the possible submission of false or otherwise improper pricing information for certain formulations of Nexium to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
The Department of Justice has filed a notice of nonintervention in the federal case.
The Attorney General of Texas has stated that it plans to file a similar notice in the Texas False Claims Act case pending in state court in Texas.
AstraZeneca and counsel for relator are currently negotiating the language of stipulations of dismissal.
AstraZeneca expects these cases to be formally dismissed shortly.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 189 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview Transfer pricing and other international tax contingencies The total net accrual included in the Group Financial Statements to cover the worldwide exposure to transfer pricing audits is 423m a reduction of 226m compared to 2011 primarily due to the settlement of a transfer pricing matter as detailed in Note 4.
AstraZeneca faces a number of transfer pricing audits in jurisdictions around the world and in some cases is in dispute with the tax authorities.
The issues under discussion are often complex and can require many years to resolve.
Accruals for tax contingencies require management to make estimates and judgements with respect to the ultimate outcome of a tax audit and actual results could vary from these estimates.
The international tax environment presents increasingly challenging dynamics for the resolution of transfer pricing disputes.
These disputes usually result in taxable profits being increased in one territory and correspondingly decreased in another.
Our balance sheet positions for these matters reflect appropriate corresponding relief in the territories affected.
Management considers that at present such corresponding relief will be available but given the challenges in the international tax environment will keep this aspect under careful review.
Management continues to believe that AstraZenecas positions on all its transfer pricing audits and disputes are robust and that AstraZeneca is appropriately provided.
For transfer pricing audits where AstraZeneca and the tax authorities are in dispute AstraZeneca estimates the potential for reasonably possible additional losses above and beyond the amount provided to be up to 522m 2011 375m however management believes that it is unlikely that these additional losses will arise.
It is possible that some of these contingencies may reduce in the future to the extent that any tax authority challenge is unsuccessful or matters lapse following expiry of the relevant statutes of limitation resulting in a reduction in the tax charge in future periods.
Other tax contingencies Included in the tax accrual is 1846m relating to a number of other tax contingencies an increase of 174m mainly due to the impact of an additional year of transactions relating to contingencies for which accruals had already been established and exchange rate effects.
For these tax exposures AstraZeneca does not expect material additional losses.
It is however possible that some of these contingencies may reduce in the future if any tax authority challenge is unsuccessful or matters lapse following expiry of the relevant statutes of limitation resulting in a reduction in the tax charge in future periods.
Timing of cash flows and interest It is not possible to estimate the timing of tax cash flows in relation to each outcome however it is anticipated that a number of significant disputes may be resolved over the next one to two years.
Included in the provision is an amount of interest of 248m 2011 291m.
Interest is accrued as a tax expense.
Serbia
In August 2011 AstraZenecas Representative Office in Belgrade Serbia was served with a criminal indictment alleging that local employees of AstraZeneca and several other pharmaceutical companies who are also named defendants in the indictment made allegedly improper payments to physicians at the Institute of Oncology and Radiology of Serbia.
The indictment was subsequently amended.
In March 2012 the Court denied AstraZenecas request to dismiss the amended indictment and joined the proceedings against AstraZeneca and the other named pharmaceutical companies with the pending proceedings against the allegedly involved individual defendants.
AstraZeneca has filed an appeal with the Serbian Constitutional Court.
India
On 23 February 2012 the Indian Central Bureau of Investigation filed a First Information Report in the court in Delhi against AstraZeneca and public officials of the Central Procurement Agency of the Delhi Directorate of Health Services DHS in connection with circumstances surrounding the submission by AstraZeneca of an alleged false affidavit in relation to pricing as part of a tender for Meronem entered into by AstraZeneca with the DHS in 2009.
AstraZeneca is cooperating with the investigation.
Other US Attorneys Offices investigations The US Attorneys Offices in Alabama Delaware and Texas are conducting investigations related to sales and marketing activities potentially involving more than one product including Crestor and Seroquel XR in response to the filing of qui tam whistleblower lawsuits.
The US Attorneys Office for the District of Delaware Criminal Division is conducting an investigation relating to AstraZenecas relationship with Medco and sales of Nexium Plendil Prilosec and ToprolXL.
Additional government inquiries As is true for most if not all major prescription pharmaceutical companies operating in the US AstraZeneca is currently involved in multiple US federal and state inquiries into drug marketing and pricing practices.
In addition to the investigations described above various federal and state law enforcement offices have from time to time requested information from the Company.
There have been no material developments in those matters.
Tax
Where tax exposures can be quantified an accrual is made based on best estimates and managements judgement.
Details of the movements in relation to material tax exposures are discussed below.
As accruals can be built up over a long period of time but the ultimate resolution of tax exposures usually occurs at a point in time and given the inherent uncertainties in assessing the outcomes of these exposures which sometimes can be binary in nature we could in future periods experience adjustments to these accruals that have a material positive or negative effect on our results in any particular period.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued Financial Statements  Notes to the Group Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 190 26 Operating leases Total rentals under operating leases charged to profit were as follows Operating leases 197 215 212 The future minimum lease payments under operating leases that have initial or remaining terms in excess of one year at 31 December 2012 were as follows Obligations under leases comprise Not later than one year 102 92 161 Later than one year and not later than five years 223 178 242 Later than five years 109 122 103 Total future minimum lease payments Statutory and other information Fees payable to KPMG Audit Plc and its associates Group audit fee 2.2 2.4 2.3 Fees payable to KPMG Audit Plc and its associates for other services The audit of subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 5.0 5.5 6.5 Auditrelated assurance services 2.2 2.4 3.3 Tax compliance services 0.8 0.8 0.6 Tax advisory services 0.1 0.1 0.5 Other assurance services 1.1 2.5 0.1 Fees payable to KPMG Audit Plc in respect of the Groups pension schemes The audit of subsidiaries pension schemes 0.5 0.6 0.6 Auditrelated assurance services include fees of 1.7m 2011 1.9m 2010 2.4m in respect of section 404 of the SarbanesOxley Act.
Other assurance services include assurance services provided in relation to the Groups longterm debt issuance in 2012.
Related party transactions The Group had no material related party transactions which might reasonably be expected to influence decisions made by the users of these Financial Statements.
Key management personnel compensation Key management personnel are defined for the purpose of disclosure under IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures as the members of the Board and the members of the SET.
Shortterm employee benefits 19451 19973 21925 Postemployment benefits 2137 2155 1793 Termination benefits 1672 Sharebased payments 15304 16064 11563 38564 38192 35281 Total remuneration is included within employee costs see Note 24.
Further details of Directors emoluments are included in the Directors Remuneration Report from pages 122 to 137.
Subsequent events There were no material subsequent events.
Financial Statements  Principal Subsidiaries AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 191 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview At 31 December 2012 Country Percentage of voting share capital held Principal activity
AstraZeneca UK Limited England 100 Research and development manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca Treasury Limited England 100 Treasury Continental Europe AstraZeneca Dunkerque Production SCS France 100 Manufacturing AstraZeneca SAS France 100 Research manufacturing marketing Novexel SA France 100 Research AstraZeneca GmbH Germany 100 Development manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca Holding GmbH Germany 100 Manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca SpA Italy 100 Marketing AstraZeneca Farmaceutica Spain SA Spain 100 Marketing AstraZeneca AB Sweden 100 Research and development manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca BV Netherlands 100 Marketing LLC AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals Russia 100 Marketing The Americas AstraZeneca do Brasil Limitada Brazil 100 Manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca Canada Inc.
Canada 100 Research marketing AZ Reinsurance Limited Cayman Islands 100 Insurance and reinsurance underwriting IPR Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Puerto Rico 100 Development manufacturing marketing Ardea Biosciences Inc.
US 100 Research and development AstraZeneca LP US 99 Research and development manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP US 100 Research and development manufacturing marketing Zeneca Holdings Inc.
US 100 Manufacturing marketing MedImmune LLC US 100 Research and development manufacturing marketing Asia Africa and Australasia AstraZeneca Pty Limited Australia 100 Development manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals Co.
Limited China 100 Research and development manufacturing marketing AZ Wuxi Trading Co.
Limited China 100 Marketing AstraZeneca KK Japan 80 Manufacturing marketing All shares are held indirectly.
The companies and other entities listed above are those whose results or financial position principally affected the figures shown in the Group Financial Statements.
A full list of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates will be annexed to the Companys next annual return filed with the Registrar of Companies.
The country of registration or incorporation is stated alongside each company.
The accounting year ends of subsidiaries and associates are 31 December.
AstraZeneca operates through 217 subsidiaries worldwide.
Products are manufactured in 16 countries worldwide and are sold in over 100 countries.
The Group Financial Statements consolidate the Financial Statements of the Company and its subsidiaries at 31 December 2012.
Principal Subsidiaries Financial Statements  Independent Auditors Report to the Members of AstraZeneca PLC AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 192 We have audited the Parent Company Financial Statements of AstraZeneca PLC for the year ended 31 December 2012 set out on pages 193 to 197 .
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and UK Accounting Standards UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditor As explained more fully in the Preparation of the Financial Statements and Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 140 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the Parent Company Financial Statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the Parent Company Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements A description of the scope of an audit of financial statements is provided on the Financial Reporting Councils website at frc. iteauditscopeukprivate.
Opinion on financial statements In our opinion the Parent Company Financial Statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Companys affairs as at 31 December 2012 have been properly prepared in accordance with UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and the information given in the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the Parent Company Financial Statements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters where the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Parent Company Financial Statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of Directors Remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Other matter We have reported separately on the Group Financial Statements of AstraZeneca PLC for the year ended 31 December 2012.
Jimmy Daboo Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of KPMG Audit Plc Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square London E14 5GL 31 January 2013 Independent Auditors Report to the Members of AstraZeneca PLC Financial Statements  Company Balance Sheet AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 193 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview AstraZeneca PLC
Fixed assets Fixed asset investments 1 25349 23421 Current assets Debtors  other 3 1 Debtors  amounts owed by Group undertakings 6589 1937 6592 1938 Creditors Amounts falling due within one year Nontrade creditors 2 956 3217 Interestbearing loans and borrowings 3  1749 956 4966 Net current assetsliabilities 5636 3028 Total assets less current liabilities 30985 20393 Creditors Amounts falling due after more than one year Amounts owed to Group undertakings 3 283 283 Interestbearing loans and borrowings 3 8742 6714 9025 6997 Net assets 21960 13396 Capital and reserves Calledup share capital 6 312 323 Share premium account 4 3504 3078 Capital redemption reserve 4 153 139 Other reserves 4 2904 2983 Profit and loss account 4 15087 6873 Shareholders funds 5 21960 13396 m means millions of US dollars.
The Company Financial Statements from page 193 to 197 were approved by the Board on 31 January 2013 and were signed on its behalf by Pascal Soriot Simon Lowth
Director
Companys registered number Company Balance Sheet at 31 December Financial Statements  Company Accounting Policies AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 194 Basis of accounting The Company Financial Statements are prepared under the historical cost convention modified to include revaluation to fair value of certain financial instruments as described below in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice UK GAAP.
The Group Financial Statements are presented on pages 142 to 191 and have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU and as issued by the IASB and in accordance with the Group Accounting Policies set out on pages 146 to 149.
The following paragraphs describe the main accounting policies under UK GAAP which have been applied consistently.
New accounting standards The Company has adopted the Amendments to FRS 29 IFRS 7 Disclosures  Transfers of Financial Assets during the year.
The adoption had no impact on the net results or net assets of the Company.
Foreign currencies Profit and loss account items in foreign currencies are translated into US dollars at average rates for the relevant accounting periods.
Assets and liabilities are translated at exchange rates prevailing at the date of the Company Balance Sheet.
Exchange gains and losses on loans and on shortterm foreign currency borrowings and deposits are included within net interest payable.
Exchange differences on all other transactions except relevant foreign currency loans are taken to operating profit.
Taxation
The charge for taxation is based on the result for the year and takes into account taxation deferred because of timing differences between the treatment of certain items for taxation and for accounting purposes.
Full provision is made for the effects of these differences.
Deferred tax assets are recognised where it is more likely than not that the amount will be realised in the future.
These estimates require judgements to be made including the forecast of future taxable income.
Deferred tax balances are not discounted.
Accruals for tax contingencies require management to make judgements and estimates in relation to tax audit issues.
Tax benefits are not recognised unless the tax positions will probably be sustained.
Once considered to be probable management reviews each material tax benefit to assess whether a provision should be taken against full recognition of that benefit on the basis of potential settlement through negotiation andor litigation.
Any recorded exposure to interest on tax liabilities is provided for in the tax charge.
All provisions are included in creditors due within one year.
Investments
Fixed asset investments including investments in subsidiaries are stated at cost and reviewed for impairment if there are indications that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Sharebased payments The issuance by the Company to employees of its subsidiaries of a grant over the Companys options represents additional capital contributions by the Company to its subsidiaries.
An additional investment in subsidiaries results in a corresponding increase in shareholders equity.
The additional capital contribution is based on the fair value of the grant issued allocated over the underlying grants vesting period.
Financial instruments Loans and other receivables are held at amortised cost.
Longterm loans payable are held at amortised cost.
Litigation
Through the normal course of business the AstraZeneca Group is involved in legal disputes the settlement of which may involve cost to the Company.
Provision is made where an adverse outcome is probable and associated costs can be estimated reliably.
In other cases appropriate descriptions are included.
Company Accounting Policies Financial Statements  Notes to the Company Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 195 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 1 Fixed asset investments Investments in subsidiaries
Loans
Total
Cost and net book value at 1 January 2012 16427 6994 23421 Additions 1980 1980 Impairment 21  21 Capital contribution 79  79 Exchange 4545 Amortisation 33 Cost and net book value at 31 December 2012 16327 9022 25349 During the year management conducted an impairment review of the Companys investment in AstraZeneca Holding GmbH because of a deterioration in the trading outlook in Germany.
The review indicated that AstraZeneca Holding GmbHs carrying amount exceeded its value by 21m and consequently the carrying amount has been written down by this amount.
The impairment loss has been recognised in operating costs within the profit and loss account.
A list of principal subsidiaries is included on page 191.
2 Nontrade creditors Amounts due within one year Shortterm borrowings unsecured 792 14 Other creditors 158 170 Amounts owed to Group undertakings 6 3033 956 3217 3 Loans
Amounts due within one year Interestbearing loans and borrowings unsecured 5.4% Callable bond US dollars 2012  1749 Amounts due after more than one year Amounts owed to subsidiaries unsecured 7.2% Loan US dollars telInterestbearing loans and borrowings unsecured 5.4% Callable bond US dollars tel5.125% Noncallable bond euros tel5.9% Callable bond US dollars 2017 1745 1744 1.95% Callable bond US dollars 2019 995 5.75% Noncallable bond pounds sterling tel6.45% Callable bond US dollars 2037 2717 2716 4% Callable bond US dollars 2042 985 8742 6714 Loans or instalments thereof are repayable After five years from balance sheet date 5541 5279 From two to five years 2735 1718 From one to two years 749 Within one year  1749 Total unsecured 9025 8746 All loans are at fixed interest rates.
Accordingly the fair values of the loans will change as market rates change.
However since the loans are held at amortised cost changes in interest rates and the credit rating of the Company do not have any effect on the Companys net assets.
Notes to the Company Financial Statements Financial Statements  Notes to the Company Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 196 4 Reserves
Capital redemption reserve
Profit and loss account
Total
At beginning of year 3078 139 2983 6873 13073 19476 Profit for the year    14467 14467 2961 Dividends  3619 3619 3752 Amortisation of loss on cash flow hedge  1 1 2 Sharebased payments  79  79 37 Share repurchases  14  2635 2621 5983 Issue of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares 426    426 406 At end of year 3504 153 2904 15087 21648 13073 Distributable reserves at end of year   1841 15087 16928 8714 As permitted by section  of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has not presented its own profit and loss account.
At 31 December 2012 15087m 2011 6873m of the profit and loss account reserve was available for distribution.
Included
Included within other reserves at 31 December 2012 is 1063m 2011 1142m in respect of cumulative sharebased payment awards.
These amounts are not available for distribution.
5 Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds At beginning of year 13396 19828 Net profit for the financial year 14467 2961 Dividends 3619 3752 Amortisation of loss on cash flow hedge 1 2 Sharebased payments 79 37 Issue of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares 429 409 Repurchase of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares 2635 6015 Net increasedecrease in shareholders funds 8564 6432 Shareholders funds at end of year 21960 13396 Details of dividends paid and payable to shareholders are given in Note 21 to the Group Financial Statements.
6 Share capital Allotted calledup and fully paid Issued Ordinary Shares 0.25 each 312 323 Redeemable Preference Shares 1 each  50000 The Redeemable Preference Shares carry limited class voting rights and no dividend rights.
This class of shares is capable of redemption at par at the option of the Company on the giving of seven days written notice to the registered holder of the shares.
The movements in share capital during the year can be summarised as follows
At 1 January 2012 1292355052 323 Issues of shares 12241784 3 Repurchase of shares 57817288 14 At 31 December 2012 1246779548 312 Share repurchases During the year the Company repurchased 57 .8m Ordinary Shares at an average price of 2879 pence per share 2011 127 .4m Ordinary Shares at an average price of 2932 pence per share.
Share schemes A total of 12.2m Ordinary Shares were issued during the year in respect of share schemes 2011 10.7m Ordinary Shares.
Details of movements in the number of Ordinary Shares under option are shown in Note 24 to the Group Financial Statements details of options granted to Directors are shown in the Directors Remuneration Report.
Shares held by subsidiaries No shares in the Company are held by subsidiaries.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 197 Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Overview 7 Litigation and environmental liabilities In addition to those matters disclosed below there are other cases where the Company is named as a party to legal proceedings.
These include the Seroquel IR product liability litigation and the Nexium product liability litigation each of which are described more fully in Note 25 to the Group Financial Statements.
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act In connection with an investigation into Foreign Corrupt Practices Act issues in the pharmaceutical industry AstraZeneca has received inquiries from the US Department of Justice and the SEC regarding among other things sales practices internal controls certain distributors and interactions with healthcare providers and other government officials in several countries.
AstraZeneca is cooperating with these inquiries.
AstraZeneca is investigating indications of inappropriate conduct in certain countries including China.
Resolution of this matter could involve the payment of fines andor other remedies.
Dutch National Competition Authority investigation In the Dutch National Competition Authority NMa investigation into alleged abuse of a dominant position the investigation team issued a report alleging foreclosure of generic versions of certain proton pump inhibitors other than esomeprazole.
The file has now been passed to the Legal Department of the NMa.
AstraZeneca completed its defence in April 2012 and awaits a decision by the Board of the NMa later in 2013.
Other
The Company has guaranteed the external borrowing of a subsidiary in the amount of 288m.
8 Statutory and other information The Directors were paid by another Group company in 2012 and 2011.
Financial Statements  Group Financial Record AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 198 For the year ended 31 December Revenue and profits Revenue 31601 32804 33269 33591 27973 Cost of sales 6598 5775 6389 6026 5393 Distribution costs 291 298 335 346 320 Research and development expense 5179 4409 5318 5523 5243 Selling general and administrative costs 10913 11332 10445 11161 9839 Profit on disposal of subsidiary    1483 Other operating income and expense 52tel970 Operating profit 9144 11543 11494 12795 8148 Finance income 85tel528 Finance expense 1317 1198 1033 980 958 Profit before tax 8681 10807 10977 12367 7718 Taxation 2551 3263 2896 2351 1391 Profit for the period 6130 7544 8081 10016 6327 Other comprehensive income for the period net of tax 1906 54 25 546 78 Total comprehensive income for the period 4224 7490 8106 9470 6405 Profit attributable to Equity holders of the Company 6101 7521 8053 9983 6297 Noncontrolling interests Earnings per share Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share basic 4.20 5.19 5.60 7.33 4.99 Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share diluted 4.20 5.19 5.57 7.30 4.98 Return on revenues Operating profit as a percentage of revenues 28.9% 35.2% 34.5% 38.1% 29.1% Ratio of earnings to fixed charges 13.5 19.9 24.0 28.5 19.9 At 31 December Statement of Financial Position Property plant and equipment goodwill and intangible assets 29240 29422 28986 27267 32435 Other investments and noncurrent receivables 60tel940 Deferred tax assets 1236 1292 1475 1514 1111 Current assets 15869 23760 25131 23506 19048 Total assets 46950 54920 56127 52830 53534 Current liabilities 13415 17 640 16787 15752 13903 Noncurrent liabilities 17475 16459 15930 13606 15679 Net assets 16060 20821 23410 23472 23952 Share capital 36tel312 Reserves attributable to equity holders 15550 20297 22861 22923 23425 Noncontrolling interests 14tel215 Total equity and reserves 16060 20821 23410 23472 23952 For the year ended 31 December Cash flows Net cash inflowoutflow from Operating activities 8742 11739 10680 7821 6948 Investing activities 3881 2444 2226 2022 1859 Financing activities 6377 3661 7334 9321 4923 1516 5634 1120 3522 166 Investing activities and Financing activities were restated in 2011 to reclassify cash paid in hedge contracts relating to dividend payments from Investing activities to Financing activities.
For the purpose of computing the ratio of earnings to fixed charges earnings consist of the income from continuing ordinary activities before taxation of Group companies and income received from companies owned 50% or less plus fixed charges.
Fixed charges consist of interest on all indebtedness amortisation of debt discount and expense and that portion of rental expense representative of the interest factor.
Group Financial Record Overview Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 199 Additional Information  Development Pipeline Development Pipeline as at 31 December 2012 Throughout the development process we strive to obtain patent protection consistent with our patent process as described in the Intellectual Property section from page 35.
However until marketing approval in individual countries is obtained it is not possible to accurately predict the maximum period of product protection available from any such patents.
While the most signicant uncertainties for development pipeline products progressing to launch are meeting development targets and obtaining regulatory marketing approvals as detailed in the Risk section from page 74 the date and language of any actual marketing approval will crucially determine the length of Patent Term Extension and the full range if any of pending patents that will protect the marketed product.
Further details of possible periods of patent RDP and related IP protections which may protect pipeline products once marketed are included from page 35.
Line Extensions Compound Mechanism Area Under Investigation Phase
Commenced
Phase
Estimated Filing US EU Japan China
Axanum proton pump inhibitor low dose aspirin FDC low dose aspirin associated peptic ulcer in highrisk CV patients III Withdrawn Launched 2016 BrilintaBrilique EUCLID ADP receptor antagonist outcomes study in patients with peripheral artery disease III 4Qtel 2016 2017
PEGASUSTIMI 54 ADP receptor antagonist outcomes study in patients with prior myocardial infarction III 4Qtel 2015 2017 Bydureon EXSCEL GLP1 receptor agonist outcomes study III 2Q 2010 2018 Bydureon Dual Chamber Pen GLP1 receptor agonist diabetes III 3Q 2013 Forxiga dapagliozin metformin FDC SGLT2 inhibitor  metformin
Forxiga dapagliozin SGLT2 inhibitor diabetes  add on to DPP4 III 1Q 2010 Filed Forxiga dapagliozin SGLT2 inhibitor diabetes  add on to insulin and add on to metformin longterm data III 2Q 2008 Filed Forxiga dapagliozin SGLT2 inhibitor diabetes  in patients with high CV risk  Study 18 and 19 longterm data III 1Q 2010 1H 2014 Forxiga dapagliozin SGLT2 inhibitor diabetes  triple therapy dapametSU III 1Q 2011 1Q 2013 Kombiglyze XR Komboglyze FDC DPP4 inhibitor  metformin
SaxaDapa FDC DPP4 inhibitorSGLT2 inhibitor diabetes III 2Qtel Onglyza SAVORTIMI 53 DPP4 inhibitor outcomes study III 2Q 2010 4Q 2013 4Q 2013 2H 2014
Entocort glucocorticoid steroid Crohns diseaseulcerative colitis III Launched Launched 2015 Nexium proton pump inhibitor peptic ulcer bleeding III Filed Launched na Launched
Diprivan sedative and anaesthetic conscious sedation III Launched 1H 2014 Launched
Faslodex oestrogen receptor antagonist 1 st line advanced breast cancer III 4Qtel 2016 2016 Iressa EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment beyond progression III 1Qtel 2015 Respiratory and Inammation Symbicort inhaled steroidlongacting beta 2agonist Breath Actuated Inhaler asthmaCOPD III 4Q 2011 1H 2014 Partnered product.
Kombiglyze XR in the US Komboglyze FDC in the EU.
CRL received from FDA in 2011.
AstraZeneca response submitted to FDA in December 2012.
Excludes Symbicort pMDI post marketing LABA in December.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 200 Additional Information  Development Pipeline as at 31 December 2012
Phase IIIRegistration Compound Mechanism Area Under Investigation Phase
Commenced
Phase
Estimated Filing US EU Japan China
BrilintaBrilique ADP receptor antagonist arterial thrombosis III Launched Launched 2Q 2013 Approved Forxiga dapagliozin SGLT2 inhibitor diabetes III Filed Launched 1Q 2013 1Q 2013 metreleptin leptin analogue lipodystrophy III 2Q 2013 na
CAZ AVI CAZ104 beta lactamase inhibitor cephalosporin serious infections III 1Q 2012 na 2H 2014 2H 2014 2016 QLAIV Flu Vaccination live attenuated intranasal inuenza virus vaccine quadrivalent seasonal inuenza III Approved Filed
Neuroscience naloxegol NKTR118 oral peripherallyacting muopioid receptor antagonist opioidinduced constipation III 2Q 2011 3Q 2013 3Q 2013
Caprelsa VEGFREGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor with RET kinase activity medullary thyroid cancer III Launched Launched 2015 Filed Respiratory and Inammation brodalumab antiIL 17R MAb psoriasis III 3Qtel fostamatinib spleen tyrosine kinase SYK inhibitor rheumatoid arthritis III 3Q 2010 4Q 2013 4Q 2013 lesinurad selective inhibitor of URAT1 chronic management of hyperuricaemia in patients with gout III 4Q 2011 1H 2014 1Htel Partnered product.
CRL received in January 2012. sBLA in US MAA in EU.
NCEs
Phases I and II Compound Mechanism Area Under Investigation Phase
Commenced
Phase
Estimated Filing US EU Japan China
AZD1722
NHE3 inhibitor end stage renal diseasechronic kidney disorder I4Q 2010
Infection
AZD5847 oxazolidinone antibacterial inhibitor tuberculosis II 4Q 2012
MRSA II 4Q 2010 ATM AVI BLBLI targeted serious bacterial infections I4Q 2012 MEDI550 pandemic inuenza virus vaccine pandemic inuenza prophylaxis I 2Q 2006 MEDI557 antiRSV MAb  extended halflife RSV prevention in highrisk adults COPDCHFother I3Q 2007 MEDI559 paediatric RSV vaccine RSV prophylaxis I 4Q 2008
AZD3241 myeloperoxidase MPO inhibitor Parkinsons disease II 2Q 2012
Alzheimers disease II 3Q 2007 AZD5213 histamine3 receptor antagonist Alzheimers disease II 2Q 2012 AZD6765 NMDA receptor antagonist major depressive disorder II 3Q 2007
Alzheimers disease I 4Q 2008
MEDI5117 antiIL6 MAb rheumatoid arthritis I 2Q 2012 Overview Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 201
Phases I and II continued Compound Mechanism Area Under Investigation Phase
Commenced
Phase
Estimated Filing US EU Japan China
AZD4547 FGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor solid tumours II 4Q 2011 fostamatinib spleen tyrosine kinase SYK inhibitor haematological malignancies II 1Q 2012
MEDI573 antiIGF MAb metastatic breast cancer II 4Q 2011
II 1Q 2012 selumetinib
ARRY
MEK inhibitor solid tumours II 4Q 2006 tremelimumab antiCTLA4 MAb solid tumours II 3Q 2004 AZD1208 PIM kinase inhibitor haematological malignancies I 1Q 2012 AZD2014 TOR kinase inhibitor solid tumours I 1Q 2010
AKT inhibitor solid tumours I 4Q 2010
ARRY  MEK inhibitor solid tumours I 1Q 2007 AZD9150 STAT3 inhibitor haematological malignancies I 1Q 2012
MEDI3617 antiANG2 MAb solid tumours I 4Q 2010
MEDI565 antiCEA BiTE solid tumours I 1Q 2011
MET inhibitor solid tumours I 1Q 2012 Respiratory and Inammation
MABA COPD II 2Q 2012 AZD5069 CXCR2 asthma II 4Q 2010
MEDI546 antiIFNalphaR MAb SLE II 1Q 2012
MEDI8968 antiIL 1R MAb COPD II 4Q 2011 sifalimumab antiIFNalpha MAb SLE II 3Q 2008 tralokinumab antiIL 13 MAb asthmaIPF II 1Q 2008
AZD7594 inhaled SGRM COPD I 4Q 2012
MEDI4212 antiIgE MAb asthma I 1Q 2012
MEDI5872 antiB7RP1 MAb SLE I 4Q 2008 MEDI7814 antiC5C5a MAb COPD I 1Q 2012
RDEA3170 selective inhibitor of URAT1 chronic management of hyperuricaemia in patients with gout I3Q 2011 Partnered product.
Comments
Submission dates shown for assets in Phase III and beyond.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 202 Additional Information  Development Pipeline as at 31 December 2012 Discontinued Projects between 31 December 2011 and 31 December 2012 NCELine Extension Compound Reason for Discontinuation Area Under Investigation
NCE AZD2820 SafetyEfcacy obesity NCE AZD4017 SafetyEfcacy glaucoma NCE AZD2927 SafetyEfcacy atrial brillation
NCE AZD9773 SafetyEfcacy severe sepsis NCE AZD5099 SafetyEfcacy serious infections NCE MEDI534 SafetyEfcacy RSCPIV prophylaxis
NCE AZD2423 SafetyEfcacy chronic neuropathic pain NCE AZD3839 SafetyEfcacy Alzheimers disease NCE MEDI578 Regulatory OA pain NCE TC5214 SafetyEfcacy major depressive disorder monotherapy NCE TC5214 SafetyEfcacy major depressive disorder adjunct
NCE AZD1480 SafetyEfcacy solid tumours NCE AZD3514 SafetyEfcacy prostate cancer NCE AZD8931 SafetyEfcacy breast cancer chemo. combi.
NCE selumetinib AZD6244
Study completed solid tumours Respiratory and Inammation NCE AZD8683 SafetyEfcacy COPD NCE MEDI570 SafetyEfcacy SLE NCE AZD1981 SafetyEfcacy asthmaCOPD NCE AZD2423 SafetyEfcacy COPD Partnered product.
Completed Projects Compound Mechanism Area Under Investigation Launch Status US EU Japan China
Crestor statin outcomes in subjects with elevated CRP Launched Launched Launched
Nexium proton pump inhibitor GERD Launched Launched Launched Launched
FluMistFluenz live attenuated intranasal inuenza virus vaccine inuenza Launched Launched
EMLA local anaesthetic topical anaesthesia Launched Launched
Iressa EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor 1 st line EGFR mut NSCLC Launched Launched Launched Faslodex oestrogen receptor antagonist high dose 500mg 2 nd line advanced breast cancer Launched Launched Launched
Launched
Respiratory and Inammation Oxis longacting beta 2agonist COPD Launched Launched Launched Symbicort inhaled steroidlongacting beta 2agonist COPD Launched Launched Launched Launched Symbicort inhaled steroidlongacting beta 2agonist SMART Launched Launched Launched Partnered product.
Comments
As disclosure of compound information is balanced by the business need to maintain condentiality information in relation to some compounds listed here has not been disclosed at this time.
Overview Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 203 Additional Information  Shareholder Information AstraZeneca PLC share listings and pricestel 2011 2012 Ordinary Shares in issue  millions At year end 1447 1451 1409 1292 1247 Weighted average for year 1453 1448 1438 1361 1261 Stock market price  per Ordinary Share Highest pencetel 3194 3111.5 Lowest pence 17tel 2543.5 2591 At year end pence 2807 2910.5tel.5 Percentage analysis of issued share capital at 31 December By size of account Number of Ordinary Shares % % % % % 1001  5000 1.2 1.
5001  10000 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 10001  50000 1.0 1.
Over 1000000 Includes Euroclear and ADR holdings.
At 31 December 2012 the Company had 111111 registered holders of 1246779548 Ordinary Shares.
There were 122617 holders of Ordinary Shares held under the Euroclear Services Agreement representing 12.9% of the issued share capital of the Company and approximately 235000 holders of ADRs representing 11.0% of the issued share capital of the Company.
The ADRs each of which is equivalent to one Ordinary Share are issued by JPMorgan Chase Bank JPMorgan.
During 2012 under AstraZenecas share repurchase programme which was introduced in 1999 57 .8 million Ordinary Shares were repurchased and subsequently cancelled at a total cost of 2635 million representing 4.6% of the total issued share capital of the Company at 31 December 2012.
The average price paid per Ordinary Share in 2012 was 2879 pence.
This brings the total number of Ordinary Shares repurchased to date since the beginning of the repurchase programme in 1999 to 615.2 million Ordinary Shares at an average price of 2777 pence per Ordinary Share for a consideration including expenses of 29352 million.
The excess of the consideration over the nominal value was charged against the prot and loss account reserve.
Ordinary Shares issued in respect of share schemes in 2012 totalled 12.2 million.
The Company suspended its share repurchase programme effective 1 October.
In 1999 in connection with the merger between Astra and Zeneca through which the Company was formed the Companys share capital was redenominated in US dollars.
On 6 April 1999 Zeneca shares were cancelled and US dollar shares issued credited as fully paid on the basis of one dollar share for each Zeneca share then held.
This was achieved by a reduction of capital under section 135 of the Companies Act 1985.
Upon the reduction of capital becoming effective all issued and unissued Zeneca shares were cancelled and the sum arising as a result of the share cancellation credited to a special reserve which was converted into US dollars at the rate of exchange prevailing on the record date.
This US dollar reserve was then applied in paying up at par newly created US dollar shares.
At the same time as the US dollar shares were issued the Company issued 50000 Redeemable Preference Shares for cash at par.
The Redeemable Preference Shares carry limited class voting rights no dividend rights and are capable of redemption at par at the option of the Company on the giving of seven days written notice to the registered holder of the Redeemable Preference Shares.
A total of 826 million Ordinary Shares were issued to Astra shareholders who accepted the merger offer before the nal closing date 21 May 1999.
The Company received acceptances from Astra shareholders representing 99.6% of Astras shares and the remaining 0.4% was acquired in 2000 for cash.
Shareholder Information AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 204 Additional Information  Shareholder Information Since April 1999 following the merger of Astra and Zeneca the principal markets for trading in the shares of the Company are the London Stock Exchange LSE the Stockholm Stock Exchange SSE and the New York Stock Exchange NYSE.
The table below sets out for 2011 and 2012 the reported high and low share prices of the Company on the following bases For shares listed on the LSE the reported high and low middle market closing quotations are derived from the Daily Ofcial List.
For shares listed on the SSE the high and low closing sales prices are as stated in the Ofcial List.
For ADSs listed on the NYSE the reported high and low sales prices are as reported by Dow Jones ADR quotations.
Ordinary LSE Ordinary SSE ADS High pence Low pence High SEK Low SEK High US Low US 2011  Quarter 1 3073.5 2801.5 320.6 289.0 49.38 45.40 Quarter 2 3194.0 2895.0 328.5 294.2 52.40 46.60 Quarter 3 3166.5 2543.5 324.5 269.3 51.08 40.95 Quarter 4 3080.5 2731.5 319.0 293.7 49.89 42.53 2012  Quarter 1 3111.5 2778.5 329.5 294.5 48.58 44.18 Quarter 2 2867.0 2591.0 309.3 286.2 46.22 40.03 Quarter 3 3096.0 2882.0 326.4 307.3 48.36 45.01 Quarter 4 3042.5 2792.5 326.3 300.8 48.90 44.34 July 3002.5 2882.0 326.4 311.8 47.34 45.01 August 3096.0 2936.5 324.8 309.0 48.21 46.79 September 2976.0 2888.5 316.9 307.3 48.36 46.34 October 2951.0 2860.0 313.2 307.0 47.63 45.82 November 2966.5 2792.5 316.7 300.8 47.55 44.34 December 3042.5 2909.5 326.3 306.4 48.90 46.88 Major shareholdings At 31 January 2013 the following had disclosed an interest in the issued Ordinary Share capital of the Company in accordance with the requirements of rule 5.1.2 of the UK Listing Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rules
Number of shares Date of disclosure to
Percentage of issued share capital BlackRock Inc.
100885181 8 December 2009 8.08 Invesco Limited 72776277 6 October 2009 5.83 Axa SA 56991117 3 February 2009 4.57 Investor AB 51587810 2 February 2012 4.13 Legal and General Investment Management Limited 57675232 5 August 2010 4.62 Since the date of disclosure to the Company the interest of any person listed above in Ordinary Shares may have increased or decreased.
No requirement to notify the Company of any increase or decrease would have arisen unless the holding moved up or down through a whole number percentage level.
The percentage level may increase on the cancellation of shares following a repurchase of shares under the Companys share repurchase programme or decrease on the issue of new shares under any of the Companys share plans.
So far as the Company is aware no other person held a notiable interest in shares comprising 3% or more of the issued Ordinary Share capital of the Company.
Changes in the percentage ownership held by major shareholders during the past three years are set out below.
Major shareholders do not have different voting rights.
Percentage of issued share capital Shareholder 31 Jan 2013 2 Feb 2012 27 Jan 2011 28 Jan 2010 BlackRock Inc.
Invesco Limited 5.83 5.67 5.18 5.01 Investor AB 4.13 4.02 3.67 3.55 Legal and General Investment Management Limited 4.62 4.50 4.10 4.64 ADSs evidenced by ADRs issued by JPMorgan as depositary are listed on the NYSE.
At 31 January 2013 the proportion of Ordinary Shares represented by ADSs was 11.17% of the Ordinary Shares outstanding.
Number of registered holders of Ordinary Shares at 31 January 2013 In the US 743 Total 110421 Number of record holders of ADRs at 31 January 2013 In the US 2103 Total 2122 So far as the Company is aware it is neither directly nor indirectly owned or controlled by one or more corporations or by any government.
Overview Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 205 At 31 January 2013 the total amount of the Companys voting securities owned by Directors and ofcers of the Company was Title of class
Percentage of class Ordinary Shares 274159 0.02 The Company does not know of any arrangements the operation of which might result in a change in the control of the Company.
Related party transactions During the period 1 January 2013 to 31 January 2013 there were no transactions loans or proposed transactions between the Company and any related parties which were material to either the Company or the related party or which were unusual in their nature or conditions see also Note 27 to the Financial Statements on page 190.
Options to purchase securities from registrant or subsidiaries a At 31 January 2013 options outstanding to subscribe for Ordinary Shares were Number of shares
19572351 1882  3335 2013  2019 The weighted average subscription price of options outstanding at 31 January 2013 was 2542 pence.
All options were granted under Company employee share schemes.
Number of shares
299060 1882  3335 2014  2019 Included in paragraph b are options granted to individually named Directors.
Details of these option holdings at 31 December 2012 are shown in the Share option plans table on page 137 .
During the period 1 January 2013 to 31 January 2013 no Director exercised any options.
Dividend payments For Ordinary Shares listed on the LSE and the SSE and ADRs listed on the NYSE the record date for the second interim dividend for 2012 payable on 18 March 2013 is 15 February 2013 and the exdividend date is 13 February 2013.
The record date for the rst interim dividend for 2013 payable on 16 September 2013 is 16 August 2013.
Future dividends will normally be paid as follows First interim Announced in July and paid in September.
Second interim Announced in January and paid in March.
Shareview
The Companys shareholders with internet access may visit the websitesite and register their details to create a portfolio.
Shareview is a free and secure online service from the Companys registrars Equiniti Limited which gives access to shareholdings including balance movements indicative share prices and information about recent dividends.
ShareGift
The Company welcomes and values all of its shareholders no matter how many or how few shares they own.
However shareholders who have only a small number of shares whose value makes it uneconomic to sell them either now or at some stage in the future may wish to consider donating them to charity through ShareGift an independent charity share donation scheme.
One feature of the scheme is that there is no gain or loss for UK capital gains tax purposes on gifts of shares through ShareGift and it may now also be possible to obtain UK income tax relief on the donation.
Further information about ShareGift can be found on its website sharegift. contacting ShareGift ontel or at 17 Carlton House Terrace London SW1Y 5AH.
ShareGift is administered by The Orr Mackintosh Foundation registered charity number .
More information about the UK tax position on gifts of shares to ShareGift can be obtained from HM Revenue and Customs on their website hmrc.
The Unclaimed Assets Register The Company supplies unclaimed dividend data to the Unclaimed Assets Register UAR which provides investors who have lost track of shareholdings with an opportunity to search the UARs database of unclaimed nancial assets on payment of a small xed fee.
The UAR donates part of the search fee to charity.
The UAR can be contacted ontel or at PO Box 9501 Nottingham NG80 1WD.
Results
Unaudited trading results of AstraZeneca in respect of the rst three months of 2013 will be published on 25 April 2013 and results in respect of the rst six months of 2013 will be published on 1 August 2013.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 206 Additional Information  Shareholder Information Documents on display The Articles and other documents concerning the Company which are referred to in this Annual Report may be inspected at the Companys registered ofce at 2 Kingdom Street London W2 6BD.
Taxation for US residents The following summary of material UK and US federal income tax consequences of ownership of Ordinary Shares or ADRs held as capital assets by the US resident holders described below is based on current UK and US federal income tax law including the USUK double taxation convention relating to income and capital gains which entered into force on 31 March 2003 the Convention.
This summary does not describe all of the tax consequences that may be relevant in light of the US resident holders particular circumstances and tax consequences applicable to US resident holders subject to special rules such as certain nancial institutions entities treated as partnerships for US federal income tax purposes persons whose functional currency for US federal income tax purposes is not the US dollar taxexempt entities or persons holding Ordinary Shares or ADRs in connection with a trade or business conducted outside of the US.
US resident holders are urged to consult their tax advisers regarding the UK and US federal income tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of Ordinary Shares or ADRs in their particular circumstances.
This summary is based in part on representations of JPMorgan as depositary for ADRs and assumes that each obligation in the deposit agreement among the Company JPMorgan and the holders from time to time of ADRs and any related agreements will be performed in accordance with its terms.
The US Treasury has expressed concerns that parties to whom American depository shares are released before shares are delivered to the depositary prerelease or intermediaries in the chain of ownership between holders and the issuer of the security underlying the American depository shares may be taking actions that are inconsistent with the claiming by US holders of American depository shares of foreign tax credits for US federal income tax purposes.
Such actions would also be inconsistent with the claiming of the reduced tax rates described below applicable to dividends received by certain noncorporate US resident holders.
Accordingly the availability of the reduced tax rates for dividends received by certain noncorporate US resident holders could be affected by actions that may be taken by parties to whom ADRs are prereleased.
For the purposes of this summary the term US resident holder means a benecial owner of Ordinary Shares or ADRs that is for US federal income tax purposes a citizen or resident of the US a corporation or other entity taxable as a corporation created or organised in or under the laws of the US any state in the US or the District of Columbia or an estate or trust the income of which is subject to US federal income taxation regardless of its source.
This summary assumes that we are not and will not become a passive foreign investment company as discussed below.
UK and US income taxation of dividends The UK does not currently impose a withholding tax on dividends paid by a UK company such as the Company.
For US federal income tax purposes distributions paid by the Company to a US resident holder are included in gross income as foreign source ordinary dividend income to the extent paid out of the Companys current or accumulated earnings and prots calculated in accordance with US federal income tax principles.
Because the Company does not maintain calculations of its earning and prots under US federal income tax principles it is expected that distributions generally will be reported to US resident holders as dividends.
The amount of the dividend will be the US dollar amount received by the depositary for US resident holders of ADRs or in the case of Ordinary Shares the US dollar value of the pounds sterling payments made determined at the spot pound sterlingUS dollar rate on the date the dividend is received by the US resident holders regardless of whether the dividend is converted into US dollars and it will not be eligible for the dividends received deduction generally available to US corporations.
If the dividend is converted into US dollars on the date of receipt US resident holders of Ordinary Shares generally should not be required to recognise foreign currency gains or losses in respect of the dividend income.
They may have foreign currency gain or loss if the amount of such dividend is converted into US dollars after the date of its receipt.
Subject to applicable limitations and the discussion above regarding concerns expressed by the US Treasury dividends received by certain noncorporate US resident holders of Ordinary Shares or ADRs may be taxable at favourable US federal income tax rates.
US resident holders should consult their own tax advisers to determine whether they are subject to any special rules which may limit their ability to be taxed at this favourable rate.
Taxation on capital gains Under present UK law individuals who are neither resident nor ordinarily resident in the UK and companies which are not resident in the UK will not be liable for UK tax on capital gains made on the disposal of their Ordinary Shares or ADRs unless such Ordinary Shares or ADRs are held in connection with a trade profession or vocation carried on in the UK through a branch or agency or other permanent establishment.
A US resident holder will generally recognise US source capital gains or losses for US federal income tax purposes on the sale or exchange of Ordinary Shares or ADRs in an amount equal to the difference between the US dollar amount realised and such holders US dollar tax basis in the Ordinary Shares or ADRs.
US resident holders should consult their own tax advisers about the treatment of capital gains which may be taxed at lower rates than ordinary income for noncorporate US resident holders and capital losses the deductibility of which may be limited.
Passive Foreign Investment Company PFIC rules We believe that we were not a PFIC for US federal income tax purposes for the year ended 31 December 2012.
However since PFIC status depends on the composition of our income and assets and the market value of our assets including among others less than 25% owned equity investments from time to time there can be no assurance that we will not be considered a PFIC for any taxable year.
If we were treated as a PFIC for any taxable year during which Ordinary Shares or ADRs were held certain adverse tax consequences could apply to US resident holders.
Overview Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 207 Information reporting and backup withholding Payments of dividends and sales proceeds that are made within the US or through certain USrelated nancial intermediaries may be subject to information reporting and backup withholding unless i the US resident holder is a corporation or other exempt recipient or ii in the case of backup withholding the US resident holder provides a correct taxpayer identication number and certies that it is not subject to backup withholding.
The amount of any backup withholding from a payment to a US resident holder will be allowed as a credit against the holders US federal income tax liability and may entitle the holder to a refund provided that the required information is supplied to the Internal Revenue Service IRS on time.
Certain US resident holders who are individuals and under proposed US Treasury regulations certain entities may be required to report information relating to securities issued by nonUS persons or foreign accounts through which the securities are held generally on IRS Form 8938 subject to certain exceptions including an exception for securities held in accounts maintained by US nancial institutions.
US resident holders should consult their tax advisers regarding their reporting obligations with respect to the Ordinary Shares or ADRs.
UK inheritance tax Under the current Double Taxation Estates Convention the Estate Tax Convention between the US and the UK Ordinary Shares or ADRs held by an individual shareholder who is domiciled for the purposes of the Estate Tax Convention in the US and is not for the purposes of the Estate Tax Convention a national of the UK will generally not be subject to UK inheritance tax on the individuals death or on a chargeable gift of the Ordinary Shares or ADRs during the individuals lifetime provided that any applicable US federal gift or estate tax liability is paid unless the Ordinary Shares or ADRs are part of the business property of a permanent establishment of the individual in the UK or in the case of a shareholder who performs independent personal services pertain to a xed base situated in the UK.
Where the Ordinary Shares or ADRs have been placed in trust by a settlor who at the time of settlement was a US domiciled shareholder the Ordinary Shares or ADRs will generally not be subject to UK inheritance tax unless the settlor at the time of settlement was a UK national or the Ordinary Shares or ADRs are part of the business property of a permanent establishment of the individual in the UK or in the case of a shareholder who performs independent personal services pertain to a xed base situated in the UK.
In the exceptional case where the Ordinary Shares or ADRs are subject to both UK inheritance tax and US federal gift or estate tax the Estate Tax Convention generally provides for double taxation to be relieved by means of credit relief.
UK stamp duty reserve tax and stamp duty A charge to UK stamp duty or UK stamp duty reserve tax SDRT may arise on the deposit of Ordinary Shares in connection with the creation of ADRs.
The rate of stamp duty or SDRT will generally be 1.5% of the value of the consideration or in some circumstances the value of the Ordinary Shares.
However following a recent ruling in the UK there is no 1.5% SDRT charge on the issue of Ordinary Shares or where it is integral to the raising of new capital the transfer of Ordinary Shares into the ADR arrangement.
No UK stamp duty will be payable on the acquisition or transfer of existing ADRs provided that any instrument of transfer or written agreement to transfer is executed outside the UK and remains at all times outside the UK.
An agreement for the transfer of ADRs will not give rise to a liability for SDRT.
A transfer of or an agreement to transfer Ordinary Shares will generally be subject to UK stamp duty or SDRT at 0.5% of the amount or value of any consideration provided in the case of stamp duty it is rounded to the nearest 5.
Transfers of Ordinary Shares into CREST will generally not be subject to stamp duty or SDRT unless such a transfer is made for a consideration in money or moneys worth in which case a liability to SDRT will arise usually at the rate of 0.5% of the value of the consideration.
Paperless transfers of Ordinary Shares within CREST are generally liable to SDRT at the rate of 0.5% of the value of the consideration.
CREST is obliged to collect SDRT from the purchaser on relevant transactions settled within the system.
Exchange controls and other limitations affecting security holders There are no governmental laws decrees or regulations in the UK restricting the import or export of capital or affecting the remittance of dividends interest or other payments to nonresident holders of Ordinary Shares or ADRs.
There are no limitations under English law or the Articles on the right of nonresident or foreign owners to be the registered holders of or to exercise voting rights in relation to Ordinary Shares or ADRs or to be registered holders of notes or debentures of Zeneca Wilmington Inc. or the Company.
Exchange rates The following information relating to average and spot exchange rates used by AstraZeneca is provided for convenience SEKUS USGBP Average rates statement of comprehensive income statement of cash ows 2010 7.2504 1.5453 2011 6.5059 1.5996 2012 6.7782 1.5834 End of year spot rates statement of nancial position 2010 6.7511 1.5422 2011 6.9050 1.5443 2012 6.5176 1.6171 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 208 Additional Information  Corporate Information History and development of the Company AstraZeneca PLC was incorporated in England and Wales on 17 June 1992 under the Companies Act 1985.
It is a public limited company domiciled in the UK.
The
Companys registered number is and its registered ofce is at 2 Kingdom Street London W2 6BD telephonetel.
From February 1993 until April 1999 the Company was called Zeneca Group PLC.
On 6 April 1999 the Company changed its name to AstraZeneca PLC.
The Company was formed when the pharmaceutical agrochemical and specialty chemical businesses of Imperial Chemical Industries PLC were demerged in 1993.
In 1999 the Company sold the specialty chemical business.
Also in 1999 the Company merged with Astra of Sweden.
In 2000 it demerged the agrochemical business and merged it with the similar agribusiness of Novartis to form a new company called Syngenta AG.
In 2007  the Group acquired MedImmune a biologics and vaccines business based in the US.
The Group owns and operates numerous RandD production and marketing facilities worldwide.
Its corporate ofce is at 2 Kingdom Street London W2 6BD.
Articles
Objects
The Companys objects are unrestricted.
Any amendment to the Articles requires the approval of shareholders by a special resolution at a general meeting of the
Directors
The Board has the authority to manage the business of the Company for example through powers to allot and repurchase its shares subject where required to shareholder resolutions.
Subject to certain exceptions Directors do not have power to vote at Board meetings on matters in which they have a material interest.
The quorum for meetings of the Board is a majority of the full Board of whom at least four must be NonExecutive Directors.
In the absence of a quorum the Directors do not have power to determine compensation arrangements for themselves or any member of the Board.
The Board may exercise all the powers of the Company to borrow money.
Variation of these borrowing powers would require the passing of a special resolution of the Companys shareholders.
All Directors must retire from ofce at the Companys AGM each year and may present themselves for election or reelection.
Directors are not prohibited upon reaching a particular age from submitting themselves for election or reelection.
Within two months of the date of their appointment Directors are required to benecially own Ordinary Shares of an aggregate nominal amount of at least 125 which currently represents 500 shares.
Rights preferences and restrictions attaching to shares As at 31 December 2012 the Company had 1246779548 Ordinary Shares and 50000 Redeemable Preference Shares in issue.
The Ordinary Shares represent 99.98% and the Redeemable Preference Shares represent 0.02% of the Companys total share capital these percentages have been calculated by reference to the closing midpoint USGBP exchange rate on 31 December 2012 as published in the London edition of the Financial Times newspaper.
As agreed by the shareholders at the Companys AGM held on 29 April 2010 the Articles were amended with immediate effect to remove the requirement for the Company to have an authorised share capital the concept of which was abolished under the Companies Act 2006.
Each Ordinary Share carries the right to vote at general meetings of the Company.
The rights and restrictions attaching to the Redeemable Preference Shares differ from those attaching to Ordinary Shares as follows The Redeemable Preference Shares carry no rights to receive dividends.
The holders of Redeemable Preference Shares have no rights to receive notices of attend or vote at general meetings except in certain limited circumstances.
They have one vote for every 50000 Redeemable Preference Shares held.
On a distribution of assets of the Company on a windingup or other return of capital subject to certain exceptions the holders of Redeemable Preference Shares have priority over the holders of Ordinary Shares to receive the capital paid up on those shares.
Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has the right to redeem the Redeemable Preference Shares at any time on giving not less than seven days written notice.
There are no specic restrictions on the transfer of shares in the Company which is governed by the Articles and prevailing legislation.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between holders of shares that may result in restrictions on the transfer of shares or that may result in restrictions on voting rights.
Action necessary to change the rights of shareholders In order to vary the rights attached to any class of shares the consent in writing of the holders of threequarters in nominal value of the issued shares of that class or the sanction of an extraordinary resolution passed at a general meeting of such holders is required.
General meetings AGMs and other general meetings as from time to time may be required where a special resolution is to be passed or a Director is to be appointed require 21 clear days notice to shareholders.
Subject to the Companies Act 2006 other general meetings require 14 clear days notice.
For all general meetings a quorum of two shareholders present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote on the business transacted is required unless each of the two persons present are corporate representatives of the same corporation or each of the two persons present are proxy of the same shareholder.
Shareholders and their duly appointed proxies and corporate representatives are entitled to be admitted to general meetings.
Limitations on the rights to own shares There are no limitations on the rights to own shares.
Property
Substantially all of our properties are held freehold free of material encumbrances and are t for their purpose.
Corporate Information Overview Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 209 Additional Information  Glossary
Market denitions United States of America Other Established Markets Emerging Markets US Western Europe Japan Emerging Europe China Other Emerging ROW Austria Albania Egypt Belgium Canada Belarus Emerging Asia Pacic Gulf States Denmark Bosnia and Herzegovina Bangladesh Israel Finland Other Established ROWBulgaria Cambodia Latin America France Australia Croatia Hong Kong Lebanon Germany New Zealand Czech Republic India Maghreb Greece Estonia Indonesia Saudi Arabia Iceland Georgia Laos South Africa Ireland Hungary Malaysia Italy Kazakhstan Philippines Luxembourg Latvia Singapore Netherlands Lithuania South Korea Norway Macedonia Sri Lanka Portugal Poland Taiwan Spain Romania Thailand Sweden Russia Vietnam Switzerland Serbia and Montenegro UK Slovakia
Turkey
Ukraine
Rest of World means Other Established Markets and Emerging Markets.
Established Markets means the US and Other Established Markets.
Established ROW means Canada Japan and Other Established ROW.
Latin America includes Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Peru and Venezuela.
Gulf States includes Bahrain Dubai Kuwait Oman Qatar and UAE.
Maghreb means Algeria Morocco and Tunisia.
IMS Health IMS Midas Quantum Q3 2012 data is not available or AstraZeneca does not subscribe for IMS Health quarterly data for these countries.
The above table is not an exhaustive list of all the countries in which AstraZeneca operates.
US equivalents Terms used in this Annual Report US equivalent or brief description Accruals Accrued expenses Allotted Issued Calledup share capital Issued share capital Creditors Liabilitiespayables Debtors Receivables and prepaid expenses Earnings Net income Employee share schemes Employee stock benet plans Fixed asset investments Noncurrent investments Freehold Ownership with absolute rights in perpetuity Interest payable Interest expense Loans Longterm debt Prepayments Prepaid expenses Prot Income Prot and loss account Income statementconsolidated statement of comprehensive income Share premium account Premiums paid in excess of par value of Ordinary Shares Shortterm investments Redeemable securities and shortterm deposits AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 210 Additional Information  Glossary
The following abbreviations and expressions have the following meanings when used in this Annual Report Abbott  Abbott Laboratories Inc. to Crestor and Synagis.
Affordable Care Act  the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act which was signed into law on 23 March 2010 as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act which was signed into law on 30 March 2010.
ADR  an American Depositary Receipt evidencing title to an ADS.
ADS  an American Depositary Share representing one underlying Ordinary Share.
AGM  an Annual General Meeting of the Company.
Amgen  Amgen Inc.
Amylin  Amylin Pharmaceuticals LLC formerly Amylin Pharmaceuticals Inc.
ANDA  an abbreviated new drug application which is a marketing approval application for a generic drug submitted to the FDA.
Annual Report  this Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012.
API  active pharmaceutical ingredient.
Ardea  Ardea Biosciences Inc.
Ardelyx  Ardelyx Inc.
Articles  the Articles of Association of the Company.
Astra  Astra AB being the company with whom the Company merged in 1999.
Astra Tech  Astra Tech AB.
AstraZeneca  the Company and its subsidiaries.
AZIP  AstraZeneca Investment Plan. molecules that have a therapeutic effect. come off patent.
BMS  BristolMyers Squibb Company.
Board  the Board of Directors of the Company.
Bureau Veritas  Bureau Veritas UK Limited.
CEO  the Chief Executive Ofcer of the Company.
CER  constant exchange rates.
CFO  the Chief Financial Ofcer of the Company.
CHMP  the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use being a committee of the EMA.
CIS  Commonwealth of Independent States.
Code of Conduct  the Groups Code of Conduct.
Company or Parent Company  AstraZeneca PLC formerly Zeneca Group PLC Zeneca.
Complete Response Letter CRL  a letter issued by the FDA communicating its decision to a drug company that its NDA or biological licensing application is not approvable as submitted.
The submitting drug company is required to respond to the Complete Response Letter if it wishes to pursue an approval for its submission.
Corporate Integrity Agreement CIA  the agreement described in the US Corporate Integrity Agreement reporting section on page 39.
Dainippon Sumitomo  Dainippon Sumitomo Pharmaceuticals Co.
Limited.
Director  a director of the Company. number of Ordinary Shares in issue during the year.
EFPIA  European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations.
EMA  the European Medicines Agency.
EMEA  Europe Middle East and Africa.
EU  the European Union.
FDA  the US Food and Drug Administration which is part of the US Department of Health and Human Services Agency which is the regulatory authority for all pharmaceuticals including biologics and vaccines and medical devices in the US.
Forest  Forest Laboratories Holdings Limited.
GAAP  Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
GERD  gastro oesophageal reux disease.
GI  gastrointestinal.
GIA  AstraZenecas group internal audit function. the difference between the two by the sales gure.
Group  AstraZeneca PLC and its subsidiaries.
GSK  GlaxoSmithKline plc.
HR  human resources.
IAS  International Accounting Standards.
IAS 19  IAS 19 Employee Benets.
IAS 32  IAS 32 Financial Instruments Presentation.
IAS 39  IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
IASB  International Accounting Standards Board.
IFRS  International Financial Reporting Standards or International Financial Reporting Standard as the context requires.
IFRS 8  IFRS 8 Operating Segments.
IP  intellectual property.
Ironwood  Ironwood Pharmaceuticals Inc.
IS  information services.
IT  information technology.
KPI  key performance indicator. krona or SEK  references to the currency of Sweden.
Lean  means enhancing value for customers with fewer resources.
MAA  a marketing authorisation application which is an application for authorisation to place medical products on the market.
This is a specic term used in the EU and European Economic Area markets.
MAb  monoclonal antibody a biologic that is specic that is it binds to and attacks one particular antigen.
MedImmune  MedImmune LLC formerly MedImmune Inc.
Merck  Merck Sharp and Dohme Corp. and Co.
Inc.
NDA  a new drug application to the FDA for approval to market a new medicine in the US.
NCE  new chemical entity.
Novartis  Novartis Pharma A.
Novexel  Novexel S.
NSAID  a nonsteroidal antiinammatory drug.
NYSE  the New York Stock Exchange. nm  not meaningful. operating costs plus operating income.
Ordinary Share  an ordinary share of 0.25 each in the share capital of the Company.
Orphan Drug  a drug which has been approved for use in a relatively lowincidence indication an orphan indication and has been rewarded with a period of market exclusivity the period of exclusivity and the available orphan indications vary between markets.
OTC  overthecounter.
Paediatric Exclusivity  in the US a six month period of exclusivity to market a drug which is awarded by the FDA in return for certain paediatric clinical studies using that drug.
This six month period runs from the date of relevant patent expiry.
Analogous provisions are available in certain other territories eg European SPC paediatric extensions.
Patent Term Extension PTE  an extension of up to ve years in the term of a US patent relating to a drug which compensates for delays in marketing resulting from the need to obtain FDA approval.
The analogous right in the EU is a supplementary protection certicate SPC.
Pzer  Pzer Inc.
Phase I  the phase of clinical research where a new drug or treatment is tested in small groups of people 20 to 80 to check that the drug can achieve appropriate concentrations in the body determine a safe dosage range and identify side effects.
This phase includes healthy volunteer studies.
Phase II  the phase of clinical research which includes the controlled clinical activities conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of the drug in patients with the disease under study and to begin to determine the safety prole of the drug.
Phase II studies are typically conducted in a relatively small number of patients and can be divided into Phase IIa studies which tend to be designed to assess dosing requirements and Phase IIb studies which tend to assess safety and efcacy.
Phase III  the phase of clinical research which is performed to gather additional information about effectiveness and safety of the drug often in a comparative setting to evaluate the overall benetrisk prole of the drug.
Phase III studies usually include between several hundred and several thousand patients. to the currency of the UK.
Pozen  POZEN INC. patients and who may have continuing care for them.
Proof of Concept  data demonstrating that a candidate drug results in a clinical change on an acceptable endpoint or surrogate in patients with the disease.
PSP  AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan.
RandD  research and development.
Redeemable Preference Share  a redeemable preference share of 1 each in the share capital of the Company.
Regulatory Data Protection  see the Intellectual Property section from page 35.
Regulatory Exclusivity  any of the IP rights arising from generation of clinical data and includes Regulatory Data Protection Paediatric Exclusivity and Orphan Drug status.
Responsible Business Plan  the plan described in the Responsible Business section from page 48 further details of which can be found at our websitesiteresponsiblemanagementand measurementresponsiblebusinessplan.
RSV  respiratory syncytial virus.
SarbanesOxley Act  the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002.
SEC  the US Securities and Exchange Commission the governmental agency that regulates the US securities industrystock market.
Seroquel franchise  Seroquel IR and Seroquel XR.
SET  Senior Executive Team.
SHE  Safety Health and Environment.
SFDA  State Food and Drug Administration of China.
SGandA costs  selling general and administrative costs.
Six Sigma  a rigorous and disciplined methodology that uses data and statistical analysis to measure and improve a companys operational performance by identifying and eliminating defects.
SOP  AstraZeneca Share Option Plan. rst contact with patients.
Targacept  Targacept Inc.
Teva  Teva Pharmaceuticals USA Inc.
TKI  tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
TSR  total shareholder return being the total return on a share over a period of time including dividends reinvested.
UK  United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
UK Corporate Governance Code  the UK Corporate Governance Code published by the Financial Reporting Council in May 2010 that sets out standards of good practice in corporate governance for the UK.
US  United States of America.
US dollar US USD or   references to the currency of the US.
WHO  the World Health Organization the United Nations specialised agency for health.
Overview Strategy Performance Corporate Governance Financial Statements Additional Information AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 211 Additional Information  Trade marks Trade marks AstraZeneca the AstraZeneca logotype and the AstraZeneca symbol are all trade marks of the AstraZeneca group of companies.
The following brand names which appear in italics in this Annual Report are trade marks of the Group Trade mark Comments
Arimidex
Atacand Atacand Plus in rest of world not in the US or the EU Axanum Not in the US Brilinta In the US and rest of world not in the EU Brilique In the EU
Casodex
Crestor
Diprivan
EMLA Not in the US or the EU
Faslodex
FluMist In the US and the rest of world.
Fluenz in the EU.
Iressa
Merrem Meronem in the EU and rest of world not in the US Naropin Not in the US or the EU
Nolvadex
Oxis Turbuhaler Not in the US or the EU
LosecPrilosec In the EU and rest of world not in the US.
Prilosec in the US
Pulmicort Respules Pulmicort Turbuhaler
Seloken Zoc Not in the US.
Seloken Seloken XL Seloken Zoc or Seloken Zok in rest of world not in the US or the EU
Seroquel IR Seroquel XR
Symbicort SMART Not in the US Symbicort Turbuhaler Not in the US or the EU Synagis In the US.
Abbott owns the trade mark for Synagis in rest of world not in the US or the EU
ToprolXL In the US.
SelokenBetaloc Zok in rest of world not in the US or the EU
Xylocaine Not in the US or the EU
Zoladex
Zomig Not in the US The following brand names which appear in italics in this Annual Report are trade marks licensed to the Group by the entities set out below Trade mark Owner Comments Bydureon Amylin  North and South Americas AstraZeneca rest of world not in the US or the EU Ownership dependent upon geography Byetta Amylin  North and South Americas AstraZeneca rest of world not in the US or the EU Ownership dependent upon geography Cubicin Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Forxiga BMS Kombiglyze XR BMS Kombiglyze BMS Komboglyze BMS Linzess Ironwood Brand name for linaclotide in the US Onglyza BMS Ranmark Daiichi Sankyo Company Limited Symlin Amylin  North and South Americas AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP  rest of world not in the US or the EU Ownership dependent upon geography Tearo Forest Brand name for ceftaroline in the US ZinforoForest Ownership of Zinforo trade mark was assigned from AstraZeneca to Forest in April 2012 The following brand names which appear in italics throughout this Annual Report are not owned by or licensed to the Group and are owned by the entities set out below Trade mark Owner Lipitor Pzer Ireland Pharmaceuticals Plavix Sano AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2012 212 Additional Information  Index 2012 performance summary 24 Accounting policies 146 194 Acquisitions and disposals 173 Annual general meeting 121 208 Articles of association 206 208 Astra Tech 174 Audit Committee 75 115 Biologics 17  19 30 Board 106 110 Branches 120 Business background and results overview 86 Capitalisation 94 Cardiovascular 52 Cash and cash equivalents 148 164
Chairmans Statement 6
Chief Executive Ofcers Review 8
Clinical Trials 33 34 Code of Conduct 47 Commitments and contingent liabilities 183 Community Investment 49 Company history 203 208 Competition 16 78 Compliance and Group Internal Audit 47  75 115 Consolidated statement of Cash Flows 145 Consolidated statement of Changes in Equity 144 Consolidated statement of Comprehensive Income 142 Consolidated statement of Financial Position 143 Corporate governance 104 Diabetes 52 54 Directors interest in shares 134 Directors remuneration 122 Directors responsibility statement 140 Diversity 43 44 Dividends 7  94 173 205 Earnings per ordinary share 5 154 Emerging Markets 13 73 77  209 Employee costs and share plans for employees 179 Established Markets 38 72 209 Ethics 33 39 47 Finance income and expense 152 Financial instruments 148 166 Financial position 2011 97 Financial position 2012 92 Financial risk management 99 175 Financial summary 2 Gastrointestinal 56 Glossary 209 Group Financial Record 198 Group Financial Statements 140 Growth drivers 16 Human Rights 45 Independent auditors report 141 192 Infection 58 Inammation see Respiratory and Inammation Intangible assets 92 97  101 159 Intellectual Property 35 Interestbearing loans and borrowings 164 Inventories 148 163 Ironwood 31 57 Key performance indicators 26 Leases 148 190 Lifecycle of a medicine 14 Litigation 102 149 184 Market denitions 209 Medicines 2 14 30 50 Neuroscience 61 Nomination and Governance Committee 117 Oncology 65 Operating prot 2 4 89 151 Operational overview 4 Other investments 148 163 Patents see Intellectual Property Patient safety 34 Pharmaceutical industry 16 Pipeline 4 24 26 30 51 199 Political donations 120 Portfolio Investment Board 119 Postretirement benets 102 131 167 Pricing 18 38 Principal risks and uncertainties 75 Product revenue information 150 Property plant and equipment 148 157 Provisions for liabilities and charges 167 Regulatory requirements 17 Related party transactions 190 205 Relations with shareholders 114 Remuneration Committee 117 Research and Development 30 147  151 Reserves 171 Respiratory and Inammation 67 Responsible Business 28 48 Restructuring 21 151 Results of operations 2011 95 Results of operations 2012 89 Revised Core nancial measures 97 Safety health and wellbeing 46 Sales and Marketing 37 Sales by geographical area 70 Sales by Therapy Area 50 Science Committee 118 Segment information 155 Senior Executive Team 108 118 Share capital 172 196 203 Share repurchase 7  94 173 196 Statutory and other information 190 Strategy 20 Subsidiaries 191 Supply and Manufacturing 40 Taxation information for shareholders 206 Trade and other payables 148 166 Trade and other receivables 148 164 Trade marks 211 Transactions with directors 133 World pharmaceutical markets 16 Important information for readers of this Annual Report Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements The purpose of this Annual Report is to provide information to the members of the Company.
The
Company and its Directors employees agents and advisers do not accept or assume responsibility to any other person to whom this Annual Report is shown or into whose hands it may come and any such responsibility or liability is expressly disclaimed.
In order among other things to utilise the safe harbour provisions of the US Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and the UK Companies Act 2006 we are providing the following cautionary statement This Annual Report contains certain forwardlooking statements with respect to the operations performance and nancial condition of the Group.
Forwardlooking statements are statements relating to the future which are based on information available at the time such statements are made including information relating to risks and uncertainties.
Although we believe that the forwardlooking statements in this Annual Report are based on reasonable assumptions the matters discussed in the forwardlooking statements may be inuenced by factors that could cause actual outcomes and results to be materially different from those expressed or implied by these statements.
The forwardlooking statements reect knowledge and information available at the date of the preparation of this Annual Report and the Company undertakes no obligation to update these forwardlooking statements.
We identify the forwardlooking statements by using the words anticipates believes expects intends and similar expressions in such statements.
Important
Report.
Nothing in this Annual Report should be construed as a prot forecast.
Inclusion of Reported performance Core nancial measures and constant exchange rate growth rates AstraZenecas determination of nonGAAP measures together with our presentation of them within our nancial information may differ from similarly titled nonGAAP measures of other companies.
Statements of competitive position growth rates and sales In this Annual Report except as otherwise stated market information regarding the position of our business or products relative to its or their competition is based upon published statistical sales data for the 12 months ended 30 September 2012 obtained from IMS Health a leading supplier of statistical data to the pharmaceutical industry.
For the US dispensed new or total prescription data and audited sales data are taken respectively from IMS Health National Prescription Audit and IMS National Sales Perspectives for the 12 months ended 31 December 2012 such data is not adjusted for Medicaid and similar rebates.
Except as otherwise stated these market share and industry data from IMS Health have been derived by comparing our sales revenue to competitors and total market sales revenues for that period.
Except as otherwise stated growth rates are given at CER.
For the purposes of this Annual Report unless otherwise stated references to the world pharmaceutical market or similar phrases are to the 54 countries contained in the IMS Health MIDAS Quantum database which amounted to approximately 92% in value of the countries audited by IMS Health.
AstraZeneca websites Information on or accessible through our websitessitesitesite does not form part of and is not incorporated into this Annual Report.
Externalthird party websites Information on or accessible through any third party or external website does not form part of and is not incorporated into this Annual Report.
Figures
Figures in parentheses in tables and in the Financial Statements are used to represent negative numbers.
Designed and produced by Board and SET photography Marcus Lyon This Annual Report is printed on Heaven 42 which is FSC certied virgin bre.
The pulp is a mix partly bleached using an Elemental Chlorine Free ECF process and partly bleached using a Totally Chlorine Free process.
Printed in the UK by Pureprint using its alcofree and pureprint environmental printing technology and vegetable inks were used throughout.
Pureprint is a CarbonNeutral company.
Both the manufacturing mill and the printer are registered to the Environmental Management System ISO14001 and are Forest Stewardship Council chainofcustody certied.
Registered ofce and corporate headquarters AstraZeneca PLC 2 Kingdom Street London W2 6BD
UK as above
Investor Relations AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP 1800 Concord Pike PO Box 15437
DE 198505437
Tel telFax telRegistrar Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA
Tel freephone in the UKtel Tel outside the UK 44 0tel Swedish Central Securities
Euroclear Sweden AB PO Box 191 SE101 23 Stockholm
Tel 46 08 402 9000 US Depositary JPMorgan Chase and Co PO Box 64504 St Paul MN 551640504
Tel toll free in the UStel Tel outside the US teljpmorgan.
