AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Registered office and corporate headquarters AstraZeneca PLC 2 Kingdom Street London W2 6BD
UK as above
Investor Relations AstraZeneca AB SE151 85 Sdertlje
Tel 46 0Fax 46 0US Investor Relations AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP 1800 Concord Pike PO Box 15437
DE 198505437
Tel telFax telRegistrar Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA
Tel freephone in the UKtel Tel outside the UK 44 0tel Swedish Central Securities
Euroclear Sweden AB PO Box 191 SE101 23 Stockholm
Tel 46 08 402 9000 US Depositary JPMorgan Chase and Co PO Box 64504 St Paul MN 551640504
Tel toll free in the UStel Tel outside the US telEmail jpmorgan.
Contact information AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 201 1 This Annual Report is also available on our websitesiteannualreport201 1 health connectsusall Improving health is one of the toughest challenges facing the world today.
As a global biopharmaceutical company AstraZeneca has a key contribution to make by providing innovative medicines for some of the worlds most serious diseases.
We know that if we are to deliver medicines that people really need and value we cannot do it in isolation.
We work closely with all our stakeholders to understand their needs and challenges.
We are committed to acting with integrity and high ethical standards in everything we do and our goal is always to improve health for patients and bring benefit for our stakeholders our business and society.
Important information for readers of this Annual Report Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements The purpose of this Annual Report is to provide information to the members of the
The Company and its Directors employees agents and advisors do not accept or assume responsibility to any other person to whom this Annual Report is shown or into whose hands it may come and any such responsibility or liability is expressly disclaimed.
In order among other things to utilise the safe harbour provisions of the US Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and the UK Companies Act 2006 we are providing the following cautionary statement This Annual Report contains certain forwardlooking statements with respect to the operations performance and financial condition of the Group.
Forwardlooking statements are statements relating to the future which are based on information available at the time such statements are made including information relating to risks and uncertainties.
Although we believe that the forwardlooking statements in this Annual Report are based on reasonable assumptions the matters discussed in the forwardlooking statements may be influenced by factors that could cause actual outcomes and results to be materially different from those expressed or implied by these statements.
The forwardlooking statements reflect knowledge and information available at the date of the preparation of this Annual Report and the Company undertakes no obligation to update these forwardlooking statements.
We identify the forwardlooking statements by using the words anticipates believes expects intends and similar expressions in such statements.
Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in forwardlooking statements certain of which are beyond our control include among other things those factors identified in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 130 of this Annual Report.
Nothing in this Annual Report should be construed as a profit forecast.
Inclusion of reported performance Core financial measures and constant exchange rate growth rates AstraZenecas determination of nonGAAP measures together with our presentation of them within our financial information may differ from similarly titled nonGAAP measures of other companies.
Statements of competitive position growth rates and sales In this Annual Report except as otherwise stated market information regarding the position of our business or products relative to its or their competition is based upon published statistical sales data for the 12 months ended 30 September 2011 obtained from IMS Health a leading supplier of statistical data to the pharmaceutical industry.
For the US dispensed new or total prescription data and audited sales data are taken respectively from IMS Health National Prescription Audit and IMS National Sales Perspectives for the 12 months ended 31 December 2011 such data is not adjusted for Medicaid and similar state rebates.
Except as otherwise stated these market share and industry data from IMS Health have been derived by comparing our sales revenue to competitors and total market sales revenues for that period.
Except as otherwise stated growth rates are given at CER.
For the purposes of this Annual Report unless otherwise stated references to the world pharmaceutical market or similar phrases are to the 53 countries contained in the IMS Health MIDAS Quantum database which amounted to approximately 96% in value of the countries audited by IMS Health.
AstraZeneca websites Information on or accessible through our websitessitesitesite does not form part of and is not incorporated into this Annual Report.
Externalthird party websites Information on or accessible through any third party or external website does not form part of and is not incorporated into this Annual Report.
Figures
Figures in parentheses in tables and in the Financial Statements are used to represent negative numbers.
Trade marks Trade marks of the AstraZeneca group of companies appear throughout this Annual Report in italics.
AstraZeneca the AstraZeneca logotype and the AstraZeneca symbol are all trade marks of the AstraZeneca group of companies.
Trade marks of companies other than AstraZeneca appear with a  sign and include Abraxane a trade mark of Abraxis BioScience LLC.
Cubicin a trade mark of Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc.
CytoFab a trade mark of Protherics
Kombiglyze XR and Komboglyze
Lipitor a trade mark of Pfizer Ireland Pharmaceuticals Onglyza a trade mark of BristolMyers Squibb Company Ranmark a trade mark of Forest Laboratories Inc.
Designed and produced by Board photography Marcus Lyon Cover image by Iain Crockart Gorky Park Moscow This report is printed on Heaven 42 which is FSC certified virgin fibre.
The pulp is a mix partly bleached using an Elemental Chlorine Free ECF process and partly bleached using a Totally Chlorine Free process.
Printed in the UK by Pureprint using its alcofree and pureprint environmental printing technology and vegetable inks were used throughout.
Pureprint is a CarbonNeutral company.
Both manufacturing mill and the printer are registered to the Environmental Management System ISO14001 and are Forest Stewardship Council chainofcustody certified.
Contents 1 33.6bn Sales down 2% at CER to 33591 million 33269 million in 2010 13.2bn Core operating profit down 4% at CER to 13167 million 13603 million in 2010 12.8bn Reported operating profit up 10% at CER to 12795 million 11494 million in 2010 Core EPS for the full year increased by 7% at CER to 7.28 6.71 in 2010 Reported EPS for the full year increased by 29% at CER to 7.33 5.60 in 2010 9.37bn Net cash shareholder distributions increased by 71% to 9370 million including net share repurchases of 5.6 billion Financial summary Welcome to the AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Annual Report You will find this Annual Report and all the case studies featured in this document on our websitesiteannualreport201 1
AstraZeneca at a glance Our year in brief
Chairmans Statement
Chief Executive Officers Review
10 Lifecycle of a medicine 15 Strategy and Performance 15 The pharmaceutical industry 19 Our strategy 20 Our business model 21 Our strategic priorities to 2014 23 Our performance in 2011
29 Business Review
29 Delivering our strategy 30 Research and Development 34 Intellectual Property 36 Sales and Marketing 38 Supply and Manufacturing 40 People 43 Compliance 47 Responsible Business 56 Therapy Area Review 77 Geographical Review
82 Financial Review
99 Corporate Governance Board of Directors and Senior Executive Team Corporate Governance Report
Directors Remuneration Report
129 Risk 139 Financial Statements 139 Financial Statements 199 Additional Information 199 Development Pipeline 203 Shareholder Information 208 Corporate Information 209 Glossary 212 Index Directors Report The following sections comprise the Directors Report which has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 Strategy and Performance
Business Review
Corporate Governance Development Pipeline Shareholder Information Corporate Information Case studies 12 Health Innovation 76 Herzbewusst in Germany 81 Faz Bem in Brazil 26 Health Collaboration 55 Phakamisa in South Africa 98 Safe  Heart in the Gulf 44 Health Integrity Young Health Programme in India
Important information for readers of this Annual Report For further information in relation to the inclusion of reported performance Core financial measures and constant exchange rate CER growth rates as used in this Overview from page 1 and throughout the Business Review and Corporate Governance section from pages 29 and 99 respectively please refer to the Financial Review on page 84.
Throughout this Annual Report growth rates are expressed at CER unless otherwise stated.
Definitions
The Glossary and the Market definitions table from page 209 are intended to provide a useful guide to terms and AstraZenecas definitions of markets as well as to acronyms and abbreviations used in this section and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Use of terms In this Annual Report unless the context otherwise requires AstraZeneca the Group we us and our refer to AstraZeneca PLC and its consolidated entities.
Statements of dates Except as otherwise stated references to days andor months in this Annual Report are references to days andor months in 2011.
Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements A cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements and other essential information relating to this Annual Report can be found on the inside back cover.
Overview
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Our business AstraZeneca at a glance We are a global innovationdriven biopharmaceutical business.
Our primary focus is the discovery development and commercialisation of prescription medicines for six important areas of healthcare Cardiovascular Gastrointestinal Infection Neuroscience Oncology and Respiratory and Inflammation.
We operate in over 100 countries and our innovative medicines are used by millions of patients worldwide.
We want AstraZeneca to be valued as a source of great medicines and trusted as a company that delivers business success responsibly.
Our Responsible Business Plan provides the framework for ensuring that we operate with integrity and high ethical standards across all our activities.
BrilintaBrilique has been approved in 64 countries it has been launched in 37 countries and remains under review in 39 countries.
Regional sales Western Europe 8501m 11% Around 32300 Sales and Marketing employees numbers in Established Markets such as the US have fallen whereas the numbers in Emerging Markets are increasing and now represent 47% of the total.
Regional sales Emerging Markets 5763m 10% Around 57200 employees worldwide Americas 17450 31% EMEA 26600 46% AsiaPacific 13150 23% Regional sales
13426m 2% Launch of our new Global External Interactions Policy reinforces our commitment to the highest standards of sales and marketing practice.
Russia We invested 150 million in a manufacturing plant near Moscow and announced plans to establish a new predictive science centre in St Petersburg.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 2 AstraZeneca at a glance Our top 10 medicines by sales value in 2011 were
Crestor for managing cholesterol levels
ToprolXL for hypertension heart failure and angina
Gastrointestinal
Nexium for acidreflux
Infection
Synagis for RSV a respiratory infection in infants
Seroquel IR for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder Seroquel XR for schizophrenia bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder
Zoladex for prostate and breast cancer Respiratory and Inflammation
Around 1 1300 employees work in our RandD organisation and we have 14 principal RandD centres in eight countries.
Our activities touch many peoples lives and we are committed to working in a spirit of collaboration to achieve our goal of better health for patients For patients and physicians we provide medicines for some of the worlds most serious diseases.
For the people who pay for healthcare we work to make sure that our medicines offer real value for money.
For our employees we provide a culture in which they can feel appreciated energised and rewarded for their contribution.
For our shareholders we aim to deliver value through our continued focus on innovation and running our business efficiently.
For the wider community we want to be valued for the contribution our medicines make to society and trusted for the way in which we do business.
We work closely with all our stakeholders to understand their challenges and how we can combine our skills and resources to achieve a common goal improved health.
Around 9600 employees work at our 23 Supply and Manufacturing sites in 16 countries.
Regional sales Established ROW 5901m 4% China We announced our decision to invest 200 million in a manufacturing facility in Taizhou Jiangsu province and our agreement to acquire Guangdong BeiKang Pharmaceutical Company Limited.
Overview
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 AstraZeneca at a glance 3 Product performance summary Top 10 products by sales value Summary financial and operational information for 2011 Our year in brief
2010 2011 Core operating prot m 4% 2010 2011 Reported operating prot m 10% 2010 2011 Core earnings per Ordinary Share 7% 2010 2011 Reported basic earnings per Ordinary Share 29%tel Core gross margin m unchanged 2010 2011 Net cash ow from operating activities 2010 2011 Reported gross margin m unchanged 2010 2011
2009 1436m 2010 1483m 1450m 6%
2009 4502m 2010 5691m 6622m 13%
2009 946m 2010 986m 11%
2009 4959m 2010 4969m 4429m 12%
2009 1443m 2010 1210m 20% Financial overview AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 4 Our year in brief Operational overview 2% Revenue in the US was down 2% 10% Emerging Markets revenue increased by 10% 79 projects in clinical development including nine in Phase III or under regulatory review 21 withdrawn during the year In line with our commitment to transparency by the end of 2011 we had published the results of over 1150 clinical trials on public websites 1.8bn Sold Astra Tech our dental and healthcare products business for approximately 1.8 billion in cash 7% Ranked in the top 7% in the sector in the Dow Jones Sustainability World and European Indexes with our highest assessment score to date of 85% Seroquel IR 2009 4171m 2010 4148m 4338m 3% Seroquel XR 2009 695m 2010 1154m 1490m 27%
2009 2294m 2010 2746m 3148m 1 1 %
2009 1082m 2010 1038m 6%
2009 1086m 2010 1115m 3%
Brilinta approved in the US and Canada Caprelsa vandetanib approved in the US and positive CHMP opinion in the EU Axanum Komboglyze and Fluenz approved in the EU Nexium and Faslodex 500mg approved in Japan Complete Response Letter received from the FDA for dapagliflozin in January 2012 Recorded an impairment charge of 435 million reflecting the decision not to progress olaparib into Phase III development and Phase III studies for TC5214 which did not meet their primary endpoints Deliver the business Strong double digit sales growth for Crestor  Seroquel XR and
Revenue performance reflected the loss of nearly 2 billion of revenue from generic competition as well as a further 1 billion lost due to government price interventions Seroquel XR patent infringement actions settled against Handa and Accord New access to healthcare strategy provided platform for increasing access in a sustainable way Business shape Restructuring programmes since 2007 are delivering planned savings new initiatives are expected to deliver a further 1.6 billion in annual benefits by 2014 Expanded responsible procurement audit programme 727 suppliers in 55 countries in 2011 42 suppliers in 2010
Improvement in employee engagement and senior leader communications Net reduction of nearly 4000 employees since 2010 included recruitment of approximately 6400 employees to replace leavers and drive our expansion in Emerging Markets Responsible Business Launched new Responsible Business Plan aligned with business strategy and created Responsible Business Council strengthening governance in this area Product performance summary Top 10 products by sales value
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Our year in brief 5 In the face of intensified pressures we delivered a good performance in 201 1 and took difficult decisions to ensure the future success of AstraZeneca.
Louis Schweitzer Chairman 6 Chairmans Statement AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Distributions to shareholders mtel Dividends 3764 3361 2977 Share repurchases 6015 Total 9779 5965 2977 Dividend for 2011  Pence SEK Payment date First interim dividend 0.85 51.9 5.33 12 September 2011 Second interim dividend 1.95 123.6 13.21 19 March 2012 Share repurchases in 2011 net of proceeds from the issue of share capital equal to 409 million were 5606 million.
Share repurchases in 2010 net of proceeds from the issue of share capital equal to 494 million were 2110 million.
Dear Shareholder I write to you at the end of a year in which research based pharmaceutical companies faced a tough marketplace and operating environment.
Against this challenging background disciplined execution of our strategy delivered a good performance.
Our strong cash flow supported a significant increase in cash distributions to shareholders and continued investment to drive future growth and value.
These conditions also provided the backdrop to the annual review by your Board of our business strategy  which remains to be a focused integrated innovationdriven global prescription based biopharmaceutical business.
I would like to take this opportunity to review AstraZenecas financial performance in 2011 and the decisions we took to ensure we continue to deliver sustainable value for you.
Financial performance Group sales in 2011 were down 2% at CER to 33591 million 2010 33269 million and reported operating profit was up 10% at 12795 million 2010 11494 million which included the gain on the sale of Astra Tech.
Performance for the year reflected strong double digit sales growth for Crestor Seroquel XR and Symbicort.
It was also impacted by government pricing interventions and generic competition which combined to reduce revenue by some 3 billion.
Revenue in the US was down 2% as was revenue in markets outside the US revenue was down 11% in Western Europe up 4% in Established ROW and up 10% in Emerging Markets.
Reported earnings per share for the full year were up 29% at 7.33 2010 5.60 which also included the nontaxable gain of 1.08 from the Astra Tech sale.
Our effective tax rate also benefited from an adjustment in respect of prior periods following the announcement in March 2011 that HM Revenue and Customs in the UK and the US Internal Revenue Service had agreed the terms of an Advance Pricing Agreement regarding transfer pricing arrangements for AstraZenecas US business.
A challenging marketplace The world pharmaceutical market grew by 4.5% in 2011 and the fundamentals of the industry remain strong.
First the world population continues to increase and age it passed the seven billion mark in 2011 while the number of people over 65 in 2030 is estimated to be almost one billion double the 2005 figure.
Secondly we are seeing the emergence of expanding numbers of patients in new markets who can access our medicines for the first time.
Thirdly there remains considerable unmet medical need.
Chronic diseases are on the increase not only in wealthy countries but also in middle income and increasingly lower income countries.
For example some 346 million people around the world have diabetes while 24 million are affected by Alzheimers Disease.
Finally advances in science and technology promise the continued delivery of new medicines that can make a real difference to patient health.
Yet while the fundamentals remain strong the challenges facing the industry have been unprecedented in recent years.
Patents on some of the worlds most successful innovative medicines are starting to expire and we face increasing competition from generic alternatives.
Additionally the need to improve RandD productivity and the number of product launches remains a critical challenge for the whole sector.
Around the world rising healthcare costs coupled with the difficult economic climate and continued austerity measures being implemented by governments have resulted in pressure on prices.
This includes pricing interventions in many countries.
The regulatory landscape is changing becoming more global and more complex.
It is no longer enough for new medicines to be safe and effective.
Health authorities increasingly require additional information regarding a medicines comparative clinical and cost effectiveness.
Our strategic response It was with these challenges in mind that your Board undertook its strategy review process in 2011.
We are confident that longterm growth in demand for innovative biopharmaceuticals will remain strong.
We believe there continue to be opportunities to create value for those who invest in pharmaceutical innovation and that AstraZeneca has the skills and capabilities to take advantage of these opportunities and turn them into longterm value through the research development and marketing of our medicines.
We also recognise that the industry is going through a period of fundamental change as it seeks to overcome the serious challenges we face.
For us that means a continued focus on ensuring we drive world class productivity in RandD increased external collaboration a global orientation reflecting the growth in Emerging Markets stronger customer orientation particularly towards payers operational efficiency with a flexible cost base.
Our 2011 review highlighted the ongoing need for a substantial improvement in RandD productivity if we are to sustain acceptable returns to shareholders.
We are therefore planning to accelerate our RandD strategy.
We intend to take a new approach to Neuroscience closing our existing research centres and creating a new virtual innovative medicines unit for our RandD in this challenging field.
We also plan to reshape our other RandD global functions to better support a more focused portfolio and create a simpler organisation with greater flexibility in all functional areas.
In his Chief Executive Officers Review on the following pages David Brennan outlines the steps we took in 2011 to secure our future business success.
David also emphasises that how we do business is as important as what we do.
We need to continue to work with integrity and to high ethical standards if we are to deliver on our promise of bringing benefits to patients creating sustainable value for shareholders and contributing to economic and social welfare.
In this regard the Board has an important role to play in setting high standards and monitoring performance.
Outlook
We continue to plan on the basis that revenue will be in the range of 2834 billion a year over the 201014 period as revenue growth from key franchises that retain exclusivity and continued growth in Emerging Markets are pressured by the loss of market exclusivity on a number of products.
However based on the evolution of the base case assumptions since 2010 such as the downward pressure on revenue from government interventions revenue for the remainder of the period is likely to be in the lower half of the range.
Returns to shareholders In recognition of the Groups strong balance sheet and sustainable significant cash flow and the Boards confidence in the strategic direction and longterm prospects for the business we announced in conjunction with the full year 2009 results the adoption of a progressive dividend policy intending to maintain or grow the dividend each year.
After providing for business investment funding the progressive dividend policy and meeting our debt service obligations the Board will also keep under review the opportunity to return cash in excess of these requirements to shareholders through periodic share repurchases.
The Board has recommended a second interim dividend of 1.95 a 5% increase over the second interim dividend awarded in 2010.
This brings the dividend for the full year to 2.80 175.5 pence SEK 18.54 an increase of 10% from 2010.
In 2011 cash distributions to shareholders through dividends totalled 3764 million and net share repurchases totalled 5606 million.
Appreciation
In the face of intensified pressures we delivered a good performance in 2011 and took difficult decisions to ensure the future success of AstraZeneca.
None of this would have been possible without the leadership of David Brennan and the other members of his executive team.
My thanks and those of the whole Board go to them and all our employees for their effort in working to deliver on our promise.
Louis Schweitzer
Chairmans Statement
Overview
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Chairmans Statement 7 If we are to be one of the winners in the sector we need to make the necessary changes both to what we do and how we do it.
David R Brennan Chief Executive Officer AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 8 Chief Executive Officers Review AstraZeneca has a proud tradition of developing great medicines that make a meaningful difference to patient health.
Looking ahead we remain committed to developing innovative and valued medicines that improve the health of people around the world benefit society and provide an acceptable return for our shareholders.
In my review I want to outline some of the steps we took and decisions we made in 2011 to secure our future business success.
79 projects in clinical development including 9 in Phase III or under regulatory review 21 withdrawn during the year 10% Emerging Markets revenue increased by 10% Operational highlights 2% Revenue in the US was down 2% 7% Ranked in the top 7% in the sector in the Dow Jones Sustainability World and European Indexes with our highest assessment score to
date of 85% Chief Executive Officers Review
A trusted partner We cannot secure our success if we do not have good relationships with those with whom we do business.
Trust is critical to achieving this we need to connect with our stakeholders including patients physicians regulators governments and payers if we are to understand their needs and challenges.
We also need to earn and maintain the trust of our customers partners and other stakeholders.
This requires us to do things in the right way and to behave in accordance with our core values.
That is why I set such store by our Global External Interactions Policy launched in April 2011 which provides a single common principle based approach to all our interactions worldwide with public officials healthcare professionals and community organisations.
The introduction of the policy drove changes in the way we market and sell our products and I believe we now lead the industry in this area of business.
Our commitment to acting responsibly and the sustainable development of our Group was further reinforced in 2011 by the publication of our new Responsible Business Plan which is closely aligned to our business strategy and its priorities.
The growing importance of compliance and ethics to our reputation and business operations was demonstrated during the year by the appointment of Katarina Ageborg our new Chief Compliance Officer to the SET.
World class Research and Development At the core of our strategy to be a focused integrated innovation driven global prescriptionbased biopharmaceutical business is the need to have an RandD function with world class productivity.
In his Chairmans Statement on page 6 Louis Schweitzer outlined how we are redoubling our efforts to deliver this through the use of innovative and collaborative ways of working.
Our focus is on ensuring more effective and efficient delivery of our research objectives across our therapeutic portfolio.
Our results in 2011 were mixed.
We were pleased by the FDAs approval in July of Brilinta our treatment for acute coronary syndromes.
Brilinta or Brilique its trade name in Europe is now approved in 64 countries launched in 37 and under review in a further Also on a positive note Caprelsa vandetanib for the treatment of thyroid cancer has been launched in the US and received a positive CHMP opinion in the EU.
Axanum for the prevention of cardiovascular events Komboglyze were also approved in the EU.
In Japan both Nexium and Faslodex were launched following approvals earlier in the year.
During 2011 two of the Phase III trials for TC5214 our neuroscience collaboration with Targacept did not meet their primary endpoint.
In December we also announced that our investigational compound olaparib AZD2281 for the treatment of ovarian cancer will not progress into Phase III.
As a result of these two events we recorded an impairment charge of 435 million.
We were also disappointed during the year by the withdrawal of zibotentan for prostate cancer.
Axanum was also withdrawn in the
In January 2012 we received a Complete Response Letter from the FDA for our submission for dapagliflozin.
We together with BMS remain committed to this treatment for diabetes and will work closely with the FDA to provide additional clinical data.
Increased collaboration Our focus on developing inhouse capabilities is matched by our desire to develop a more outwardlooking organisation committed to accessing the best science regardless of its origin.
Indeed six of our nine projects in Phase IIIRegistration and 12 out of 24 in Phase II were sourced externally.
During 2011 we completed a number of transactions to strengthen our longterm development.
These included the inlicensing of tremelimumab from Pfizer and our groundbreaking collaboration with the UK Medical Research Council providing academic researchers with access to over 20 AstraZeneca compounds.
Our plans for RandD will see us build further on this collaborative way of working.
Global orientation Our future success requires us to develop global strategies to commercialise our products effectively.
These need to be tailored to local needs in both mature and emerging markets.
As part of that drive we announced our decision to invest 200 million in a manufacturing facility in China and our agreement to acquire a Chinese company that will give us access to a portfolio of medicines used to treat infections.
In Russia we invested 150 million in a manufacturing plant and announced plans to establish a new predictive science centre.
We are also committed to playing our part in the global challenge of providing sustainable access to healthcare for all those who need it.
Our strategy recognises the complexities surrounding the issue which range from the affordability of medicines to the availability of healthcare systems and the resources to make them effective.
Stronger customer orientation As the Chairman noted there is no let up in sight on the downward pressure we face on the price of medicines.
More than ever we need to demonstrate their value to those who buy them.
Our collaborations with HealthCore and IMS will help us undertake real world studies to understand how to treat disease most effectively and economically.
We also need to undertake more studies such as the Brilinta PLATO study demonstrating that even at a higher price it is a more cost effective treatment than the generic alternative.
Equally we need to recognise the changing shape of healthcare systems.
Those who work in them are working more intensively and with less time to research medicines.
We are therefore piloting new ways of working to meet their needs.
These include the use of digital channels which offer information that is available when it is needed and without having to leave the office.
Operational efficiency Our continued drive for operational efficiency is typified by the design and construction of our new plant in China which is using Lean production principles from the outset.
We are also streamlining processes and moving to a more flexible cost base in order to remain competitive.
As we reshape our business to meet the needs of our customers efficiently we are seeing reductions in the workforce across much of our organisation particularly in our mature Established Markets and in our RandD organisation.
This reshaping includes plans for further RandD site consolidation.
These are difficult decisions as they go to the heart of AstraZeneca our people.
Where possible we seek to redeploy staff or assist with outplacement and together with my colleagues I remain committed to managing these changes in the right way in accordance with local employment laws our standards and core values.
A confident future Our industry is undergoing a period of fundamental change.
If we are to be one of the winners in the sector we need to make the necessary changes both to what we do and how we do it.
I am confident that within AstraZeneca we have people with the skills to do that and pay tribute to their continued efforts in 2011 to ensure we deliver on our commitments to patients society and our shareholders.
I look forward to working with them to build on those efforts in 2012.
David R Brennan
Chief Executive Officer
Overview
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Chief Executive Officers Review 9 Overview Lifecycle of a medicine Phase I studies Studies designed to understand how the potential medicine is absorbed in the body distributed around it and excreted also determine an appropriate dosage and identify side effects.
These typically take place in small groups of healthy human volunteers or in certain cases patients.
Confirm the most appropriate formulation and begin to develop manufacturing route to ensure the manufacturing process is robust and costs are minimised.
May involve external clinicians and organisations in the design and running of these studies.
Regulatory submission and pricing Seek approval from regulatory authorities to manufacture market and sell the medicine.
Submit package of clinical data which demonstrates the safety profile and efficacy of the medicine to regulatory authorities.
Regulatory authorities decide whether to grant marketing authorisation based on the medicines safety profile effectiveness and quality.
Large numbers of national regional and local payers grant approval for the pricing andor reimbursement of the medicine.
Phase III studies Studies typically in large groups of patients designed to gather information about effectiveness and safety of the medicine and evaluate the overall benefitrisk profile in the specific disease and patient segments in which the medicine will be used.
Create appropriate branding for the new medicine in preparation for launch.
Phase II studies Studies designed to evaluate effectiveness of the medicine typically using small groups of patients.
During Phase II studies design a Phase III programme to deliver data required for regulatory approval and pricing andor reimbursement throughout the world.
External advisory panels help define the attributes to test in studies to demonstrate whether the potential new medicine can be differentiated from the existing standard treatment of care.
Preclinical studies Undertake studies in the laboratory and in animals to understand if the potential medicine should be safe to introduce into humans and in what quantities.
Determine likely efficacy side effect profile and maximum tolerable dose estimate in humans.
Regulatory authorities are informed of proposed trials which are then conducted within the framework of the relevant regulations.
Find potential medicine Identify the unmet medical need and market opportunity.
Undertake laboratory research to find a potential medicine that should be potent selective and absorbed into and well tolerated by the body.
Begin the process of seeking patent protection for the potential medicine.
Collaborate with academia and external clinicians to access the best external science and medical opinion.
Time years Phase Discovery Preclinical Clinical
Phase I 63% Phase II 30% Phase III 7% AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 10 Lifecycle of a medicine Postlaunch research and development Studies to further understand the safety profile of the medicine in larger populations.
Sponsors and regulatory authorities monitor the safety of medicines postapproval and update prescribing information as necessary.
Includes lifecycle management activities to broaden understanding of the medicines full potential.
Work with external advisory groups and regulatory authorities to consider potential additional diseases which might be treated by the medicine or better ways of administering the medicine.
Submit data packages with requests for line extensions.
Regulatory authorities review the data to assess the benefits and risks of using the medicine in the new disease or population and issue a decision.
Patent expiry and generic entry Typically when patents protecting the medicine expire generic versions of the medicine may enter the market.
Launch new medicine Raise awareness of patient benefit and appropriate use.
Market and sell medicine continuously monitor record and analyse reported side effects review need to update the side effect warnings to ensure that patients wellbeing is maintained.
Clinicians begin to prescribe medicine and patients begin to benefit.
The process of getting a drug to market from initial discovery through development to approval and launch is risky costly and time consuming.
This is a high level overview of the process.
It is illustrative only.
It is not intended to nor does it represent the lifecycle of any particular medicine or of every medicine discovered andor developed by AstraZeneca nor of the probability of success or approval of any AstraZeneca medicine.
The line marked Overall probability of success is the probability that a compound in preclinical development will reach each phase of development and subsequent approval.
For example only 7% of preclinical compounds enter Phase III studies.
Source Pharmaceutical Benchmarking Forum 2011.
Approval and launch
3%
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Lifecycle of a medicine 11 healthinnovation Delivering value through innovation Innovation is at the heart of everything we do at AstraZeneca  from our research of effective new medicines to how we run our business.
Our
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 12 Health Innovation healthinnovation Innovation drives progress in society.
Successful biopharmaceutical innovation delivered responsibly brings benefit for patients creates value for stakeholders and contributes to the social and economic development of the communities we serve.
We are a global RandDbased biopharmaceutical company with a longstanding commitment to delivering valued innovation in healthcare.
We remain dedicated to the discovery development manufacturing and commercialisation of differentiated value adding medicines for some of the worlds most serious health challenges cancer heart disease gastrointestinal disorders infection neurological disorders and respiratory conditions.
We work continuously to understand anticipate and adapt to the needs of a changing world.
Overview
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Health Innovation 13 The Manchester Collaborative Centre for Inflammation Research is being created by the University of Manchester GSK and AstraZeneca to establish a worldleading centre for inflammatory diseases.
It is a unique collaboration that began with an initial investment of 5 million from each partner over a threeyear period and will bring together scientists from both the pharmaceutical industry and academia.
A groundbreaking agreement with the UK Medical Research Council MRC means a wide range of chemical compounds developed by AstraZeneca is to be made available free of charge to UK medical researchers.
As part of the collaboration with AstraZeneca the MRC is inviting research proposals from across the UK academic community to use the compounds in new areas.
The MRC will judge and select the best scientific proposals and award up to 10 million in total to fund research across a broad range of human diseases.
Sir John Savill Chief Executive of the MRC said The initiative marks a new era in medical discovery open innovation and public private collaboration.
In the US we used social media channels to support the recruitment of patients into Phase III clinical trials for NKTR118 which seek to determine whether the medicine is safe and effective for patients suffering from opioidinduced constipation.
For more information See from page 30 in the Business Review 1st The positive decision in Germany in favour of Brilique our treatment for acute coronary syndromes was the first to be made under the new law for the mandatory pricing assessment for newly introduced drugs in their healthcare system.
Our contribution to better health is founded on the RandD of innovative medicines that make a real difference in the treatment of disease.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 14 Health Innovation Our Strategy and Performance More people than ever before had access to innovative medicines in 2011.
At the same time the pharmaceutical industry is facing the expiry of patents on some of the worlds most successful medicines is experiencing pressure on RandD returns and is increasingly being challenged to prove the value of its drugs.
In this section we describe the key growth drivers and challenges that we face.
We then describe AstraZenecas response strategy and business model for creating value through which we deliver benefits to our stakeholders.
Finally we outline the indicators that we use to measure our delivery against our objectives.
As the figure overleaf shows the world pharmaceutical market grew by 4.5% in 2011.
Average revenue growth in Established Markets was 2.8% while that in Emerging Markets was over four times higher at 12%.
The top five pharmaceutical markets in the world remained the US Japan Germany France and China with the US representing 38.1% of global prescription pharmaceutical sales 2010 38.5%.
While demand for medicines and world pharmaceutical markets continued to grow in 2011 researchbased pharmaceutical companies faced a challenging marketplace.
Industry returns are under pressure from declining RandD productivity and intensifying pricing pressures particularly in Established Markets facing rising healthcare costs.
We also face increased competition from generic medicines as some of the worlds most successful drugs come off patent.
In addition greater regulatory constraints are being placed on the pharmaceutical industry by governments and those who pay for our medicines.
The industry remains highly competitive.
Our competitors are other large researchbased pharmaceutical companies that develop and sell innovative patentprotected prescription medicines and vaccines as well as smaller biotechnology and vaccine companies and companies that produce generic medicines.
While many of our peers are confronting similar challenges strategically these challenges are being met in different ways.
For example some companies have chosen to diversify by acquiring or building branded generics businesses or consumer portfolios arguing that this enables them to better meet changing customer needs and smooth risk for shareholders.
Most companies continued to pursue their existing strategies in 2011 with some continuing to diversify and others pursuing a focused strategy.
There were however exceptions with examples of companies shedding diversified assets.
Key trends included efforts to improve RandD productivity expansion of geographic scope especially in Emerging Markets and Japan and the pursuit of operational efficiency.
Industry consolidation continued with both merger activity and acquisitions of specific assets and capabilities.
The pharmaceutical industry Growth drivers Expanding patient populations The world population is estimated to have passed seven billion in 2011 increasing from six billion in 1998 and is expected to reach nine billion by 2050.
In addition the number of people who can access healthcare continues to increase particularly among the elderly.
Globally it is estimated that the number of people over 65 will be almost one billion by 2030 double what it was in 2005.
Fasterdeveloping economies such as China India and Brazil offer new opportunities for the pharmaceutical industry to help an expanding number of patients who can benefit from innovative medicines.
Emerging Markets now represent approximately 85% of the world population.
In addition pharmaceutical revenues in those markets grew significantly faster than those in Established Markets in 2011 and as the Estimated pharmaceutical market growth 20102015 figure overleaf shows it is estimated that this trend will continue.
Unmet medical need In most established markets ageing populations and certain lifestyle choices such as smoking a poor diet and lack of exercise drive an increased incidence of chronic diseases such as cancer cardiovascularmetabolic and respiratory diseases which require longterm management.
The prevalence of chronic disease is increasing in middle income countries and is also beginning to have an impact in low income countries.
For example there are 36 million deaths every year from noncommunicable diseases and of those 80% are in lower and middle income countries.
It is estimated that nearly 33% of the worlds diabetes patients will come from India and China by 2030 by which date its prevalence in Brazil is expected to have increased by twothirds.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Strategy and Performance Strategy and Performance The pharmaceutical industry 15 World pharmaceutical markets Data based on world market sales using AstraZenecas market definitions as set out in the Market definitions table on page 209.
Source IMS Health IMS Midas Quantum Q3 2011.
World
Sales bn Growth in 2011 4.5% Market value in 2011 100%
2010 2011tel Western Europe Sales bn Growth in 2011 0.8% Market value in 2011 24.3%
2010 2011tel Growth in 2011 12.0% Market value in 2011 1 % Emerging ROW Sales bn
2010 2011tel
Sales bn Growth in 2011 3.4% Market value in 2011 1 %
2010 2011tel Established ROW Sales bn Growth in 2011 3.8% Market value in 2011 16.5%
2010 2011tel Strategy and Performance Advances in science and technology Innovation leading to new drugs is critical to meeting unmet medical need.
Existing drugs will continue to be important in meeting the growing demand for healthcare particularly with the increasing use of generic medication.
At the same time advances in disease understanding and the application of new technologies will be required to ensure the delivery of new medicines.
Such approaches include personalised healthcare and predictive science as well as new types of therapy.
With advances in the technologies for the design and testing of novel compounds new opportunities exist for the use of innovative small molecules as new medicines.
The use of large molecules or biologics has also become an important source of innovation with biologics among the most commercially successful new products.
Forecasts for 2016 predict that of the worlds top 100 pharmaceutical products 45% of sales will come from biologics.
This compares with only 33% in 2010 and 15% in 2002.
Most pharmaceutical companies now pursue both small molecules and biologics RandD.
The challenges RandD productivity Improving RandD productivity is a critical challenge for the pharmaceutical industry.
Global investment in pharmaceutical RandD by the top 500 pharmaceutical and biotech companies reached an estimated 133 billion in 2011 a 93% increase from 69 billion in 2002.
Over the same period the number of new drug launches per year in the US stayed broadly the same with an annual average of 25.
Increasing investment has not yet resulted in a sustained increase in output although the FDA approved 30 new drugs in 2011.
At the same time there appears to be a shift away from regulatory submissions for broad primary care medicines to more specialist drugs treating for example more complex diseases together with orphan drugs for rare medical conditions.
To ensure it delivers a sustainable return on its RandD investment the industry is working to increase its probability of success in developing commercially viable new drugs and moving to a lower more flexible cost base.
It does so at a time when regulators and payers are demanding more and better evidence of comparative effectiveness of compounds which lengthens development times and increases development costs.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 16 Strategy and Performance The pharmaceutical industry Using the full range of innovative technologies the industry is focused on two critical milestones Proof of Concept which delivers candidate drugs with supporting data demonstrating that the drug results in a clinical change with an acceptable endpoint or surrogate in patients with the disease and secondly product approval.
Organisationally companies are addressing productivity challenges in a variety of ways.
These include focusing on a defined set of therapeutic areas and exiting those where success has been poor restructuring RandD organisations to create clearer accountabilities and smaller more entrepreneurial units revamping decision making and governance so that unsuccessful compounds are identified early before significant costs have been incurred reducing costs and improving process efficiency using Lean business improvement tools such as Six Sigma and outsourcing a collaborationcentric business model that includes academic collaborations and codevelopment agreements that provide for the sharing of development risks and costs with third parties looking externally for high quality science technologies targets drug candidates andor entire drug pipelines.
Regulatory requirements Our industry continues to be one of the most heavily regulated.
This reflects public interest in ensuring access to safe effective and high quality medicines that are responsibly promoted.
Given the nature and geographic scope of our business we maintain important relationships with health authorities worldwide including the FDA in the US the EMA in the EU the Japan Pharmaceuticals and Medical Device Agency and the SFDA in China.
Estimated pharmaceutical market growth 20102015 1.5% 2.2% 5.3% 15.3% 7.9% 7.4% 12.2% 3.9% 12.2% 3.3% 15.3%
Estimated sales  2015 Estimated growth  20102015 compound annual growth rate North America Sales 357.4bn Growth 1.5% Europe EU countries Sales 237.4bn Growth 2.2% South East and East Asia Sales 147.1bn Growth 15.3% Japan Sales 120.6bn Growth 3.3% Latin America Sales 100.9bn Growth 12.2% Source IMS Health IMS Market Prognosis 20112015.
Exmanufacturer prices at CER.
CIS Sales 33.5bn Growth 12.2% Indian Subcontinent Sales 32.1bn Growth 15.3% Europe Non EU countries Sales 27.6bn Growth 5.3% Africa Sales 25.0bn Growth 7.9% Oceania Sales 16.7bn Growth 3.9% Middle East Sales 15.4bn Growth 7.4% Efforts to harmonise regulations globally are ongoing yet the number of regulations and their impact continue to multiply.
This is particularly evident in the conduct of clinical trials.
In order to support the registration of our products in a given regulatory jurisdiction programmes providing foreign clinical trial data must meet each individual health authoritys requirements to ensure relevance to their population.
Regulators also continue to redefine their patient safety assessment processes.
This includes the management of known and emerging risks both before and after product approval.
In certain markets additional safety initiatives are developing locally which operate independently of already established international standards further increasing the complexity and disharmony of drug safety monitoring and reporting.
In addition the growing complexity and globalisation of both clinical studies and the manufacturing supply chain has led to an increase in crossregional health authority collaborations and inspections in these areas.
Public demand for access to data especially clinical data to understand how health authorities arrive at their regulatory decisions has resulted in numerous transparency proposals worldwide.
In some instances policies have been implemented without guidelines that define personal private and proprietary information.
Thus there can be no assurance that the data will be safeguarded against public disclosure.
There is mounting pressure from both health technology assessors and payers to assess not only the safety of our products but also their relative effectiveness and value.
Consequently there is a heightened interest by health authorities in both the comparative clinical effectiveness and the ongoing benefitrisk assessment of pharmaceuticals after approval.
The regulatory landscape is evolving with an increased focus on incorporating validated health outcome quality measures into clinical trials and developing clinical comparative evidence.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Strategy and Performance Strategy and Performance The pharmaceutical industry 17 an agreement and barring future action by Congress sequestration will take effect on 2 January 2013 and will impact most federal government healthcare programmes other than Medicaid with broad reductions in federal government spending.
As federal financial pressures continue we anticipate that some policymakers will look to the pharmaceutical industry for further cost savings in much the same way that they did during deficit reduction discussions.
More information regarding the impact of price controls and reductions as well as the impact of healthcare reform in the US can be found in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page The principal aspects of price regulation in our major markets are described further in the Geographical Review from page 77.
Patent expiries and genericisation Over the next few years some of the biggest selling drugs the industry has ever produced face patent expiry.
As a consequence payers physicians and patients in Established Markets will have low price generic alternatives in many important classes of primary care drugs.
For example in the US generics constitute 80% of the market by volume today and are expected to be the single largest driver of value growth up to 2015.
Patents only protect pharmaceutical products for a finite period and the expiry or early loss of patents may lead to the availability of generics.
Generic versions of drugs are very competitive with significantly lower pricing than the innovator equivalents.
This is partly due to lower investment by generic manufacturers in RandD and market development which generic manufacturers do not need to recover.
While generic competition has traditionally occurred when patents expire it can also occur where the validity of patents is disputed or successfully challenged before expiry.
Such early challenges by generics have increased with generic companies increasingly willing to launch products at risk for example prior to resolution of the relevant patent litigation.
This trend is likely to continue resulting in significant market presence for the generic version during the period in which litigation remains unresolved even though the courts may subsequently rule that the innovative product is properly protected by a valid patent.
The unpredictable nature of patent litigation has led innovators to seek to settle such challenges on terms acceptable to both innovator and generic manufacturer.
However some competition authorities have sought to challenge the scope or even availability of this type of settlement agreement.
Biologics have to date sustained longer lifecycles than traditional pharmaceuticals and have faced less generic competition.
This is due to a more complex manufacturing process for biologics compared with small molecule medicines and the inherent difficulties in producing a copy of a biologic or biosimilar which is sufficiently similar to the innovator to meet regulatory requirements.
However with regulatory authorities in Europe and the US continuing to implement abbreviated approvals processes for biosimilar versions biologics are becoming subject to competition from biosimilars and other followon biologics.
Building trust The pharmaceutical industry faces a challenge in building and maintaining trust particularly with governments and regulators.
The last 10 years have seen a significant increase in the number of settlements between innovator companies and governmental and regulatory authorities for violations of a variety of laws.
These include breaches of sales and marketing practices inducements of physicians to administer a companys products and breaches of antitrust legislation.
For some audiences there is a perception that pharmaceutical companies place their commercial goals above the interests of patients physicians and payers.
Companies are taking steps to change this perception by embedding a culture of ethics and integrity adopting higher standards of governance and improving relationships with employees shareholders and other stakeholders.
For more information about some of the measures we are taking see the Responsible Business section from page 47.
In spite of the challenges regulators are approving drugs that address unmet medical needs when supported by strong data and compelling benefitrisk propositions.
In addition health authorities are increasing their collaboration with external stakeholders to drive innovation define and clarify approval requirements for personalised healthcare and drugdiagnostic combinations and to accelerate the development of treatments that address public health priorities.
Pricing pressure Most pharmaceutical sales continue to be generated in highly regulated markets where governments and private payers such as insurance companies exert various levels of control on pricing and reimbursement.
Cost containment in healthcare including containment of pharmaceutical spending continues to be a focus and the global economic downturn has enhanced this trend.
As a consequence the pricing and reimbursement environments in many markets continue to be highly dynamic.
It is increasingly important for companies to work with governments to promote innovation while ensuring they achieve adequate commercial returns.
Pricing pressures have arisen in the pharmaceutical industry in a number of ways in recent years particularly through the implementation of a variety of regulatory drug price control mechanisms and other reforms.
For example in Europe mandatory discounts have been applied in Italy.
In Germany Europes largest pharmaceutical market there have been freezes on permitted pharmaceutical prices.
In addition recent German healthcare reforms have transformed the way in which new patent protected drugs are assessed.
There is no longer a free market for the pricing and reimbursement for such drugs.
Instead the law in Germany now requires manufacturers to prove the additional benefit of their drugs over existing alternatives and demonstrate their value to regulators and payers.
Only by showing additional benefit can the drug avoid being transferred to the German reference pricing system where for each drug group a single reimbursement level or reference price is set.
China has experienced 26 rounds of cuts to the maximum permitted retail drug prices in the last seven years and in Japan and South Korea biennial cuts are expected to continue.
We are also seeing the introduction of fixed hospital tariffs which can act as a method of controlling drug costs by incentivising hospitals to choose cheaper generic alternatives.
Elsewhere such as in Canada and the UK increasing use is being made of risk sharing agreements the most common forms of which allow health bodies and payers to seek a refund if a drug fails to meet certain expectations with other markets expected to follow.
Finally in markets such as France Mexico and South Korea pricevolume negotiations are becoming prevalent.
In the US the Affordable Care Act Act has already had a direct impact on healthcare activities despite the fact that many of the healthcare coverage expansion provisions of the Act do not take effect until 2014.
For example there has been an increase in drug rebates and discounts.
The pharmaceutical industry including AstraZeneca has continued to show its commitment to expanding access to government healthcare programmes through for example helping to close the coverage gap in the Medicare Part D prescription drug programme and by paying an annual industry fee.
The industry is working with policymakers and regulators during the implementation of healthcare reform with a view to ensuring that they strike a balance between containing costs while also promoting an environment that fosters medical innovation.
In August as part of the bipartisan agreement to raise the federal debt ceiling the US Congress created the Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction Committee.
The Committee was empowered to recommend a package of 1.2 trillion in cost savings with the requirement that if the Committee failed to reach an agreement the savings would be achieved through across the board spending cuts sequestration.
The Committee discussions ended without reaching Strategy and Performance AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 18 Strategy and Performance The pharmaceutical industry Our strategy
Pipeline discovery and development of innovative differentiated and commercially attractive medicines Deliver the business sales and marketing activities undertaken in the right way and focused on the needs of our customers patients physicians and payers Business shape a reliable supply and manufacturing operation and Lean organisational infrastructure that ensure our medicines are where they need to be when they are needed
Responsible business committed to acting responsibly and to the sustainable development of our business Strategic pillars business.
Our priorities are to drive World class productivity in RandD Increased external collaboration Our global orientation reflecting the growth in Emerging Markets Stronger customer orientation particularly towards payers Operational efficiency with a flexible cost base
Integrity and high ethical standards Respect for the individual and diversity Openness honesty trust and support for each other Leadership by example at all levels Our mission is to make the most meaningful difference to health through great medicines that bring benefit for patients and add value for our stakeholders and society.
The diagram above illustrates the strategic framework which defines the direction and shape of the Group to deliver this.
We believe that the most valuecreating strategy for AstraZeneca is to be a focused integrated innovationdriven global prescriptionbased biopharmaceutical business biopharmaceutical in that we will develop both chemical small molecule and biological large molecule medicines focused in that we will continue to be selective about those areas of the pharmaceutical industry in which we choose to compete targeting those product categories where medical innovation or brand equity will continue to enable us to make acceptable levels of return on our investments integrated in that we believe the best way to capture value within this industry is to span the full value chain of discovery development and commercialisation while continuing to work with partners and outsourcing to capture operational efficiencies innovationdriven in that we believe our technology base will continue to deliver innovative products that will benefit patients and for which payers will pay global in that we believe we have the ability to meet healthcare needs in both established and emerging markets efficiently and effectively.
We believe that there continue to be opportunities to create value for those who invest in pharmaceutical innovation and that AstraZeneca has the skills and capabilities to take advantage of these opportunities and turn them into longterm value through the research development and marketing of medicines.
For us this is the core of our commitment to our stakeholders and society.
Successful pharmaceutical innovation delivered responsibly brings benefits to patients creates sustainable value for shareholders and contributes to the economic and social welfare of the communities we serve.
Values
Building strong relationships is a critical element of our business success.
We need to connect with our stakeholders including patients doctors regulators governments and payers if we are to understand their needs and challenges and deliver on our commitment to improving patient health.
We also need to earn and maintain the trust of our customers partners and others.
This requires us to behave in accordance with our core values.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Strategy and Performance Strategy and Performance Our strategy 19 Our business model Strategy and Performance Our business model is driven by our strategy and is based on using the best innovative science and technology to invent or acquire produce and distribute innovative patentprotected medicines that make a meaningful difference to peoples health around the world.
We also commercialise medicines that do not have patent protection where we can obtain prices that reflect the quality and value of our brand.
To pursue our strategy we invest in those projects and products where we believe medical innovation or brand equity will enable us to make acceptable levels of return for our shareholders.
The Lifecycle of a medicine overview on page 10 illustrates the process we use to develop new drugs.
It starts with the identification of an unmet medical need and market opportunity and the search for a potential medicine and moves through clinical trials and drug development regulatory submission a medicines launch and management of its lifecycle.
An inherent element of our business model is the creation and protection of our underlying IP assets.
As the diagram below shows the development of a new medicine requires a significant investment of resources over a period of 10 or more years before product launch with no guarantee of success.
For this to be a viable investment the resulting new medicine must be safeguarded from being copied with a reasonable amount of certainty for a reasonable period of time.
This allows time to generate the revenue we need to reinvest in new pharmaceutical innovation.
In addition to establishing and defending our IP assets see the Intellectual Property section from page 34 and as illustrated in the diagram we can also influence the return we make on our investment by improving our RandD productivity see from page 30 Sales and marketing effectiveness see from page 36 Operational efficiency see from page 38.
A key goal for our planning process is to ensure that we sustain the cycle of successful innovation and as a result continue to refresh our portfolio of patented products and so generate value for shareholders.
Our business model Expiry of IP rights and commoditisation of knowledge which typically sees generic versions of a medicine entering a market Period of IP protection for an innovative medicine which allows a return to be made on the investment undertaken Clinical development programmes to determine safety and efficacy of the potential medicine and generate further IP rights and data for regulatory submissions Application for patents to protect the IP assets developed in a potential medicine Creation and acquisition of IP through innovative
Reinvestment of returns from period of patent protection into next generation of innovative medicines Commercialisation of medicines that do not have patent protection
Return Investment Sales and marketing Launch Investment in discovery development and commercialisation of patent protected medicines
Sales and marketing effectiveness
Extend patent life AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 20 Strategy and Performance Our business model Our strategic priorities to 2014 Our goal is to create sustainable value for shareholders by being one of the bestperforming biopharmaceutical companies.
To achieve that goal the pace of change across AstraZeneca needs to accelerate and we need to deliver on the following mediumterm strategic priorities.
Pipeline
We are transforming our RandD organisation.
We have streamlined and refocused our product portfolio introduced a new operating model and simplified our site footprint.
We continue to focus on improving the quantity and quality of RandD output by building industryleading capabilities in critical areas and a more outwardlooking organisation which accesses the best science regardless of origin.
While we are confident that longterm growth in demand for innovative biopharmaceuticals will remain strong it is clear that substantial improvement in RandD productivity is needed if we are to sustain acceptable returns to shareholders.
We are therefore accelerating our RandD strategy.
We are pioneering innovative ways of conducting research.
Neuroscience is a challenging field of medical science with high unmet need and one that a number of our competitors have chosen to exit.
To reinvigorate our efforts in this therapeutic area we plan to create a virtual innovative medicines unit iMed in which a small group of scientists discover and develop a full pipeline of medicines working with external partners and collaborators.
They would replace our current scientific and laboratory resources.
Alongside this we plan to create a simpler leaner more flexible organisation through a variety of steps which better support a more focused portfolio.
Deliver the business At a time when many companies are exiting primary care AstraZeneca is distinctive for combining a broad portfolio of primary and specialty care products with a global reach.
We will continue to build on our leading positions in Established Markets and to introduce innovative ways of serving our customers using digital and telephone channels service teams and deskbased medical support.
We will invest in growth opportunities including brands such as Crestor and BrilintaBrilique and markets such as Japan and China.
We will drive sales of our leading products which no longer benefit from patent protection where we retain brand equity and can command prices which reflect the quality and value of our brand.
In addition we will pursue further growth in Emerging Markets by expanding the population we serve supplementing our patented innovative products with branded generic products sourced externally and marketed under the AstraZeneca brand.
To further strengthen revenues we will accelerate our efforts to secure latestageonmarket product licensing acquisition and peer collaboration opportunities.
Across the Group we are investing in our ability to meet the needs of those who pay for our medicines.
In RandD our new payer evidence group is ensuring that as we develop our medicines we gather not only the clinical data required for regulatory approval but also the health economics costbenefit information and valueinuse data required by payers.
Our HealthCore and IMS collaborations will gather real world evidence about the comparative effectiveness of our products.
This capability helps us to gain global reimbursement broad market access and optimal pricing for our medicines.
Business shape Given the pressures in the external environment we will continue to simplify the business.
Simplification means not only cost reduction but also streamlining processes and shifting to a more flexible cost base.
In our Commercial organisation we are simplifying our operating model.
We are consolidating the business into three regions the Americas EMEA and AsiaPacific running the global and regional organisations from three sites Wilmington US London UK and Shanghai China and changing our Established Markets footprint in line with declining sales.
Following the success of our Nordic and Central American clusters we are creating further country clusters to share resources and expertise more effectively.
Across our Supply and Manufacturing function we continue to drive efficiencies through our business improvement programmes and to use outsourcing and partnering to increase flexibility.
We are also consolidating many of our support services into shared services driving Lean process improvements investing in automation and new global systems.
We are outsourcing selected activities to specialist third party providers in low cost locations.
People
Talented motivated and capable people are critical to the successful achievement of our strategic ambitions.
We are focused on four key people priorities as we lead through significant change in the business acquiring and retaining key capabilities and talent further developing leadership and management capabilities improving the strength and diversity of the talent pipeline improving employee engagement.
Responsible business We reviewed and reshaped our corporate responsibility priority action plan during the year taking into account our strategy insights gained from dialogue with stakeholders and our internal risk assessment.
Our new Responsible Business Plan launched in April 2011 reflects our commitment to enhancing the sustainability of our business by operating responsibly.
It underpins our work and provides the framework for applying integrity and high ethical standards across all our activities.
The Responsible Business Plans objectives are closely aligned to our business strategy.
We have given the highest priority to those areas most impacted by our strategic priorities including sales and marketing practices access to healthcare research ethics including animal welfare human rights and supplier management.
At the same time we have not lost sight of other significant aspects of our corporate responsibility such as patient safety and the environment.
The Responsible Business Plan is overseen by a Responsible Business Council of senior leaders from within our organisation.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Strategy and Performance Strategy and Performance Our strategic priorities to 2014 21 Restructuring Since 2007 we have undertaken significant efforts to restructure and reshape our business to improve longterm competitiveness.
The first phase is complete.
It comprised total restructuring costs of 2.5 billion and delivered 2.4 billion in annual benefits by the end of 2010 with a gross headcount reduction of 12600.
The second phase which featured a significant change programme in RandD began in 2010 and was largely completed during 2011.
The cost phase of this programme totalled 2.1 billion and is expected to deliver total annual benefits of 1.9 billion by the end of 2014 of which 1 billion had been achieved by the end of 2011.
Gross headcount reductions associated with this second phase will be around 9000.
Both restructuring programmes delivered their targeted benefits to date.
We have invested some of the savings to drive future growth and value such as in our Emerging Markets commercial infrastructure and an expansion of our research capabilities in biologics.
At the same time we have also improved Core preRandD and operating margins over the period.
When completed the next phase of restructuring announced in February 2012 is expected to deliver a further 1.6 billion in annual benefits by the end of 2014.
Total programme costs are estimated to be 2.1 billion approximately 1.7 billion in cash costs of which 261 million were charged in 2011 and the total number of positions expected to be impacted for this phase is estimated to be approximately 7300.
Final estimates for programme costs benefits and headcount impact in all functions are subject to completion of the requisite consultation processes in accordance with relevant local requirements and labour laws.
Mediumterm planning assumptions When we announced our full year results for 2009 we set out a series of mediumterm planning assumptions which we updated in January 2011 and February 2012.
We continue to plan on the basis that revenue will be in the range of 28 billion to 34 billion per annum over the 201014 period.
However given increased government price intervention currency movements and the divestment of Astra Tech we now expect the centre of gravity for revenue for the remainder of the period is likely to be in the lower half of the range.
Using our latest assessment including the Complete Response Letter received in January 2012 for dapagliflozin in the US we have lowered our risk adjusted view of the potential revenue contribution in 2014 from recently launched and pipeline products to between 2 billion and 4 billion.
Based on continued productivity improvements including successful completion of restructuring initiatives our planning assumption remains that Core operating margin before investment in RandD Core preRandD operating margin will be in the range of 48% to 54% of revenue.
We expect that these levels of revenue and margins would generate the requisite operating cash flow over the planning period to support the reinvestment needs of the business debt service obligations and shareholder distributions.
Over the planning period we expect that between 40% and 50% of our preRandD posttax cash flows will be reinvested in internal and external RandD and capital investments to drive future value and growth.
The planning assumptions described above depend in turn on assumptions and expectations regarding the development of our business the industry and macroeconomic factors.
See the Financial Review from page 82 for a discussion of our highlevel planning assumptions.
These and other assumptions underlying our expected future results are subject to risks and uncertainties and actual results may differ significantly from our current expectations.
See the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 130.
Noncore businesses We have actively considered potential shareholder value creation from our noncore businesses and in November 2010 formally initiated a review of strategic options for Astra Tech a global leader in dental and healthcare urological and surgical products services and support.
Our review concluded with the sale of the Astra Tech business to DENTSPLY International Inc. a transaction that closed on 31 August 2011.
Proceeds from the sale are being returned to shareholders through share repurchases.
As of 31 January 2012 we had signed binding agreements with four of the five hospitalbased outpatient cancer centres managed by Aptium Oncology Inc.
Aptium Oncology.
Under the terms of these agreements each hospital has acquired Aptium Oncologys interest in the assets used in connection with the operation of the cancer centres.
Transactions with three of the five hospitals had closed by 31 December 2011 a fourth closed in January 2012.
We expect the final transaction to be signed during the first quarter and close during the second quarter of 2012.
IT transitional services support will be provided to each cancer centre during 2012.
Strategy and Performance AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 22 Strategy and Performance Our strategic priorities to 2014 Our performance in 201 1 Our performance Within AstraZeneca each business function is subject to an annual budget and targetsetting process that includes developing financial and business forecasts conducting sensitivity and risk analyses and setting relevant objectives.
In setting our objectives we ensure that they are aligned with our mediumterm planning assumptions and strategic priorities.
Regular reviews are undertaken in order to monitor and assess progress against business and budget targets.
During the year we also seek to manage the business appropriately both to optimise our opportunities and to assess key risks and mitigating actions.
Quarterly reports provide the SET and the Board with insight into progress against current year objectives and milestones for longerterm strategic goals.
We assess performance using quantitative comparative market operational and financial measures and qualitative analysis.
We have developed KPIs by which we measure our success in delivering our strategy.
A description of our KPIs and how we performed against them in 2011 is shown below and overleaf.
Financial
Met or exceeded targets as a result of solid business performance plus Astra Tech sale and lower effective tax rate Core preRandD operating profitmargin Sustain Core preRandD operating margins of 48%54% 54.2% 2010 53.5% Exceeded target
Sustain annual revenues of 2834 billion 33591m 2010 33269 million Met target Reinvestment rate Reinvest 40%50% of preRandD posttax cash flows in RandD and capital investments 40% 2010 37% Met target Core EPS Achieve Core EPS for 2011 in the range 2010 6.71 Met target Total shareholder distribution Provide strong cash returns to shareholders via progressive dividends and periodic share repurchases 5.6bn Fullyear dividend 2.80 Net share repurchases 5.6 billion 2010 Fullyear dividend 2.55 Net share repurchases 2.1 billion Met target See Financial Review from page 82 for more information.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Strategy and Performance Strategy and Performance Our performance in 2011 23 Strategy and Performance Our performance in 201 1 continued
Major market approvals for Brilinta Caprelsa Axanum and Komboglyze
Nexium and Faslodex 500mg approved in Japan mixed results for dapagliflozin submission and disappointments on other pipeline products Product approvals Onetwo first major market approvals per year that support revenue target for 2014 of billion from recent launches pipeline and inlicensing 2011 Brilinta approved in the US and Canada Caprelsa vandetanib approved in the US and positive CHMP opinion in the EU Axanum approved in the EU Komboglyze approved in the EU Fluenz approved in the EU 2010 Vimovo approved in the US and the EU Brilique approved in the EU with Complete Response Letter received for Brilinta in the US Kombiglyze XR approved in the US additional indications approved for Crestor in the US and the EU and for Seroquel XR in the EU 2014 target reduced Regulatory submissions Major market submissions to support first approvals and line extensions for each new product and continued marketing applications first local authorisation and local line extensions in additional countries to drive growth 2011 Nexium and Faslodex 500mg approved in Japan dapagliflozin MAA validated by EMA Complete Response Letter received from the FDA in the US requesting additional clinical data 2010 Dapagliflozin and vandetanib NDAs submitted in the US and the EU Zinforo and Axanum MAAs submitted in the EU On target Phase III investment decisions Phase III investment decisions that support value targets for new products 2011 Phase III trials started for NKTR118 and initiation of Phase III programme for CAZ AVI 2010 Phase III trials started for fostamatinib and TC5214 2014 target reduced Licensing dealsacquisitions 40% of our pipeline sourced from outside our laboratories 6 out of 9 Phase IIIRegistration projects 67% sourced externally 12 out of 24 Phase II projects 50% sourced externally 6 out of 9 Phase IIIRegistration projects 67% sourced externally 11 out of 32 Phase II projects 34% sourced externally Met target Deliver the business Global revenue reduction of 2% included 10% increase in Emerging Markets Growth of key brands Drive revenue growth of key brands that retain exclusivity Crestor 13% Symbicort 11% Seroquel XR 27% Crestor 24% Symbicort 20% Seroquel XR 67% Met target Revenue from new product launches Revenue in 2014 in the range of billion from recent launches pipeline and inlicensing Combined revenue from Onglyza Vimovo BrilintaBrilique Caprelsa and Axanum 2010 74 million Combined revenue from Onglyza and Vimovo 2014 target reduced Emerging Market sales 25% of revenue in 2014 from Emerging Markets business 1 7% 17% of revenue from Emerging Markets 2010 16% of revenue from Emerging Markets On target See Research and Development section from page 30 for more information.
Target revised to 24 billion in February 2012.
See Mediumterm planning assumptions section on page 22.
See Financial Review from page 82 and Therapy Area Review from page 56 for more information.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 24 Strategy and Performance Our performance in 2011 Responsible business Achieved highest ever assessment score for Dow Jones Sustainability World and European Indexes DJSI ranking Maintain position within the DJSI World Index comprising the top 10% of the largest 2500 companies Top 7% 2010 Top 8% Met target Confirmed breaches of external sales and marketing codes or regulations Report confirmed breaches of external codes arising from external scrutiny and voluntary disclosure by AstraZeneca 2011 17 confirmed breaches of external sales and marketing regulations or codes globally 2010 11 confirmed breaches of external sales and marketing regulations or codes globally Met target Number of audits conducted Expand riskbased programme of responsible procurement audits across all supplier categories and geographies 751 audits of 727 suppliers 2010 48 audits of 42 suppliers Met target Business shape Met targets with continued efficiencies across the organisation Gross margin Maintain gross margin in excess of 80% 82.2% 2010 81.2% Met target Core SGandA costs Improve cost efficiencies and flexibility in SGandA costs 1.5% 1.5% reduction in Core SGandA costs 2010 2% reduction in Core SGandA costs Met target Procurement savings Procurement savings across all functions Savings of 487 million 2010 Savings of 541 million Met target RandD cost efficiency Reduced function costs across RandD to support focused RandD portfolio 5.0bn Achieved Core RandD efficiency savings with spend of 5.0 billion 2010 Achieved Core RandD efficiency savings with spend of 4.2 billion Met target
Improvement in employee engagement and senior leader communications Employee engagement Achieve global high performing norm rating for employee engagement by 2014 84% 2010 83% score On target Leadership communications Further developing our leadership and management capabilities 65% 2010 63% score Met target Worklife balance Achieve an improvement in the worklife balance of our employees 67% 2010 65% score Met target See Financial Review from page 82 for more information.
See Research and Development section from page 30 for more information.
See Responsible Business section from page 47 for more information.
See People section from page 40 for more information.
All percentages are the result of our global employee survey FOCUS percentage scores are measured on a likeforlike basis using comparable questions from the FOCUS survey.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Strategy and Performance Strategy and Performance Our performance in 2011 25 Finding solutions through collaboration We believe that only by working together with all our stakeholders can real progress be made in healthcare.
Collaboration is a way of life for us.
26 Health Collaboration AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 healthcollaboration Improving health is a tough challenge.
As tough as world poverty and other big challenges like global food supply energy and the environment.
Despite all the advances in recent decades major diseases are on the increase.
We know that AstraZeneca has a key role to play in tackling these challenges with medicines that make a real difference.
We also know that we cannot work in isolation if we are to deliver medicines that people really need and value.
So we work closely with all our stakeholders to understand their needs and perspectives and how we can combine forces to achieve a common goal  improved health.
Strategy and Performance AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Health Collaboration 27 Following the acquisition of Novexel in 2010 we are collaborating with Forest on the codevelopment and commercialisation of two late stage antibiotic development programmes.
In 2011 we announced that one of these ceftazidimeavibactam CAZ AVI is entering Phase III trials to investigate its efficacy in treating patients with complicated intraabdominal and urinary tract infections.
AstraZeneca is one of four companies to have signed up to partner with TB Alliance and the World Health Organization in a sixway alliance through which the companies will share information about the tuberculosis TB compounds in their pipelines to quickly identify and collaborate to develop the most promising TB drug regimen regardless of sponsor.
Formed under the Critical Path to TB Drug Regimens CPTR initiative the partnership facilitates a more collaborative approach to TB drug development.
It aims dramatically to speed up the development of shorter safer and more effective multidrug treatments which are urgently needed to control the global TB pandemic.
The Scrip Award for the Best Partnership Alliance was won by our Colorectal Cancer Collaboration with molecular diagnostics company Agendia and the Netherlands Cancer Institute.
The twoyear partnership has the objective of accelerating the development of targeted therapies for colorectal cancer by segmenting it at the molecular level.
A key feature of the partnership is that personalised diagnostics may be developed far earlier in the development process for new drugs than has previously been possible.
6 of 9 Six of our nine Phase III products are the result of successful partnerships 67%.
We have a longstanding culture of collaboration and 57200 people worldwide dedicated to working with each other and with our stakeholders to improve healthcare.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 28 Health Collaboration Delivering our strategy Our strategy is to be a focused integrated innovationdriven global prescriptionbased biopharmaceutical business
Business Review
This section includes information that fulfils the requirements of a business review under the Companies Act 2006.
The Strategy and Performance Corporate Governance Development Pipeline Shareholder Information and Corporate Information sections from pages 15 99 199 203 and 208 respectively are incorporated into this section.
Details of the more significant risks to AstraZeneca are set out in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 130.
Many of our products are subject to litigation.
Information about material legal proceedings can be found in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
References to prevalence of disease have been derived from a variety of sources and are not intended to be indicative of the current market or any potential market for AstraZenecas pharmaceutical products since among other things there may be no correlation between the prevalence of a disease and the number of individuals who are treated for such a disease.
We need the following resources skills and capabilities to deliver our strategy An RandD function with world class productivity.
See page 30 Cost effective sales and marketing activities focused on our customers and patients needs.
See page 36 A reliable supply and manufacturing operation that ensures our medicines are where they need to be when they are needed.
See page 38 A talented and diverse workforce with the right capabilities operating in a high performance culture.
See page 40 These resources need to be underpinned by A wellfunctioning system of IP rights.
See page 34 High quality and flexible support services including high value information technology and systems.
See page 39 Employees acting with integrity.
See page 40 A commitment to acting responsibly and to the sustainable development of our business.
See page 47 And at the heart of what we do is the need to Deliver value through innovation.
See page 12 Find solutions through collaboration.
See page 26 Earn trust through integrity.
See page 44 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Delivering our strategy 29 Delivering our strategy Research and Development We are focused on delivering innovative and valued medicines We are committed to deploying the best science and technology to invent and acquire produce and distribute innovative medicines that make a meaningful difference to peoples health around the world.
This commitment is at the core of our RandD strategy and continues to drive our focus to create valuable medicines for patients that recognise the needs of healthcare practitioners governments payers and external stakeholders throughout the healthcare system.
Our RandD organisation continues to evolve to meet the challenges facing our industry by investing in high quality science and harnessing the innovation of our people.
We are continuously improving our understanding of mechanisms and targets that will become the foundation for developing and delivering tomorrows new medicines.
These efforts are undertaken with the highest ethical standards as we are committed to delivering innovative medicines responsibly.
More information about our Responsible Business Plan can be found from page 47.
Focused RandD portfolio We continue to prioritise our resources and focus discovery activities on those diseases within our existing therapy areas where we believe there is the greatest potential to meet patient need through the application of novel science.
This continual process of prioritisation is designed to ensure that the projects we have in our pipeline constitute the programmes which we believe are most likely to deliver technical and commercial success.
In 2011 we continued our core research focus on six therapy areas Cardiovascular Gastrointestinal Neuroscience Infection Oncology and Respiratory and Inflammation.
Our RandD efforts are supported by nine innovative medicine units iMeds across small molecule and biologics projects.
Eight iMeds focus on defined disease areas with a ninth targeting New Opportunities.
Our iMeds are responsible for discovery and development up to and including Phase II testing and delivery of molecules to our Global Medicines Development GMD organisation for Phase III and registration activities.
Our
GMD organisation provides a single global platform dedicated to conducting trials for small molecules and biologics and is accountable for delivering the regulatory packages to support launches of new medicines that are commercially attractive and reimbursable.
In addition to our defined disease areas we continuously assess opportunities to acquire through purchase or partnership development and commercialisation rights to compounds targets and technologies outside our core therapeutic expertise.
I am passionate about making a difference to patients through great medicines.
To create value we aim to unlock the best science available from our own labs and through partnerships Martin Mackay President Global RandD 86 pipeline projects of which 79 are in the clinical phase of development and a further seven are approved or launched Nine projects in late stage clinical development either in Phase III or under regulatory review 18 out of 33 projects in Phase II III or under regulatory review sourced externally AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 30 Delivering our strategy Research and Development 2011 1tel
Phase I Phase II Phase III Line Extensions Includes seven lifecycle management projects reintroduced from Brazil Russia India China Mexico Turkey and Japan.
Includes seven projects that are approved or launched.
Development projects Development projects Our pipeline includes 79 projects in the clinical phase of development.
As shown in the Development projects chart above we now have a total of 29 projects in Phase I 24 projects in Phase II 10 projects in late stage development either in Phase III or under regulatory review and we are running 23 significant lifecycle management projects.
During 2011 across the clinical portfolio 25 projects have successfully progressed to their next phase including five projects entering first human testing and 21 projects have been withdrawn.
Further details are set out in the Therapy Area Review from page 56 and in the Development Pipeline table from page 199.
Portfolio quality In 2011 we undertook a thorough assessment of our early portfolio projects resulting in the termination of a number of early projects.
Going forward our focus will be on identifying key candidate medicines that have the highest potential to deliver technical and commercial success.
By continuing to apply a rigorous quality approach to our candidate selection process we expect to increase the likelihood that our most promising medicines progress into Phase III development.
Our Portfolio Investment Board PIB plays an important role in maintaining portfolio quality through its continued evaluation of our projects designed to ensure that we are maximising the value of our RandD investments.
More detail relating to the PIBs responsibilities can be found in the Corporate Governance Report from page 99.
Pipeline delivery Several milestones for products currently in development were passed in 2011.
These are shown in the table overleaf and more information about these can be found in the Therapy Area Review from page 56.
Of the 21 projects withdrawn in 2011 two were withdrawn following failure to obtain the required regulatory or marketing approvals for the product candidate or the facilities in which it is manufactured and 15 were withdrawn following poorer than anticipated safety or efficacy results.
The remaining projects were withdrawn following assessment of the projects against other product pipeline risk factors such as those detailed in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 130.
Integrated RandD approach As demonstrated by the Lifecycle of a medicine section on page 10 our RandD activities span the entire lifecycle of a medicine.
Our
This new model is designed to increase accountability and enhance scientific knowledgesharing within therapeutic areas.
In addition our single RandD strategy enables more effective and efficient delivery of our research objectives across the therapeutic portfolio regardless of geography disease area or stage of development.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Delivering our strategy Research and Development 31 Delivering our strategy Our collaboration efforts have resulted in a combination of internally and externally sourced compounds throughout our portfolio with various development partnerships with biotechnology firms research institutions and other pharmaceutical companies.
We previously announced our intention to source up to 40% of our pipeline from outside our laboratories by 2014 and we are on track to deliver that commitment.
Collaborating externally enables us to build the value of our internallysourced products and identify external sources of cuttingedge science that will enhance and amend our own portfolio of compounds.
External partnerships announced in 2011 include Tremelimumab a late stage CTLA4 MAb in oncology which AstraZeneca inlicensed from Pfizer for the potential treatment of a number of oncology indications.
A collaboration with the UK Medical Research Council MRC in which UK academic researchers are provided with access to over 20 compounds developed by AstraZeneca for investigation as potential new treatments across a spectrum of diseases.
AMG108 a novel MAb targeting the IL 1 pathway with potential for treating certain inflammatory diseases which AstraZeneca licensed from Amgen Inc.
A strategic collaboration with the Sarah Cannon Research Institute SCRI an international leader in advancing therapies for cancer patients through clinical research under which SCRI will lead the clinical development of a novel targeted oncology compound from
A collaborative research agreement with Galderma Pharma S. including psoriasis acne and atopic dermatitis.
A collaboration with Manchester University and GSK to establish the Manchester Collaborative Centre for Inflammation Research MCCIR a translational science centre that will bring together industry researchers and academia in an alliance to study chronic inflammatory diseases.
AZD4694 a late stage radiopharmaceutical imaging candidate outlicensed to Neoprobe Corporation.
AZD4694 is a fluorine18 labelled radiotracer discovered by AstraZeneca to support development of potential treatments for Alzheimers disease.
Our biologics capabilities signed its first oncology research agreement in China with the Shanghai Chest Hospital.
The goal of this collaboration is to build a database of small and nonsmall cell lung cancer cases.
We continue to search actively for opportunities to advance science and public health through research collaborations and partnerships.
This is demonstrated by our ongoing efforts with organisations such as the European Innovative Medicines Initiative IMI aimed at improving tools technologies methodologies and knowledge management and additional collaborations with the UK MRC and the World Intellectual Property Organisation WIPO.
We have made a significant commitment to the field of neglected tropical diseases NTDs RandD via our founder membership of WIPOs WIPO ReSearch consortium.
This consortium promotes the formation of research partnerships aimed at driving the identification of solutions to NTDs which are less commercially attractive disease targets but have particularly severe effects in the worlds least developed countries.
Our commitment to WIPO ReSearch includes the promise to contribute a range of resources technology and IP.
Pipeline delivery Milestone Product 2011 Achievement Key pipeline progressions CAZ AVI Initiation of Phase III programme for CAZ AVI a combination of ceftazidime and avibactam formerly known as CAZ104 for the treatment of complicated intra abdominal and complicated urinary tract infections NKTR118 Initiation of Phase III programme for treatment of opioidinduced constipation Dapagliflozin FDA acceptance of NDA file for treatment of adult patients with Type 2 diabetes Complete Response Letter received from the FDA in January 2012 requesting additional clinical data Major market approvals BrilintaBrilique ticagrelor Regulatory approvals in US Canada and 64 countries in total for the prevention of cardiovascular events in patients with acute coronary syndromes Caprelsa vandetanib FDA approval for treatment of symptomatic and progressive medullary thyroid cancer in patients with unresectable locally advanced or metastatic disease.
Positive opinion received from CHMP regarding MAA for Caprelsa Axanum esomeprazoleASA Approval by 23 EU member states as a treatment to prevent CV events in highrisk CV patients in need of low dose ASA who are at risk of gastric ulcers Komboglyze saxagliptin metformin HCI European Commission approval as a treatment for adults with Type 2 diabetes Fluenz live attenuated intranasal influenza vaccine EU marketing authorisation granted for the treatment of seasonal influenza for children from 24 months to less than 18 years Nexium esomeprazole Approval in Japan for acidrelated conditions including NERD reflux esophagitis and PUD Faslodex fulvestrant 500mg Approval in Japan for the treatment of postmenopausal women with hormone receptorpositive metastatic breast cancer which has recurred or progressed following prior endocrine therapy AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 32 Delivering our strategy Research and Development Investing in capabilities A core component of our RandD strategy is strengthening four core capabilities.
In 2010 we announced an investment of more than 200 million over five years to develop capabilities in the areas of payer partnering personalised healthcare predictive science and clinical design.
We are making steady progress in building these skills both internally and through external collaborations.
Examples of our efforts in 2011 include Payer partnering  a new payer evidence function has been established to support both our Commercial and RandD organisations in addressing the evidence needs of payers at every stage of the product lifecycle.
A key part of this support comes from new capabilities in analysing observational data.
We have entered a unique collaboration with HealthCore the health outcomes research subsidiary of Wellpoint Inc. diseases.
This provides access to the largest commercially insured population data environment in the US and is fully operational supporting both development projects and marketed brands.
Building on this in January 2012 we signed a threeyear collaboration agreement with IMS Health Inc. to preexisting anonymised health records.
This information will provide a degree of insight into how medicines that are already on the market are working in realworld settings across Europe and will help inform our discovery and clinical development programmes.
Personalised healthcare  our personalised healthcare capability is focused on identifying patients that are most likely to benefit from our medicines.
The proportion of our development portfolio utilising or investigating personalised healthcare approaches such as the use of biomarkers has increased from 25% at the end of 2010 to over 50% including 10 projects that involve a companion diagnostic to target therapy.
Our recently formed personalised healthcare group continues to support Iressa with initiatives to improve the speed and quality of diagnostic testing contributing to Iressas increase in sales.
Predictive science  we are integrating modelling and simulation into many different aspects of RandD.
We recruited 25 external experts from the global modelling and simulation community to accelerate the development of our predictive science capability.
Modelling and simulation is now used in the areas of biology chemistry formulation development preclinical and clinical safety assessment pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic evaluation and clinical trial simulation.
Clinical design  we implemented a range of innovative changes to drive consistency and excellence in the critically important capability of clinical trial design and interpretation.
Almost 90% of our RandD teams have incorporated the changes and are starting to utilise a new design and interpretation framework.
Our resources At the end of 2011 our RandD organisation comprised approximately 11300 people at 14 principal centres in eight countries.
Our RandD transformation that began in 2010 has been largely completed resulting in the closure of several of our RandD facilities and a net reduction of 1400 positions.
The exit of RandD personnel and activities from the Charnwood site in the UK and the Lund site in Sweden was completed in 2011 and the facilities will be closed in early 2012.
Our approach to implementing such change is outlined in the Managing change in our organisation section on page 42.
In February 2012 we announced the next phase of restructuring.
Further details are set out in the Our strategic priorities to 2014 section from page 21.
Our RandD geographic footprint includes four main small molecule facilities in the UK Alderley Park and Macclesfield Sweden MIndal and the US Waltham Massachusetts.
Other sites with a focus on research are in Sweden Sdertlje Canada Montreal Quebec and France Reims.
We also have a clinical development facility in Osaka
Our principal sites for biologics and vaccines are in the US Gaithersburg Maryland and Mountain View California and in the UK Cambridge.
Our Wilmington Delaware site in the US now focuses on late stage development across the portfolio.
Finally our strategic expansion in Emerging Markets continues and includes the growth of our Innovation Centre China research facility in Shanghai China as well as our research facility in Bangalore India.
In 2011 there was Core RandD expenditure of 5.0 billion in our RandD organisation 2010 4.2 billion 2009 4.3 billion.
In addition 189 million was spent on acquiring product rights such as inlicensing 2010 1017 million 2009 764 million and we invested approximately 468 million on the implementation of our RandD restructuring strategy.
The allocations of 20092011 spend by early and late activities are presented below.
RandD spend analysistel iMeds % Discovery and early development 56% 73% 70% GMD % Late stage development 44% 27% 30% Core RandD costs m 5033 4219 4334 Reported expenditure in our RandD organisation was 5.5 billion 2010 5.3 billion 2009 4.4 billion.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Delivering our strategy Research and Development 33 Intellectual Property We protect the ownership of our inventions Delivering our strategy The discovery and development of a new medicine requires a significant investment of resources by researchbased pharmaceutical companies over a period of 10 or more years.
For this to be a viable investment the results new medicines must be safeguarded from being copied with a reasonable amount of certainty for a reasonable period of time.
The principal economic safeguard in our industry is a wellfunctioning patent system that recognises our effort and rewards our innovation with appropriate protection allowing time to generate the revenue we need to reinvest in new pharmaceutical innovation.
Patent rights are limited by territory and duration yet a significant period of this time can be spent on RandD of our products and before product launch.
We therefore commit significant resources to establishing and defending our patent and related IP protections for these inventions.
Patent process We file applications for patent protection for our inventions to safeguard the large subsequent investment required to obtain approval of potential new drugs for marketing.
Further innovation means that we may seek additional patent protection as we develop a product and its uses.
We apply for patents via patent offices around the world which assess whether our inventions meet the strict legal requirements for a patent to be granted.
In some countries our competitors can challenge our patents in the patent offices and in all countries competitors can challenge our patents in the courts.
We can face challenges early in the patent application process and throughout the life of the patent.
These challenges can be to the validity of a patent andor to the effective scope of a patent and are based on everevolving legal precedents.
There can be no guarantee of success for either party in patent proceedings.
For information about third party challenges to the patents protecting our products see Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
The basic term of a patent is 20 years from filing of the patent application with the relevant government patent office.
However the product protected by a pharmaceutical patent may not be marketed for several years after patent filing due to the time required for clinical trials and the regulatory approval process necessary to obtain marketing approval for the product.
Patent Term Extensions PTE are available in certain major markets including the EU and US to compensate for these delays.
The term of the PTE can vary from zero to five years depending on the time taken to obtain any marketing approval.
The maximum patent term including any PTE is however capped at 15 years EU or 14 years US from the first marketing approval.
The average effective patent term on the market is frequently several years less than these maximum terms for reasons including unpredictable regulatory timings and the time taken for any required pricing negotiations.
The generic industry is increasingly challenging innovators patents at earlier stages and almost all leading pharmaceutical products in the US have faced or are facing patent challenges from generic manufacturers.
The result of patent challenges experienced by our competitors products may lead to the availability of generics in the same product class as patented products we currently supply which may materially impact our business.
We are also experiencing increased challenges elsewhere in the world for example in Europe Canada Asia and Latin America.
Further information about the risks relating to patent litigation and early loss and expiry of patents is contained in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 130.
We seek to protect the value of our products and our Company while safeguarding our reputation Jeff Pott General Counsel AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 34 Delivering our strategy Intellectual Property Patent expiries for our key marketed products US revenue m Key marketed products US Patent expirytel Nexium 2015 2397 2695 2835 Crestor 2016 3074 2640 2100 ToprolXLSeloken Expired 404 689 964 Atacand tel263 Symbicort 2014 combination 2023 formulation 2026 pMDI device 846 721 488 Zoladex Expired 39 46 54 Seroquel IR 2012 3344 3107 3074 Seroquel XR 2017 formulation telSynagis 2015 composition 2023 formulation 570 646 782 PrilosecLosec Expired 38 47 64 EU Canada and Japan revenue m Key marketed products EU Patent expiry Canadian Patent expiry Japanese Patent expirytel
1042 1422 1395 Crestortel 2534 2201 1782 ToprolXLSeloken Expired Expired Expired 163 169 181 Atacand 2012 Expired NA 799 837 808 Symbicort 2018 formulation 2019 Turbuhaler device 2012 combination 2018 formulation 2019 Turbuhaler device 2017 combination 2018 formulation 2019 Turbuhaler device 1822 1621 1459 Zoladex Expired Expired Expired 733 718 744 Seroquel IR 2012 Expired tel792 Seroquel XR 2017 formulation 2017 formulation NA 562 401 301 Synagis 2015 composition 2015 composition 2015 composition 405 392 300 PrilosecLosec Expired Expired Expired 660 660 641 Patents are or may be challenged by third parties and generics may be launched at risk.
See the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 130.
Many of our products are subject to challenges by third parties.
Details of material challenges by third parties can be found in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
Additional patents relating to the stated products may have terms extending beyond the quoted dates.
Licence agreements with Teva and Ranbaxy Pharmaceuticals Inc. allow each to launch a generic version in the US from May 2014 subject to regulatory approval.
Licence agreements with Handa and Accord allow each to launch a generic version in the US from 1 November 2016 or earlier upon certain circumstances subject to regulatory approval.
Aggregate revenue for the EU Canada and Japan.
Expiry in major EU markets.
PTE application pending.
Patent expiries The tables above set out certain patent expiry dates and sales for our key marketed products.
The expiry dates relate to the basic substance patent relevant to that product unless indicated otherwise.
The expiry dates shown include any PTE and Paediatric Exclusivity periods.
Data exclusivity In addition to patent protection Regulatory Data Protection RDP or data exclusivity is an important IP right which arises in respect of data which is required to be submitted to regulatory authorities in order to obtain marketing approvals for our medicines.
Significant investment is required to generate such data for example through conducting global clinical trials and the use of this proprietary data is protected from use by third parties such as generic manufacturers for a number of years in a limited number of countries.
The period of such protection and the extent to which the right is respected differs significantly between these countries.
We believe in enforcing our rights to RDP and consider it an important protection for our inventions particularly as patent rights are increasingly being challenged.
The period of RDP starts from the date of the first marketing approval from the relevant health authority and runs in parallel to any pending patent protection.
RDP would generally be expected to expire prior to patent expiry in all major markets.
If a product takes an unusually long time to secure marketing approval or if patent protection has not been secured expired or lost then RDP may be the sole IP right protecting a product from copying as generics should not be approved and marketed until RDP has expired.
Compulsory licensing Compulsory licensing the overruling of patent rights to allow patented medicines to be manufactured and sold by other parties is increasingly being included in the access to medicines debate.
We recognise the right of developing countries to use the flexibilities in the World Trade Organisations Agreement on TradeRelated Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights TRIPS including the Doha amendment in certain circumstances such as a public health emergency.
We believe that this should apply only when all other ways of meeting the emergency needs have been considered and where healthcare frameworks and safeguards are in place to ensure that the medicines reach those who need them.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Delivering our strategy Intellectual Property 35 Delivering our strategy Sales and Marketing We focus on brands and activities that make a difference Our global sales and marketing organisation is active in over 100 countries and at the end of 2011 comprised approximately 32300 employees.
As well as building on our leading positions in the US and Other Established Markets we continue to increase our strength in Emerging Markets including China Brazil Mexico and Russia.
See the Market definitions table on page 209 for more information on AstraZenecas market definitions.
We work to ensure success in individual markets by having highly accountable local leaders who understand their markets and have a strong focus on profitable business growth.
This extensive network is supported by a single Commercial organisation that develops global product strategies and drives commercial excellence ensuring a strong customer focus and commercial direction in the management of our pipeline and marketed products.
All our efforts are underpinned by a commitment to conducting our sales and marketing activity in accordance with our values and driving commercial success responsibly.
Driving commercial success Delivering commercial success requires us to maximise the value of our portfolio across the whole lifecycle of a medicine.
For an overview of this process see the Lifecycle of a medicine section on page 10.
We do so by connecting our science with our customers needs.
From an early stage in the medicine discovery process we embed customer insights into our RandD strategy based on our interactions with healthcare providers patients regulators and payers.
We build on this with our local market expertise and knowledge.
This approach helps us to prioritise resources and optimise our portfolio thereby delivering medicines which customers value and which meet their needs.
Activities in 2011 focused on ensuring continued commercial excellence of key products such as Crestor Seroquel XR and Symbicort driving growth in new markets and accelerating the commercialisation of recently launched products.
Recently launched products include Onglyza BrilintaBrilique Vimovo and Caprelsa.
BrilintaBrilique has been approved in 64 countries and while launches have occurred in 37 markets due to the time needed to secure reimbursement formulary approval and protocol adoption full patient access at the end of 2011 was limited to an estimated 12% of the acute coronary syndromes market.
Global strategies tailored to meet local needs We focus on developing global strategies tailored to meet local needs and recognise that our commercial capability must evolve to meet future market requirements.
The pace and degree of change in global economies and intensifying regulatory and access challenges have led us to look at ways of better and more efficiently addressing the changing needs and preferences of payers prescribers and patients.
As part of this effort in November we announced our consolidation into three regions the Americas EMEA and AsiaPacific running the regional sales and marketing organisation from three sites Wilmington Delaware US London UK and Shanghai China and we are changing We will lead the industry in commercial innovation that brings value to customers on their terms and improves patient health Tony Zook Executive VicePresident Global Commercial Operations Double digit Double digit sales growth for Crestor Seroquel XR and Symbicort 5.8bn Emerging Markets revenue totalled 5.8 billion 17% of the total revenue Revenue of 274 million from recent launches pipeline and inlicensing AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 36 Delivering our strategy Sales and Marketing our Established Markets footprint in line with declining sales.
Our
Managing change in our organisation section on page 42.
All our markets have a role to play in delivering our commercial strategy.
We continue to prioritise investment and allocate our resources in the most cost effective way.
This allows us to identify those markets of major significance to us those that will become more important drivers of our business in the future and highlight those Established Markets where we need to refocus our approach to deliver sustained success.
Creating new commercial sales models In most countries our sales are made through whollyowned local marketing companies.
In other countries we sell through distributors or local representative offices.
Our products are marketed primarily to primary care and specialist doctors.
Our efforts are directed towards explaining the therapeutic as well as the economic benefits of our products to doctors governments and others who pay for healthcare.
Facetoface contact is our traditional marketing method and we are committed to making this channel as effective and efficient as possible.
We continue to focus on our customer needs and having learnt from successful approaches implemented in North America and Europe we are accelerating the adoption of our new commercial sales model which is now live in all our regions including officebased sales teams dedicated customer service staff and digital channels.
Our rapid growth in Emerging Markets is driving demand for central commercial support particularly in respect of sales force effectiveness.
We have adopted and rolled out core sales and marketing training programmes in local environments.
The main focus of these programmes is to embed core commercial skills and to strengthen sales managers coaching and planning skills while also reflecting local market needs and conditions.
Pricing our medicines Our challenge is to deliver innovative medicines that improve health for patients bring benefits to society and provide an appropriate return on our investment.
Our global pricing policy provides the framework to ensure appropriate patient access while optimising the profitability of all our products in a sustainable way.
When setting the price of a medicine we take into consideration its full value to patients to those who pay for healthcare and to society in general.
We also pursue a flexible approach to the pricing of our medicines.
For example we support the concept of differential pricing provided that appropriate safeguards are in place to ensure that differentially priced products are not diverted from patients who need them to be sold and used in more affluent markets.
Delivering value for payers Our medicines play an important role in treating unmet medical need.
In doing so they bring economic as well as therapeutic benefits.
Effective treatments can help to lower healthcare costs by reducing the need for more expensive care such as hospital stays or surgery or through preventing patients from developing more serious or debilitating diseases that are costly to treat.
They also contribute to increased productivity by reducing or preventing the incidence of diseases that keep people away from work.
As outlined in the Pricing pressure section on page 18 there is continued downward pressure on drug pricing and in the current difficult economic environment payers expect us to be able to define the value our medicines create.
We are acutely aware of the challenges facing those who pay for healthcare and are committed to delivering value which will allow us to bring our valuable medicines to the patients that need them.
We therefore work with payers and healthcare providers to understand their priorities and requirements and generate evidence regarding how our products offer value and support cost effective healthcare delivery.
Broadening affordability Sales of medicines in our Established Markets enable us to generate the revenue we need to provide our shareholders with a return invest in continued innovation and pursue other opportunities to expand the availability of our medicines.
At the same time we recognise that Emerging Markets will contribute around 70% of pharmaceutical industry growth in the five years to 2014.
Our programme of investment in these markets continues both in the large faster growing markets such as China Mexico Brazil and Russia as well as in highgrowth mediumsized and smaller markets.
As we expand our business in these markets we are exploring broad market strategies to reach new patients in particular the emerging middle income populations who are increasingly able to access healthcare systems and for whom our medicines are becoming affordable.
In some cases where it is appropriate we are looking at ways of making our medicines more affordable.
For example our Broad Market Strategy in China means we are expanding our marketing activity and broadening affordability of our medicines to reach an increasing number of physicians and hospitals in communities outside the most affluent cities who do not currently have regular access to healthcare and high quality medicines.
In Brazil our Faz Bem Wellbeing programme provides discounts to the cost of our medicines to patients across all socioeconomic groups.
The programme also provides additional incentives for those patients who adhere to their treatment regimens which helps improve health outcomes and benefit our business.
Like the Faz Bem programme initiatives in Romania and other Central and Eastern European countries attempt to provide similar incentive schemes to patients that are unable to complete treatment regimens as a result of affordability constraints.
These approaches are part of our overall Access to healthcare strategy which can be found in the Responsible Business section from page 47 .
A broader portfolio To support our growth in Emerging Markets we are broadening our portfolio through the launch of branded genericised medicines.
This range will comprise a portfolio of products which are complementary to our patented original medicines in markets where we already have a developed commercial infrastructure existing relationships with healthcare professionals and a strong reputation.
In the second half of 2011 we continued our programme of generic launches with three branded generic products being launched in the Philippines.
We also launched a generic antiinfective medicine in Thailand in December.
Against the backdrop of a challenging competitive environment we have reevaluated our portfolio and are now focusing on approximately 70 generic products aligned to our wider portfolio which allows us to adopt an integrated selling model.
We plan to market these generic products under the AstraZeneca brand in 20 targeted Emerging Markets.
In December we announced we had entered into an agreement to acquire Guangdong BeiKang Pharmaceutical Company Limited a generics manufacturing company based in Guangdong province
This agreement which remains subject to regulatory approval in China expected in the first quarter of 2012 will give us access to a portfolio of injectable medicines used to treat infections.
It underscores our intention to serve the health needs of Chinese patients through our innovative medicines and increasingly high quality branded generic treatments that are locally produced to global standards.
Sales and marketing ethics The pharmaceutical sector is subject to increased oversight by regulatory and governmental authorities.
As we drive the growth of our business and reshape our geographic footprint we remain committed to the responsible delivery of commercial success.
You can read more about our standards of ethical practice and 2011 performance in the Responsible Business section from page 47.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Delivering our strategy Sales and Marketing 37 Delivering our strategy Supply and Manufacturing We ensure our medicines are where they need to be when they are needed Our strategy is to balance innovative and efficient inhouse manufacturing capabilities with external manufacturing resources particularly in relation to the early stages of our production process.
We also see opportunities to use outsourced production in our branded generics business.
This balance is designed to give us product integrity and quality assurance while affording us cost efficiency and volume flexibility.
Continuous improvement We seek to maximise the efficiency of our supply chain through a culture of continuous improvement built on the commitment and engagement of our employees and a commitment to minimise the impact on the environment.
We focus on what adds value to our customers and patients as well as waste elimination.
This programme has delivered significant benefits in recent years including reduced manufacturing lead times and lower average stock levels both of which improve our ability to respond to customer needs and reduce inventory costs.
All improvements are designed to ensure we maintain product quality safety and customer service.
We have applied Lean production business improvement tools and ways of working to improve the efficiency of our manufacturing plants for a number of years and have now applied them to the whole of our supply chain.
This has led to improvements in quality lead times and overall equipment effectiveness.
In 2011 we continued to establish more efficient processes with experts from our global supply chain organisation providing crossfunctional support throughout the business.
In October we launched an online Supply Chain Academy providing ongoing internal training to drive further improvements across our endtoend supply chain.
Alongside this we ran an internal leadership programme to reinforce the cultural aspects of more efficient supply chain processes.
In October we announced an investment of 200 million to build a manufacturing facility in China Medical City in Taizhou Jiangsu province China to meet growing local demand for our products and expand availability of our products to people in urban and rural communities.
This will be our first manufacturing site to be built using Lean principles from the outset.
These principles are being applied from the planning stage to the whole facility including operators products components and equipment.
We are designing equipment to meet varying demand enabling fast reliable changeover.
We also seek to identify where processes could fail designing systems to minimise these risks.
Crucial to the delivery of a reliable supply of high quality medicines in a cost effective way is a culture that drives continuous improvement and change David Smith Executive VicePresident Global Operations and Information Services 487 million in procurement savings 80% Sustained gross margin in excess of 80% Capital expenditure on supply and manufacturing facilities totalled 388 million AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 38 Delivering our strategy Supply and Manufacturing Product quality We are committed to delivering product quality that underpins the safety and efficacy of our medicines.
We have a comprehensive quality management system in place designed to assure the quality of our products in compliance with relevant regulations.
Manufacturing facilities and processes for medicines must observe rigorous standards of quality and are subject to inspections by regulatory authorities to ensure compliance with prescribed standards.
Authorities have the power to require improvements to facilities and processes halt production and impose conditions that must be satisfied before production can resume.
Regulatory standards are not harmonised globally and evolve over time.
We hosted 27 independent inspections from 19 different regulatory authorities in 2011.
All observations from such inspections are reviewed along with the outcomes of internal inspections and subsequent improvement actions are put in place as required to ensure ongoing compliance.
The knowledge obtained from all inspections is shared across the Group.
We are actively involved in providing input into new product manufacturing regulations both at national and international levels through our membership of industry associations.
For example in the EU we provided input into the Falsified Medicines Directive while in the US we contributed to debates concerning drug shortages and security of supply.
Our resources Capital expenditure on supply and manufacturing facilities totalled approximately 388 million in 2011 2010 333 million 2009 360 million.
As part of our overall risk management we carefully consider the timing of investment to ensure that secure supply chains are in place for our products.
We also have a programme in place to provide appropriate supply capabilities for our new products.
At the end of 2011 approximately 9600 people at 23 sites in 16 countries were working on the manufacturing and supply of our products.
In addition to our planned investment in Taizhou China our principal small molecule manufacturing facilities are in the UK Avlon and Macclesfield Sweden Snckviken and Grtuna Sdertlje the US Newark Delaware and Westborough Massachusetts France Reims Japan Maihara Australia North Ryde China Wuxi Puerto Rico Canovanas Germany Wedel Mexico Lomas Verdes Brazil Cotia and Argentina Buenos Aires.
We currently operate sites for the manufacture of APIs in the UK and Sweden complemented by the efficient use of external sourcing.
Our principal tablet and capsule formulation sites are in the UK Sweden Puerto Rico and the US.
We also have major formulation sites for the global supply of parenteral andor inhalation products in Sweden France and the UK.
Some 650 permanent and an additional 140 seasonal people are employed at our four principal biologics commercial manufacturing facilities in the US Frederick Maryland and Philadelphia Pennsylvania the UK Speke and the Netherlands Nijmegen with capabilities in process development manufacturing and distribution of biologics including worldwide supply of MAbs and influenza vaccines.
Our biologics capabilities are scalable which enables efficient management of our combined small molecule and biologics pipeline.
Managing sourcing risk Given our strategy to outsource all API manufacturing we place particular importance on our global procurement policies and integrated risk management processes to ensure uninterrupted supply of high quality raw materials.
Supplies are purchased from a range of suppliers.
We factor in a wide range of potential risks to global supply such as disasters that remove supply capability or the unavailability of key raw materials and work to ensure that these risks are effectively mitigated.
Contingency plans include the appropriate use of dual or multiple suppliers and maintaining appropriate stock levels.
Although the price of raw materials may fluctuate our global purchasing policies seek to avoid such fluctuations becoming material to our business.
We also take into account reputational risk associated with our use of suppliers and are committed to working only with suppliers that embrace standards of ethical behaviour that are consistent with our own.
For more information see the Responsible Business section from page 47.
Information Technology Effective and flexible IT support services are critical to delivering our strategy.
In 2011 we terminated our existing outsource relationship for IS infrastructure services and transitioned to a new multisourced operating model.
This includes bringing critical strategic and control activities back into AstraZeneca.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Delivering our strategy Supply and Manufacturing 39 Delivering our strategy
We are further developing a talented and diverse workforce in a high performance culture With approximately 57 200 people in over 100 countries worldwide we value the talents skills and capabilities that a global workforce brings to our business.
Our people strategy which defines our approach to managing our workforce and supports the delivery of our business strategy is built around four key priorities which we believe are critical acquiring and retaining key capabilities and talent further developing leadership and management capabilities improving the strength and diversity of the talent pipeline and improving employee engagement while building a high performance culture.
Managing significant change in the organisations workforce is also something to which considerable management attention is directed.
We use a range of metrics to track progress against these priorities which are reported quarterly to the SET.
Acquiring and retaining key capabilities and talent During 2011 we hired approximately 6400 permanent employees to replace leavers to fuel the expansion of our business in Emerging Markets and to build the new capabilities required to implement our strategy successfully.
With 1400 of the new hires having joined AstraZeneca in China and 400 in Russia we have developed a range of innovative approaches to ensure that we have an attractive employer brand globally and to help us achieve our ambitious growth plans in these markets.
During the course of the year we have also successfully attracted key talent to supplement critical capabilities across the business including in payer excellence and personalised healthcare and to refresh our leadership pipeline in key areas.
In parallel we have invested significant management time over the last 12 months to better understand the key drivers influencing employees decisions to leave across the business particularly in markets where conditions are most volatile.
We have implemented a range of initiatives to minimise the risks to the business from such attrition.
Further developing leadership and management capabilities We encourage and support our people in achieving their full potential by providing a range of learning and development LandD programmes.
These are designed to build the capabilities and encourage the behaviours needed to deliver our business strategy.
Engaged employees who are true to our core values supported by accountable and empowered leaders driving performance underpin the continued success of our business Lynn Tetrault Executive VicePresident Human Resources and Corporate Affairs 84% Employee engagement FOCUS score rose to 84% Employees by geographical area %
Sweden
Rest of Europe North America Latin America
Africa and Middle East
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 40 Delivering our strategy People We have a global approach supported by the creation of our global talent and development organisation to ensure that high standards of LandD practice are applied across the organisation.
We continue to develop and deploy instructorled and online development resources which we aim to make available to all employees to increase access to learning and to support selfdevelopment.
We recognise the importance of good leadership and its critical role in stimulating high levels of performance and engagement.
Our leadership development frameworks are focused on the core capabilities which we believe are essential for strong and effective leadership.
These capabilities are defined for each level in the organisation and apply to all our employees.
Alongside judicious hiring of new leaders into critical senior roles such as recently into our RandD organisation the development of an internal pipeline of future global leaders is a high priority.
We work to identify individuals with the potential for more senior and complex roles.
These talent pools provide succession candidates for a range of critical leadership roles across AstraZeneca.
We regard these individuals as key assets to the organisation and we proactively support them to reach their potential through for example global talent development programmes and targeted development opportunities.
We complement our leadership capabilities with a set of manager accountabilities which define what we expect from our managers.
Building line manager capability is supported by a suite of global learning programmes which we have extended during 2011 addressing people management change management and other critical capabilities.
We remain committed to making full use of the talents and resource of all our people.
We have policies in place to avoid discrimination including on the grounds of disability.
Our policies cover recruitment and selection performance management career development and promotion transfer and training including retraining if needed for people who have become disabled and reward.
Improving the strength and diversity of the talent pipeline Our global workforce provides a diversity of skills capabilities and creativity and we value the benefits that such diversity brings to our business.
We aim to foster a culture of respect and fairness where individual success depends solely on ability behaviour work performance and demonstrated potential.
As we continue to reshape our organisation and geographic footprint our ongoing challenge is to ensure that diversity in its broadest sense is reflected in our workforce and leadership and integrated into our business and people strategies.
We have made progress on our evolving global diversity and inclusion strategy following research carried out in 2010 to better understand the barriers to women progressing into more senior roles in the organisation.
Under the leadership of a global steering group chaired by our CEO and made up of senior leaders from across the business we are driving change in three key areas Leadership and Management Capability Transparency in Talent Management and Career Progression and Work Life Challenges.
We track gender representation at different levels of the organisation and the country of origin of our senior leaders to measure progress over the medium term.
Improving employee engagement We use a variety of global leadership communications channels to engage employees in our business strategy.
These include faceto face meetings video conferencing and Yammer a social media tool to encourage two way dialogue to take place.
For the second year in a row our annual global employee survey FOCUS included an open text feedback mechanism with around 19000 comments made on a variety of topics.
We measure levels of engagement the effectiveness of our communications and other areas critical to the performance of our business such as leadership and management capabilities through our FOCUS survey.
The results are communicated to all employees.
Ninety one percent of our people participated in 2011.
Our employee engagement score increased by one percentage point from 2010 restoring it to 2009 levels.
The leadership category score improved by two percentage points and the leadership communication score which was identified as a priority after last years survey improved by four percentage points.
In 2012 we will build on this further with particular emphasis on clarity of direction and prioritisation from leadership teams.
A further area of attention in 2011 was worklife balance given scores in this area had declined between 2008 and 2010.
A set of global worklife balance principles was agreed and communicated in April 2011 initiating a range of activities across the business including manager dialogues better use of virtual meeting technologies and health and wellbeing initiatives.
Worklife balance category scores improved by two percentage points this year and we intend to maintain momentum in this area during 2012.
A key element of our people strategy is the continued development of a performance culture across the organisation.
By strengthening our focus on setting high quality objectives aligned to our business strategy and ongoing coaching and feedback we strive to ensure that performance at all levels of the organisation delivers value.
The
Board is responsible for setting our highlevel strategic objectives and monitoring performance against them see the Operation of the Board section on page 104.
Managers across AstraZeneca are accountable for working with their teams to develop individual and team performance targets and for ensuring that our people understand how they contribute to overall business objectives.
We will continue to empower our leaders to drive performance to hold our managers accountable for understanding and delivering against the standards required and to provide the tools necessary to reward outstanding contributions.
Our focus on optimising performance is reinforced by performance related bonus and incentive plans.
AstraZeneca also encourages employee share ownership by offering the opportunity to participate in various employee share plans some of which are described in the Directors Remuneration Report from page 113 and also in Note 24 to the Financial Statements from page 176.
FOCUS engagement scores 2009 2010 83% 84% 84% 82% AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Delivering our strategy People 41 Delivering our strategy Managing change in our organisation The composition of our global workforce continues to evolve.
Our strategic focus on business growth in Emerging Markets has meant the workforce in these areas has grown substantially as shown in the Sales and Marketing workforce composition figures below.
This increase has been accompanied by headcount reductions as a result of our continuing strategic drive to improve efficiency and effectiveness.
Reductions have come about through restructuring in RandD supply and manufacturing support functions and our sales and marketing workforce in Established Markets together with the disposal of our Astra Tech business.
The net effect of these changes since the end of 2006 has been to reduce our total headcount by some 9600 from 66800 to 57200.
This decrease includes a reduction of 2600 positions in 2010 and a further 5000 in 2011 which resulted from our business change plans announced in 2010.
In 2011 the most significant business change was the implementation of the RandD strategy announced in 2010 which also involved a number of site changes.
While the net impact by the end of 2011 was a reduction of approximately 1400 roles almost all RandD employees worldwide were impacted in some way by this change.
In order to mitigate further job losses over 750 employees were redeployed where appropriate skills and capabilities allowed.
We were committed to ensuring that AstraZenecas core values robust people policies consultation infrastructure and prior experience were integrated into this multifaceted business transformation.
Trade unions and employee representative groups were involved throughout the restructuring process.
With significant investment in outplacement support high levels of success have been achieved in finding employees alternative opportunities outside AstraZeneca.
In addition there were reductions in the number of roles in several areas of our sales and marketing organisation in 2011 which were incremental to the ongoing restructuring programme announced in 2010.
The most substantial reduction was in the US where we announced in December that the sales force would be reduced by approximately 1150 leadership positions and sales representative roles by the end of February 2012.
In February 2012 we announced the next phase of restructuring.
Further details are set out in the Our strategic priorities to 2014 section from page 21.
We work to ensure a level of global consistency in managing employee relations while allowing enough flexibility to support the local markets in building good relations with their workforces taking into account local laws and circumstances.
To that end relations with trade unions are nationally determined and managed locally in line with the applicable legal framework and standards of good practice.
However each change programme has its unique challenges and a standard solution may not always be appropriate.
Where this is the case the appropriate solution is developed through consultation with employee representatives or where applicable trade unions with the aim of retaining key skills and mitigating job losses.
Sales and Marketing workforce composition Emerging Markets 2007 2011 53% 47% 69% 31% 16% 84% Established Markets AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 42 Delivering our strategy People Compliance We ensure a culture of ethics and integrity Our task is to ensure that we operate in step with the evolving compliance environment globally and in a way that is consistent with our values Katarina Ageborg Chief Compliance Officer These priorities are closely aligned to the Groups strategic priorities and reflect our drive to strengthen our efforts for oversight at all levels of our business including risk management relating to third parties antibribery and anticorruption.
GIA and Global Compliance work closely with one another and both separately provide assurance reporting to the Audit Committee.
Our Global Compliance function also works together with a range of specialist compliance functions throughout our organisation to ensure ongoing legal and regulatory compliance.
When a potential compliance breach is identified an internal investigation is undertaken by appropriate staff from our Global Compliance Human Resources andor Legal teams.
When appropriate external advisers are engaged to conduct andor advise on investigations.
Should the investigation conclude that an actual compliance breach has occurred management in consultation with our Legal function will consider whether the Company needs to make a disclosure andor to report the findings to a regulatory or governmental authority.
More information on GIA and our overall risk management and control framework can be found in the Corporate Governance Report from page 103.
Code of Conduct Our Code of Conduct the Code is at the core of our compliance programme and applies to all our employees at every level and in every country in which we operate.
It has been translated into over 40 languages and each employee has a copy in hisher local language.
It provides clear direction as to how our commitment to honesty and integrity is to be translated into consistent actions across all areas of the business.
Every employee receives training on the Code and compliance with it is mandatory.
Similarly every employee is required to comply with local laws and regulations as well as applicable national and international codes.
We always seek to operate at the highest of these various standards whether this is our Code national legislation or other applicable codes.
The Code is regularly reviewed and updated to take account of our changing legal and regulatory obligations.
The Code includes information on how to report possible violations of the Code including through the AZethics telephone lines and the global websitesite Anyone who raises a possible breach in good faith is fully supported by management.
We take all alleged compliance breaches and concerns extremely seriously and investigate and report them to the Audit Committee as appropriate.
In 2011 222 reports of alleged compliance breaches or other ethical concerns were made via telephonesite website or the Global Compliance email or postal addresses described in the Code.
In 2010 the number of reports through equivalent channels was 368.
This decrease is in the context of a significant increase in management selfreporting of compliance incidents which can be seen as an indication that employees are more comfortable in raising their concerns with line managers local Human Resources Legal or Compliance as recommended in the Code and reinforced in the 2011 annual Code training.
As with the Code our global policies apply to all members of our
They provide clear and comprehensive guidance in plain language to all managers and employees as to their accountabilities in key ethical compliance and corporate responsibility risk areas.
We report on the operation of our Global Policy on External Interactions on page 51.
We work to promote best practice in compliance within AstraZeneca in the rapidly changing external environment in which we operate.
This is critical to ensuring the trust of our stakeholders and the patients we serve.
Our Global Compliance function has been established to drive and embed a culture of ethics and integrity within our organisation.
The addition of Global Compliance to the SET reflects the growing importance of compliance to our business operations.
Our key compliance priorities include focusing our efforts on important compliance risk areas communicating clear policies to employees improving compliance behaviours through effective training and support ensuring employees can raise concerns and that those concerns will be properly addressed ensuring fair and objective investigations of possible policy breaches monitoring and auditing compliance with policies and working with GIA providing key stakeholders with assurance and effective reporting of material issues.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Delivering our strategy Compliance 43 Earning trust through integrity We want AstraZeneca to be valued as a source of great medicines and trusted as a company that delivers business success responsibly.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 44 Health Integrity healthintegrity We are dedicated to the research development and marketing of medicines that make a difference in healthcare.
We consider this to be at the core of our responsibility to our stakeholders and society.
Successful biopharmaceutical innovation brings benefit for patients creates value for our stakeholders and contributes to the social and economic development of the communities we serve.
Our responsibility also extends to making sure that we deliver success in the right way to bring sustainable benefit through both what we do and how we do it.
The trust of our stakeholders and our continued licence to do business depend on it.
Business Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Health Integrity 45 We have a global RandD organisation and a track record of creating medicines that meet some of the worlds greatest disease challenges.
Our efforts are concentrated on unmet needs in disease areas where we believe our skills and experience can make the most difference cancer cardiovascular gastrointestinal disorders infection neurological disorders and respiratory conditions.
It can take more than 10 years and up to 1 billion to bring a new medicine to market.
Many thousands of compounds are investigated for their potential to become a new medicine.
Only a few make it through the rigorous development process.
Our Responsible Business Plan provides the framework for applying integrity and high ethical standards across all our activities.
Our commitment to the highest standards of sales and marketing practice was underpinned in 2011 by our new Global External Interactions Policy which describes what is required to operate with the highest level of integrity in our interactions with public officials healthcare professionals and community organisations.
Among other things it places a ban on providing gifts other than low monetary value cultural items or educational items for the benefit of patients.
A Responsible Business Council comprising senior leaders and reporting to the Senior Executive Team has been established.
The Council will agree the Responsible Business strategy and oversee its implementation as measured by longterm and annual objectives targets and KPIs established by the relevant business functions and published in the Responsible Business Plan.
For more information See the Responsible Business section which follows 85% A member of the Dow Jones Sustainability Index since 2001 we achieved our highest ever assessment score in the 2011 World Index.
Our core values sit at the heart of our culture working with integrity and to high ethical standards showing respect for the individual and diversity being open and honest in all our interactions and leading by example at all levels.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 46 Health Integrity Delivering our strategy Responsible Business We are committed to acting responsibly and to the sustainable development of our business Our continuing commitment to enhancing the sustainability of our business was demonstrated by the launch of our Responsible Business Plan and the creation of our Responsible Business Council Dame Nancy Rothwell NonExecutive Director with responsibility for overseeing Responsible Business In this section we describe how we are working to deliver business success responsibly including summary information about our commitment and performance in certain key areas.
Further information about these areas and others is available on our websitesiteresponsibility.
Introduction
At AstraZeneca we are dedicated to the research development manufacture and marketing of medicines that make a difference in healthcare.
For us this is at the core of our responsibility to our stakeholders and to society.
Successful pharmaceutical innovation delivered responsibly brings benefits for patients creates sustainable value for shareholders and contributes to the economic development of the communities we serve.
Previous sections have described our strategic business priorities and how we are enhancing our RandD expanding our footprint in Emerging Markets continuing our efforts to source innovation from outside AstraZeneca and increasingly working in partnerships that broaden the base for success in improving healthcare.
At the same time we continue to drive efficiency and effectiveness across the organisation including increased outsourcing to a diverse range of strategic suppliers.
All of these efforts are underpinned by our continued commitment to the sustainable development of our business which delivers value for our stakeholders and for us.
To that end our responsible business objectives must be closely aligned to and support delivery of our business strategy.
Our new Responsible Business Plan published in April 2011 provides our framework for delivering business success responsibly.
It puts at the top of our agenda those areas most impacted by our strategic priorities and which are therefore key enablers of our business strategy.
This means a specific focus on Clinical trials and animal research  underpinning our drive for innovation with sound ethical RandD practice worldwide Sales and marketing practices  driving consistently high ethical standards to promote our medicines responsibly worldwide Access to healthcare  exploring ways of increasing access to healthcare for underserved patient populations in a sustainable way Human rights  making sure that we continue to develop and drive a consistent approach across all our activities Diversity and inclusion  ensuring that diversity in its broadest sense is appropriately represented in our leadership our workforce and our thinking.
See the People section from page 40 for more information Suppliers  working only with organisations who embrace ethical standards that are consistent with our own.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Delivering our strategy Responsible Business 47 Delivering our strategy As well as managing specific responsible business challenges associated with the changes to our strategy we are maintaining focus on other aspects of our responsibility Patient safety Environmental impact Employee safety health and wellbeing Community investment.
A summary of these areas of focus is provided in this section.
The full Responsible Business Plan is available on our websitesiteresponsibility.
Accountabilities and responsibilities The Board is responsible for our Responsible Business framework and NonExecutive Director Dame Nancy Rothwell oversees implementation and reporting to the Board.
The SET and senior managers throughout the Group are accountable for operating responsibly within their areas taking into account national functional and site issues and priorities.
Line managers are accountable for ensuring that their teams understand the requirements and that people are clear about what is expected of them as they work to achieve AstraZenecas business goals.
Individually everyone has a responsibility to integrate sustainability considerations into their daytoday decision making actions and behaviours.
Our dedicated Global Corporate Responsibility Team CR Team works together with the SET areas across the business to ensure that responsible business risks and opportunities are identified and managed appropriately in line with our strategic business objectives.
Responsible business governance During 2011 we established the Responsible Business Council the Council  a cross functional team of senior leaders chaired by our EVP HR and Corporate Affairs.
The Council will meet twice a year and their agenda is focused on driving longterm value creation by agreeing among other things Responsible Business priorities for the Group in line with strategic business objectives Strategy and overseeing performance as measured by short and longterm objectives targets and key performance indicators recorded in the Responsible Business Plan Appropriate policy positions to support AstraZenecas business objectives and reputation management.
The Council is supported by a newly established Responsible Business Working Group the Working Group of SET area representatives and our CR Team chaired by the Head of Corporate Affairs Strategy Brand and CR.
Among other things the Working Group continuously reviews external issues with the potential to impact AstraZeneca and as appropriate prepares management and measurement proposals for the Councils consideration.
The Working Group will meet four times a year.
External engagement and benchmarking Stakeholder dialogue was critical in the development of our Responsible Business Plan and we continue to engage with our stakeholders to ensure that our strategy development and risk management take account of their feedback.
During 2011 we developed a global framework for multistakeholder engagement to provide a consistent best practicebased approach across AstraZeneca and to improve how we capture feedback from around the world.
We held a number of multistakeholder events throughout the year.
These included an event specifically for key Socially Responsible Investor SRI contacts.
The agenda reflected areas of interest expressed by the SRI community and focused on growth in Emerging Markets sustaining innovation in RandD and managing environmental impact.
Feedback following the event was generally positive and the opportunity to interact with senior AstraZeneca leaders was particularly welcomed by the participants.
Discussion centred on how we are managing the potential challenges to sustainability as we expand our business and drive RandD productivity.
The SRIs also highlighted that they wanted more information on our access to healthcare strategy.
We also hosted a discussion on global product security during the year.
This brought together representatives from diverse organisations geographies and perspectives to gain insights into what our stakeholders expect from us in the area of product security and to gain new perspectives on how we can reduce the threat that counterfeiting and illegal trade pose to global health.
Attendees included NGOs supply chain partners academics and enforcement professionals from both the developed and developing world.
The discussion focused mainly on the critical need for collaboration between all the key players in this area including the role that AstraZeneca can play working with other manufacturers and influencing broader stakeholders regarding policy and regulation enforcement and activities to influence patient understanding and behaviour.
Product security is an inherent part of our commitment to patient safety which continues to be a fundamental consideration.
In addition we use the insights we gain from external surveys to develop our approach in line with global best practice.
A member of the Dow Jones Sustainability Index since 2001 AstraZeneca achieved its highest ever placing in the 2011 World Index.
We also retained our listing on the DJSI STOXX  European index the top 20% of the 600 largest European companies for the fourth year running one of only four pharmaceutical companies to do so out of 14 assessed.
We achieved a total score of 85% 2010 81% compared with a sector best score of 87% 2010 87%.
We increased individual scores for 14 out of 23 criteria for 2011 compared to nine out of 23 criteria in 2010 including corporate governance RandD environmental policy and supplier standards.
While these scores are encouraging we lost ground in some areas including marketing practices and health outcomes contribution.
To better understand these lower scores we have commissioned an indepth external benchmark survey and the analysis will be used to inform our improvement planning.
The survey is expected to report in the first quarter of 2012.
External assurance Bureau Veritas has provided external assurance on the responsible business information contained within this Responsible Business section of this Annual Report and of the detailed content of the Responsibility section of our website.
Bureau Veritas has found the responsible business information provided within this Annual Report to be accurate and reliable based on the evidence provided and subject to the scope objectives and limitations defined in the full assurance statement.
The full assurance statement which contains detailed scope methodology overall opinion and recommendations can be found on our websitesite web page content assured by Bureau Veritas is marked at the bottom of each page.
Bureau
Veritas is an independent professional services company that specialises in quality health safety social and environmental management with a long history of providing independent assurance services.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 48 Delivering our strategy Responsible Business healthintegrity Improving the health of young people The Young Health Programme is a global programme.
In India it is focused on improving hygiene infection and reproductive health in five settlement areas in Delhi.
India has the fastest growing number of urban poor in the world.
However services and infrastructure have not kept pace with rapid urbanisation.
There are significant issues related to water and sanitation including lack of potable water waste disposal and sewage maintenance.
Access to health services is limited and awareness about sexual and reproductive health and HIVAIDS is low.
Our programme seeks to improve the health of adolescents by empowering them with necessary information skills and access to services.
Objectives for the programme include enabling better choices about health and lifestyle as well as improving health seeking behaviours through raising awareness and knowledge about healthcare and access to available healthcare systems.
The programme is being implemented by Plan India in partnership with the Community Aid and Sponsorship Programme CASP.
Since its launch in November 2010 over 30000 young people have received health information.
Business Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Health Integrity 49 Delivering our strategy RandD ethics We want to be recognised for our high quality science and for the impact we can make on serious diseases and to be trusted for the way we work.
Our standards of RandD ethics are global and apply to all AstraZeneca research activity in all locations whether conducted by us or on our behalf by external contract research organisations
We continue to work to ensure that these standards are applied particularly as we expand our activity in countries such as China and Russia.
Clinical trials We conduct clinical trials at multiple sites in several different countries.
A broad geographic span helps us to ensure that those taking part in our studies reflect the diversity of patients around the world for whom the new medicine is intended.
This approach also helps to identify the types of people for whom the treatment may be most beneficial.
Our global governance process for determining where we place clinical trials provides the framework for ensuring a consistent approach worldwide.
We take several factors into account including the availability of experienced and independent ethics committees and a robust regulatory regime as well as sufficient numbers of trained healthcare professionals and patients willing to participate in a trial.
Before a trial begins we work to make sure that those taking part understand the nature and purpose of the research and that proper procedures for gaining informed consent are followed including managing any special circumstances such as different levels of literacy.
Protecting participants throughout the trial process is a core priority and we have strict procedures in place to ensure that they are not exposed to any unnecessary risks.
Patients in global AstraZeneca studies by geographic region Europe US
Central
Eastern
Europe
Asia
Pacic
41% 19% 20% 10% 26% 22% 4% 12% Japan South
Other Latin
4% 1% 2% 11% 2% 7% 15% 4% Small molecule studies Biologics studies We recognise that situations may exist where continued provision of a nonapproved clinical study drug to patients is both appropriate and necessary following the completion of a clinical study.
During 2011 we introduced a new standard to provide global guidance in this area.
Factors we take into account include the severity of the disease the availability of alternative treatments the individual patient response to the medicine and the overall benefitrisk profile of the medicine based on completed and ongoing studies.
If we continue to provide a clinical study drug after the original study is completed we ensure that appropriate oversight measures are in place such as dispensing treatment in the context of a clinical study or a compassionate use programme.
All our clinical studies are conceptually designed and finally interpreted inhouse but a percentage of them are run for us by CROs.
In 2011 around 39% of patients in our small molecule studies and around 66% of patients in our biologics studies were monitored by CROs on our behalf.
We contractually require CROs to work to our global standards and we conduct riskbased audits to monitor compliance.
We publish information about the registration and results of all our clinical trials whether favourable or unfavourable to AstraZeneca on a range of public websites including our own dedicated sitesite By the end of 2011 we had registered over 1370 trials and published the results of more than 1150.
Animal research Animal studies continue to play a vital role in the search for new medicines.
They provide essential information not available through other methods about the effects of a potential new therapy on disease and the body.
Regulatory authorities around the world also require safety data from preclinical testing in animals before a new medicine can be tested in humans.
As we work to improve our RandD productivity we remain committed to minimising our use of animals without compromising the quality of the research data.
All research using animals is carefully considered and justified not only to confirm the scientific need for a study but also to make sure that it has been designed so that the minimum number of animals is used and that they are exposed to as little pain and distress as possible.
Wherever possible we use nonanimal methods such as computer modelling that eliminate the need to use animals early in drug development or reduce the number required.
We also work to refine our existing methods.
This replacement reduction and refinement of animal studies is known as the 3Rs and to support our drive for continuous improvement we work both within AstraZeneca and the wider scientific community to share 3Rs knowledge and learning.
The number of animals we use will continue to vary because it depends on a number of factors including the amount of preclinical research we are doing the complexity of the diseases under investigation and regulatory requirements.
We believe that without our active commitment to the 3Rs our animal use would be much greater.
In 2011 we used approximately 381400 animals inhouse 2010 408000.
In addition approximately 16600 animals were used by external CROs on our behalf 2010 21000.
The welfare of the animals we use continues to be a top priority and our standards apply worldwide.
In addition to mandatory inspections by government authorities we have a formal programme of regular peer reviews of our internal animal research facilities conducted by our own qualified staff.
External CROs that conduct animal studies on our behalf are required to comply with our global standards and we undertake audits to ensure our expectations are being met.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 50 Delivering our strategy Responsible Business Protests AstraZeneca acknowledges the right of every individual to express their views on the use of animals in research but we condemn the use of violence and other illegal acts.
We firmly reject any harassment intimidation or harming of our employees and their families our suppliers and our other stakeholders as totally unacceptable.
Sales and marketing ethics Delivering consistently high standards of sales and marketing practice continues to be one of our top priorities and is at the core of our commitment to driving commercial success responsibly.
Our activities centre on ensuring that the appropriate information is provided to those who need it to support the safe and effective use of our medicines and enhance patient care.
We have always had a range of sales and marketing policies and standards in place but following a review in 2010 we further strengthened the requirements and consolidated the range to form a single new Global Policy on External Interactions the Policy.
Launched in April 2011 the new Policy provides a single common principlebased approach to all our interactions worldwide.
Everyone in AstraZeneca wherever they are located is required to work to our global standards of ethical sales and marketing practice.
We believe this is especially important as we grow our business in Emerging Markets such as China and Russia alongside our continued efforts in Established Markets including the US and Japan.
The diversity of business cultures around the world means that putting a global approach into practice at a local level is a challenge.
Nevertheless we are committed to making it work.
During 2011 we continued to provide targeted training for our people to ensure expectations and accountabilities were clear and understood as well as where to obtain further advice and support if needed.
We are also talking to our customers and other stakeholders to explain the changes they are seeing to the way we are working with them.
We have comprehensive processes in place for monitoring compliance with our Code of Conduct and global policies including dedicated compliance professionals who support our line managers locally in monitoring their staff activities.
We also have a nominated signatory network that works to ensure that our promotional materials meet all applicable requirements.
Instances of potential noncompliance are collected through our compliance incident management processes and reviewed by senior management in local andor regional compliance committees.
Serious breaches are reviewed by the Audit Committee and if appropriate the
More information about our compliance and risk assurance processes is contained in the Managing risk section from page 129.
We take all breaches very seriously and act to prevent repeat occurrences.
In 2011 we identified a total of 17 confirmed breaches of external sales and marketing regulations or codes globally 2010 11 2009 24.
Excluding the confirmed external breaches there were 1275 instances of failure to comply with our Code of Conduct and global policies in our Commercial organisation including contract staff.
In relation to all these breaches we removed 214 people from their role formally warned 570 people and provided further guidance or coaching on our policies for 971 people.
It is important to note that a single breach can involve more than one employee failing to meet the standards required.
We believe that the increase in identified breaches is due in part to our enhanced management oversight of compliance and heightened awareness of policy requirements through targeted training alongside improved data capture mechanisms.
However we acknowledge that our numbers are likely to continue to vary as we reshape our business and geographic footprint.
We will continue to focus our compliance efforts appropriately.
Disciplinary actions Breaches of Code of Conduct by our Commercial organisation including contract staff Number of people Action taken 2011 2010 Removed from role 214 117 Formal warning 570 740 Guidance and coaching 971 768 Total 1755 1625 In the majority of cases this means dismissal from the Companycontract termination but it can include resignations and demotions.
US Corporate Integrity Agreement reporting In April 2010 AstraZeneca signed an agreement with the US Department of Justice to settle an investigation relating to the sales and marketing of Seroquel IR.
The requirements of the associated Corporate Integrity Agreement between AstraZeneca and the Office of the Inspector General of the US Department of Health and Human Services OIG include a number of active monitoring and selfreporting obligations that differ from selfreporting required by authorities in the rest of the world.
To meet these obligations AstraZeneca provides notices to the OIG describing the outcomes of particular investigations potentially relating to violations of certain laws as well as a separate annual report to the OIG summarising monitoring and investigation outcomes relevant to Corporate Integrity Agreement requirements.
Access to healthcare Providing sustainable access to healthcare for all those who need it is a significant global challenge.
The complexities surrounding the issue mean that there is no one size fits all solution.
Factors affecting access range from the affordability of medicines to the availability of healthcare systems and the resources to make them effective.
We believe it will take a combined global effort involving all related stakeholders to drive sustainable progress in increasing access to healthcare worldwide and we know that as a global biopharmaceutical company we can make a meaningful contribution to that effort.
Our strategy takes account of the different barriers to healthcare in different parts of the world and because access to healthcare can also vary within a country our approach is tailored locally to meet the needs of different patient populations.
We are pursuing a range of different initiatives across these populations to understand what works best and in what context.
We believe we will be able to make the biggest contribution to improving health where we are able to adopt a commercial approach.
Our goal is always to improve health for patients and add value for our stakeholders and our business.
Our mainstream business will continue to focus on those people for whom healthcare is readily available and who can afford our medicines.
The selling of these medicines in our Established Markets helps enable us to generate the revenue we need to provide our shareholders with a return invest in continued innovation and pursue other opportunities to increase the availability of our medicines.
Global KPI Breaches of external sales and marketing codes and regulations ruled by external bodies AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Delivering our strategy Responsible Business 51 Delivering our strategy As we expand our business in new geographies we are exploring broad market strategies to reach new patients in particular the emerging middle income populations who are increasingly able to access healthcare systems and for whom our medicines are becoming affordable.
You can read more about our efforts to broaden access to our medicines in the Sales and Marketing section from page 36.
The availability of medicines is not always the primary challenge.
Access to healthcare also depends on having a functioning healthcare system and the right allocation of resources to make sure that medicines are used appropriately as part of overall health management.
For people in communities with limited healthcare infrastructure we partner with others to help strengthen healthcare frameworks and capabilities.
We have defined some common criteria to guide our commitment and ensure that all our partnerships centre on delivering meaningful and enduring benefit.
The key principles are that our partnerships lead to positive measurable outcomes in underserved communities can be scaled up and potentially replicated to improve outcomes for a greater number of people deliver a sustainable framework that can ultimately be owned and managed locally without the need for our support.
Such partnerships can also contribute to our business development by enabling us to understand better the health needs of and build important relationships in markets of the future.
An example is our Phakamisa initiative in South Africa see page 55 for further information.
We also partner with NGOs who are experienced at tackling disease at a community level.
For example we have been supporting the British Red Cross since 2002 in their work to tackle TB and TBHIV in Kyrgyzstan Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan and more recently in South Africa and Lesotho.
To date over 16000 people have been directly supported in completing their TB treatment across all our partnership countries and TB mortality and morbidity rates continue to fall in our partnership countries in central Asia.
Our partnership with the African Medical and Research Foundation AMREF created in 2007 centres on strengthening healthcare systems and integrating the management of malaria HIVAIDS and TB MAT programmes in Uganda where there is a high burden of all three diseases.
Progress to date includes six laboratories upgraded to Ministry of Health standards to support improved diagnosis and over one million patient visits recorded in the Health Management Information System as having received MAT diagnostic treatment and other services.
Our most recent community investment the AstraZeneca Young Health Programme YHP is designed to help young people in need around the world deal with the health issues they face so they can improve their chances of living a better life.
We are working with expert partners Plan International and Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health to identify the needs in our local communities and to help address these needs with a combination of work on the ground research and advocacy.
Adolescent health remains an underserved part of the healthcare agenda and this global investment initiative aims to make a measurable and sustainable difference.
YHP initiatives are now in place in nine countries and our target is 15 by the end of 2012.
By 2015 YHP will reach 500000 young people between the ages of 10 and 24 directly and will touch an additional 500000 lives indirectly.
On a broader basis we collaborate at a global level to increase understanding of fastemerging and existing health threats in the developing world and to lend our skills and resources to addressing these.
For example In partnership with the IFPMA AstraZeneca is undertaking policy research to understand practical steps to overcome the barriers to treatment and care for noncommunicable diseases NCDs which are fast overtaking communicable diseases as a developing world health threat.
The challenges that NCDs present are not new to us.
We have many decades of experience in NCD treatment with a strong product portfolio and pipeline of new medicines targeting these areas.
The majority of our research investment continues to centre on NCDs.
Alongside the rising challenge of NCDs the battle against TB and neglected tropical diseases NTDs is far from over.
Scientists at our dedicated research facility in Bangalore India are focused on finding a new treatment for TB.
For further information about this see the Infection section from page 64.
As outlined in the Research and Development section from page 30 during 2011 we joined the World Intellectual Property Organizations WIPO ReSearch initiative.
This unprecedented collaboration between the private sector and public partners will make publicly available a searchable database of available IP assets and resources for use in NTD research to speed the discovery and development of new potential treatments.
More information about our Access to healthcare strategy and the associated initiatives is available on our websitesiteresponsibility.
Human rights As we reshape our organisation grow our business and increase our outsourcing we are working to make sure that human rights continue to be appropriately integrated into our policies and processes.
AstraZeneca is a signatory to the United Nations Global Compact UNGC a strategic publicprivate initiative for organisations committed to social and environmental sustainability.
This means that we have committed to uphold 10 internationally recognised principles in the areas of human rights labour standards environmental sustainability and anticorruption.
These are longstanding principles for AstraZeneca as described in our Code of Conduct and global policies but being part of the UNGC reinforces how seriously we take these principles.
It also gives us the framework for further developing our approach.
In recent years we participated in a project led by the Danish Institute for Human Rights DIHR working with the pharmaceutical industry to develop a human rights assessment tool for pharmaceutical companies based on the DIHRs existing Human Rights Compliance
The first pharmaceutical industry version of the tool was launched in November 2010 and we used it to conduct a labour review in 11 of our marketing companies including some countries where national labour standards are inconsistent with global best practice.
The review focused on International Labour Organization core areas freedom of association and collective bargaining forced and bonded labour child labour discrimination and working time and wages.
Building on the experience of this review we adapted and simplified the employment section of the assessment tool and during the remainder of 2011 used it to conduct a labour review in every country where AstraZeneca has employees.
The results of all our 2011 reviews are currently being collated and analysed to identify what we are doing well and where we may need to improve.
Any areas identified for improvement will be included in our local people strategies in the relevant countries.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 52 Delivering our strategy Responsible Business Also in 2011 the DIHR in collaboration with AstraZeneca GSK Novartis and Merck established the Human Rights Assessment Tool for Pharmaceuticals Companies Forum the Forum.
The Forum is a means of sharing information experience and best practice helping members to better understand what it means to integrate human rights into daily business practice and to further clarify human rights responsibilities for pharmaceutical companies.
Working with suppliers Our ongoing drive to support increased efficiency through our procurement activity continues to be underpinned by our work to make sure that our purchasing is directed only to those organisations which embrace ethical standards consistent with our own.
Our Global Responsible Procurement Standard the Standard defines one of the key business processes for integrating our ethical standards into our procurement activity and decision making worldwide.
It includes detailed expectations of suppliers.
In addition responsible procurement clauses that include audit requirements are incorporated in supplier contracts.
We continue to review the Standard to ensure it appropriately reflects our commitment and during 2011 revised it to strengthen the antibribery and anti corruption ABAC requirements in line with our ABAC policy and the requirements of the UK Bribery Act.
The process outlined in our Standard applies to suppliers of goods and services globally and is focused on ensuring that our responsible business expectations are being met.
Specific expectations of suppliers such as healthcare professionals or CROs are managed within the relevant functions using specific assessment and monitoring processes.
Our Responsible Procurement process is based on an escalating set of riskbased due diligence activities applied in a pragmatic way.
The same initial assessment process is used for all suppliers and more detailed focused assessments are then made relevant to the service provided.
Full details of the process are available on our websitesiteresponsibility.
By the end of 2011 we had completed 3342 responsible procurement risk assessments accounting for 71% of our third party spend.
We categorise suppliers as high medium or low risk.
We focus our auditing efforts on high and medium risk rated suppliers but we also audit some suppliers that we consider to be lower risk to confirm our performance expectations across all suppliers we do business with.
In 2011 we worked with our suppliers to substantially increase our audit activity.
727 suppliers across 55 countries have participated in 751 audits undertaken this year 48 audits and 42 suppliers in 2010.
Forty five percent of supplier sites audited demonstrated standards that met our expectations with a further 51% implementing improvements to address noncompliances.
We monitor progress across all corrective actions and 4% of suppliers audited this year will require significant follow up to confirm they will make the improvements we require.
We will not use suppliers who are unable or unwilling to meet our expectations in a timely way.
Our audits are conducted through a combination of internal resources and external independent auditors.
Our assessment programmes reflect best practice from other industry sectors as well as the principles of the Pharmaceutical Supply Chain Initiative.
Patient safety The safety of the patients who take our medicines will always be a fundamental consideration for us.
All drugs have potential side effects and we aim to minimise the risks and maximise the benefits of each of our medicines beginning with the discovery of a potential new medicine and continuing throughout its development launch and marketing.
After launch we continually monitor the use of all our medicines to ensure that we become aware of any side effects not identified during the development process.
This is known as pharmacovigilance and is core to our ongoing responsibility to patients.
We have comprehensive and rigorous pharmacovigilance systems in place for detecting and rapidly evaluating such effects including mechanisms for highlighting those that require immediate attention.
We also work to ensure that accurate wellinformed and uptodate information concerning the safety profile of our drugs is provided to regulators doctors other healthcare professionals and where appropriate patients.
We have an experienced inhouse team of clinical patient safety professionals working around the world who are dedicated to the task of ensuring that we meet our commitment to patient safety.
At a global level every medicine in development and on the market is allocated a Global Safety Physician and a team of patient safety scientists.
In each of our markets we also have dedicated safety managers with responsibility for patient safety at a local level.
Our two Chief Medical Officers one for small molecule products and one for biologics have overall accountability for the benefitrisk profiles of the products we have in development and those on the market.
They provide medical oversight and ensure that appropriate risk assessment processes are in place to enable informed decisions to be made about safety as quickly as possible.
We use an external provider Tata Consultancy Services TCS to manage the data entry process for individual case safety reports relating to our products.
As experts in their field TCS continues to drive improvements in the efficiency and consistency of data entry across AstraZeneca and using TCS for this work means our patient safety teams can focus primarily on case prioritisation the medical aspects of patient safety and continuing to improve our safety science.
TCS is contractually required to comply with our patient safety standards and is closely monitored through audits against detailed quality and compliance performance indicators.
Environmental sustainability Managing our environmental impact is a core commitment.
In January 2011 we implemented our new SHE strategy and associated objectives and targets for 20112015 which are closely aligned with our business objectives and provide the framework for driving our environmental sustainability going forward.
This section includes summary information about certain key areas of the framework.
Full details of our strategy objectives and targets are available on our websitesiteresponsibility.
We aim to minimise our environmental impact by reducing the carbon footprint and natural resource demands of our business activities and improve the environmental profile of our products.
We believe we are on track to deliver our 2015 targets.
We work to reduce our CO2 emissions by among other things improving our energy efficiency and pursuing lowercarbon alternatives to fossil fuels at our sites and making sure that our travel and transport activities are as efficient as possible.
Our carbon footprint is also affected by some of our respiratory therapies specifically our AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Delivering our strategy Responsible Business 53 Delivering our strategy pressurised metereddose inhalers that rely on hydrofluoroalkane HFA propellants to deliver the medicine to a patients airways.
While
HFAs have no ozone depletion potential and a third or less of the global warming potential than the chlorofluorocarbons CFCs they replace they are still greenhouse gases.
Our target is to reduce our operational greenhouse gas footprint excluding emissions from patient use of our inhaler therapies by 20% by 2015.
In 2011 our greenhouse gas emissions from all sources totalled 1.17 million tonnes 35 tonnesm indexed to Group revenue.
The management of waste is another key aspect of our commitment and we have a 2015 target of a 15% reduction in hazardous and nonhazardous waste.
Our primary focus is waste prevention but where this is not practical we concentrate on waste minimisation and appropriate treatment or disposal to maximise the reuse and recycling of materials and minimise disposal to landfill.
In 2011 our total waste was 45.9 thousand tonnes excluding our biologics capabilities with a tonnesm index of 1.41.
We recognise the need to use water responsibly and where possible to minimise the use of water in our facilities.
To support the delivery of our target to reduce water use by 25% by 2015 we now have water conservation plans at our largest sites.
In 2011 our water use was 4.4 million m with a m m index of 130.
Alongside these efforts we are also working to ensure that we measure and report the impact of our external manufacturing activity on the environment and that our suppliers have appropriate environmental improvement targets.
Our continued commitment to product stewardship is underpinned by our ongoing work to integrate environmental considerations into a medicines complete lifecycle from discovery and development through manufacturing marketing use and ultimately disposal.
Further information is available on our websitesite responsibility including environmental risk assessment data for our medicines.
Employee safety health and wellbeing Providing a safe workplace and promoting the health and wellbeing of all our people remains a core consideration.
We provide a wide range of health and wellbeing improvement programmes across AstraZeneca designed to help people understand their personal health risks and support them in proactively managing these risks.
In January 2011 we implemented our new SHE strategy and a complementary Health and Wellbeing strategy with associated objectives and targets for 20112015.
The new targets reflect our determination to stay focused on continuous improvement as we grow and reshape our business.
Driver safety remains our highest priority for improvement and our focus is on promoting driver safety among our sales forces collectively the single largest group of employees who drive on company business.
Our longstanding Road Scholars scheme in the US continues to be a valuable channel for building awareness and improving driver skills.
Outside the US our Drive Success programme takes into account the different driving environments in the various countries in which we operate and provides a highlevel framework of common standards and measures to be applied by each country.
Driver safety targets are included in regional and local scorecards.
Performance is monitored centrally to assess progress and identify areas for improvement.
We regret that during 2011 one of our employees was killed in a road traffic accident while driving on AstraZeneca business.
A detailed investigation was carried out including an audit of the implementation of the Drive Success programme.
An action plan was drawn up to respond to the findings of the investigation which include further enhancements to the Drive Success programme and increased communications to drivers.
These actions are being tracked and learning will be shared widely across the business.
In 2011 we achieved a 23% improvement in the lost time injuryillness rate compared to the baseline year  exceeding our annual improvement target.
This puts us well on track to achieve our 2015 target of a 25% reduction in the lost time injuryillness rate.
Workrelated stress remains our greatest single category of occupational illness with high workloads interpersonal issues and organisational change identified as significant factors.
As part of our ongoing efforts in this area we are adopting an increasingly proactive riskbased approach using wellbeing risk assessment tools to identify highrisk areas and target interventions more effectively.
Community investment Wherever AstraZeneca operates worldwide we aim to make a positive contribution to our local communities through partnerships charitable donations and other initiatives that help to make a sustainable difference.
Our investment is focused on improving health and promoting science skills.
In 2011 we spent a total of 1.27 billion 2010 1.41 billion on community sponsorships partnerships and charitable donations worldwide including our product donation and patient assistance programmes which make our medicines available free of charge or at reduced prices.
Through our three patient assistance programmes in the US we donated products valued at an average wholesale price of over 938 million 2010 1.38 billion.
We also donated products worth 8.2 million valued at average wholesale price to the charitable organisations Americares and Direct Relief International.
Disaster relief During 2011 we made a number of contributions to disaster relief efforts including donations from our Charities Aid Foundation CAF account.
We also developed an enhanced protocol for working with the British Red Cross our global disaster relief partner to improve our internal coordination and enable us to respond in a timely consistent and effective way to emergencies as and when they arise.
This protocol was used to inform the following contributions to disaster relief efforts during the year.
In February 2011 we donated 10000 approximately 16000 from our CAF account to the British Red Cross New Zealand Earthquake Appeal.
In March 2011 we donated 100000 approximately 162000 from our CAF account to the British Red Cross Libya and Region Appeal to help support those who had fled to neighbouring countries to escape the violence in Libya.
Following the earthquake in Japan we donated 51 million Yen approximately 640000 as part of an overall pledge of 100 million Yen approximately 1.3 million to Ashinaga Ikueikai in support of their ongoing relief and rebuilding effort.
In addition employee donations from AstraZeneca in Japan totalling 25.5 million Yen approximately 320000 were matched by the Company.
We donated 25000 to AMREF to support their local networks in North East Kenya where the Horn of Africa drought was having a devastating impact.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 54 Delivering our strategy Responsible Business healthcollaboration Raising breast cancer awareness and improving treatment Named after the Zulu word for rise or uplifting our Phakamisa partnership brings together different organisations to help raise breast cancer awareness increase early diagnosis and improve access to treatment and effective support networks in communities across South Africa.
Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women in South Africa and is on the increase.
Every year 1 in 29 women will be diagnosed with the disease.
Many more go undiagnosed and a lot of women are unable to afford or access treatment.
Phakamisa helps in three ways.
First we are ensuring that our hormonal treatments are made available to the health service cost effectively.
Secondly in collaboration with South Africas Foundation for Professional Development we are providing accredited courses in cancer diagnosis treatment and care to doctors nurses and other healthcare professionals.
Finally with the help of the Cancer Association of South Africa and the Breast Health Foundation we are training teams of volunteers and counsellors to raise awareness and support patients.
In 2011 100 doctors and nurses and 400 volunteers and counsellors were trained.
Business Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Health Collaboration 55 Therapy Area Review This section contains further information about the Therapy Areas in which our efforts are focused Cardiovascular Gastrointestinal Infection Neuroscience Oncology and Respiratory and Inflammation.
We describe the business environment trends and other factors that have influenced our decision to focus on diseases in these six areas our strategic objectives for each and our progress towards achieving these objectives.
We include information about our marketed medicines and how they are designed to make a meaningful difference for patients together with an overview of performance Sales by Therapy Areatel
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Cardiovascular 10212 9 5 9403 12 11 8376 Gastrointestinal 5536 9 11 6088 1  6011 Infection and other 1856 15 15 2176 17 18 2631 Neuroscience 7204 7 5 6704 7 7 6237 Oncology 3705 8 12 4045 10 12 4518 Respiratory and Inflammation 4468 9 6 4099 1 1 4132 Other businesses 610 19 22 754 16 15 899 Total 33591 1 2 33269 1  32804 Represents all other pharmaceutical product sales that are not in our six Therapy Areas.
Represents sales by Astra Tech of 386m 2010 535m and Aptium Oncology of 224m 2010 219m.
Astra Tech was sold to DENTSPLY International Inc. on 31 August 2011.
Further details on these two businesses are included on page 22. during the year.
We also report in detail on the potential new products and product lifecycle developments in our pipeline that reflect our commitment to maintaining a flow of innovation that adds value for our shareholders and to society.
For a list of all our potential new products and product lifecycle developments see the Pipeline by Therapy Area at 31 December 2011 table on page 57 and the Development Pipeline table from page 199.
For details of patent expiries of our key marketed products see the Patent expiries section on page 35.
Many of our products are subject to litigation.
Information about material legal proceedings can be found in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
Details of relevant risks are set out in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 130.
References to months in this section refer to months in 2011 unless otherwise stated.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 56 Therapy Area Review Pipeline by Therapy Area at 31 December 2011
Phase I Phase III
Line
Extensions
Phase II
AZD2927
AZD4017
BrilintaBrilique dapagliflozin
BrilintaBrilique
PEGASUSTIMI
Crestor elevated CRP dapagliflozin metformin FDC dapagliflozin diabetes  add on to DPPIV dapagliflozin diabetes  add on to insulin and add on to metformin LT data dapagliflozin diabetes  in patients with high CV risk  Study 18 and 19 data Kombiglyze XR
Komboglyze
TM
FDC
Onglyza
TM
SAVORTIMI
Infection  AZD5099
MEDI534
MEDI550
MEDI557
MEDI559
AZD9773
CXL
CEF104
CAZ AVI
QLAIV Flu Vac
Zinforo ceftaroline
Neuroscience
AZD1446
AZD3241
AZD3839
AZD5213
MEDI578
AZD2423
AZD3480
AZD6765
TC5214 monotherapy
TC5214 adjunct
EMLA
Oncology  AZD1480
AZD3514
AZD5363
AZD8330
ARRY
MEDI551
MEDI565
MEDI573
MEDI3617 moxetumomab pasudotox
AZD6244
ARRY
MK2206
AZD4547
AZD8931 fostamatinib
AZD6244
ARRY tremelimumab
Ranmark
TM denosumab
2nd line advanced breast cancer
1st line advanced breast cancer
1st line EGFR mut NSCLC I ressa treatment beyond progression Respiratory and
AZD2115
MEDI546
MEDI551
MEDI570
AZD1981
AZD2423
AZD5069
AZD5423
AZD8683 benralizumab
CAM3001
MEDI8968 sifalimumab
CAT354 fostamatinib
Symbicort asthmaCOPD
COPD
Symbicort
SMART
Partnered product.
Kombiglyze XR
TM
FDC in the EU.
Added to pipeline table after starting Phase II in January 2012.
Addition
No change
New filing
Reclassified
Key  showing movements since 27 January 2011
CAT354
Entocort
Nexium peptic ulcer bleeding
GERD
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Therapy Area Review 57 Therapy Area Review
In brief Crestor sales up 13% to 6.62 billion.
Results from the SATURN study published in November did not demonstrate a statistically significant greater reduction in favour of Crestor versus atorvastatin for the reduction of atherosclerotic plaque percent atheroma volume on the primary endpoint even though the reduction was numerically greater.
For the secondary efficacy measure of normalised total atheroma volume Crestor demonstrated a statistically significant reduction compared with atorvastatin.
Statistically significant differences were observed in favour of Crestor for key lipid parameters and once again the study demonstrated that Crestor helps to reduce plaque buildup in the arteries.
In April 2011 and July AstraZeneca reached settlements in Canada with Mylan Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Pharmaceuticals Canada Inc. relating to the Crestor substance patent.
The settlement early entry date is 2 April 2012.
Several defendants appealed the 2010 decision in the US District Court for the District of Delaware finding in favour of AstraZeneca that the substance patent covering the active ingredient in Crestor tablets is valid enforceable and infringed.
The parties await the decision of the US Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.
Atacand sales down 6% to 1.45 billion.
In July the FDA approved Brilinta ticagrelor to reduce the rate of heart attack myocardial infarction and cardiovascular CV death in adult patients with acute coronary syndromes ACS compared to clopidogrel.
In the previous month Health Canada approved Brilinta for the secondary prevention of atherothrombotic events in patients with ACS.
In May we announced new health economics data from a substudy of the PLATO trial that showed treating a broad spectrum of ACS patients with Brilinta was more cost effective than treatment with generic clopidogrel.
In October Brilique the trade name for ticagrelor in Europe received final guidance recommendation from The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence in the UK for reimbursement in patients with ACS who have suffered a heart attack or an episode of unstable angina.
In December Brilique received a positive final medical benefit assessment in Germany from the Federal Joint Committee as part of the new AMNOG ArzneimittelmarktNeuordnungsgesetz review process.
In January 2011 the EMA validated a MAA for dapagliflozin as a oncedaily oral therapy for the treatment of adult patients with Type 2 diabetes.
In March 2011 the FDA accepted for review the NDA filed by AstraZeneca and BMS for dapagliflozin as a oncedaily oral therapy for the treatment of adult patients with Type 2 diabetes.
Following an FDA Advisory Committee meeting in July requesting additional data in January 2012 we received a Complete Response Letter from the FDA requesting further clinical data to allow a better assessment of the benefitrisk profile for dapagliflozin.
In March 2011 Onglyza severe renal impairment.
In November AstraZeneca and BMS received approval from the European Commission for the marketing authorisation for
TM an immediate release fixed dose combination of saxagliptin and metformin HCI as a treatment for adults with Type 2 diabetes.
In August Axanum received positive agreement for approval in 23 European member states and in Norway.
Axanum is indicated for prevention of CV events in highrisk CV patients in need of daily lowdose acetylsalicylic acid treatment and who are at risk of gastric ulcers.
Our marketed products Cardiovascular diseases of dyslipidaemia and hypercholesterolemia.
In some markets it is also indicated to slow the progression of atherosclerosis and to reduce the risk of first cardiovascular CV events.
Atacand candesartan cilexetil is an angiotensin II antagonist used for the 1st line treatment of hypertension and symptomatic heart failure.
SelokenToprolXL metoprolol succinate is a betablocker oncedaily tablet used for 24hour control of hypertension and for use in heart failure and angina.
Tenormin atenolol is a cardioselective betablocker used for hypertension angina pectoris and other CV disorders.
Plendil felodipine is a calcium antagonist used for the treatment of hypertension and angina.
Zestril lisinopril dihydrate is an angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitor used for the treatment of a wide range of CV diseases including hypertension.
BrilintaBrilique ticagrelor is an oral antiplatelet for the treatment of acute coronary syndromes ACS.
Axanum acetylsalicylic acid ASA and esomeprazole is a fixed dose combination indicated for prevention of CV events in highrisk CV patients in need of daily lowdose ASA treatment and who are at risk of gastric ulcers.
Diabetes
Komboglyze saxagliptin and metformin HCl is an immediate release fixed dose combination indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycaemic control in adult patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus inadequately controlled on their maximally tolerated dose of metformin alone or those already being treated with the combination of saxagliptin and metformin as separate tablets.
Kombiglyze XR saxagliptin and metformin XR is an extended release fixed dose combination indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycaemic control in adults with Type 2 diabetes mellitus when treatment with both saxagliptin and metformin is appropriate.
Onglyza
Therapy area world market MATQ311 bn Market sectors High blood pressure Abnormal levels of blood cholesterol
Thrombosis
Other
Cardiovascular is the single largest therapy area in the global healthcare market.
Worldwide market value of 186.7 billion.
Licensed from Shionogi and Co.
Ltd.
Licensed from Takeda Chemicals Industries Ltd.
Licensed from Merck.
Codeveloped and cocommercialised with BMS.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 58 Therapy Area Review Cardiovascular Our strategic objectives AstraZeneca is one of the world leaders in cardiovascular CV medicines.
We aim to build on our strong position focusing on the growth areas of atherosclerosis hardening of the arteries thrombosis blood clotting diabetes obesity and atrial fibrillation cardiac arrhythmia.
Despite improvements in the quality of diagnosis and treatment the unmet medical needs remain high and these disease areas and their complications continue to grow worldwide both in Established Markets and Emerging Markets as a consequence of the spread of a westernised lifestyle.
In addition to our smallmolecule CV research we are developing potential new therapies using a variety of biologic approaches including antibodies peptides and proteins to address unmet medical needs in the treatment of obesity diabetes and heart disease.
Cardiovascular diseases Hypertension high blood pressure and dyslipidaemia abnormal levels of blood cholesterol damage the arterial wall which may lead to atherosclerosis.
CV events driven by atherosclerotic disease remain the leading cause of death in the western world.
Lipidmodifying therapy primarily statins is a cornerstone for the treatment of atherosclerosis.
Acute coronary syndromes ACS is an umbrella term for sudden chest pain and other symptoms due to insufficient blood supply ischaemia to the heart muscle.
ACS is the acute culmination of ischemic heart disease the leading cause of death worldwide WHO 2008.
There remains a significant need to improve outcomes and reduce the costs of treating ACS.
Our focus Our key marketed products Since its launch in 2003 Crestor has continued to gain market share with its differentiated profile in managing cholesterol levels and its more recent label indications for slowing the progression of atherosclerosis and reducing the risk of CV events in some markets.
Crestor is the only statin with an atherosclerosis indication in the US which is not limited by disease severity or restricted to patients with coronary heart disease.
A competitor to Crestor atorvastatin Lipitor was available in generic form in the US from late 2011.
Fewer than half the people thought to have high levels of lowdensity lipoprotein cholesterol LDL C bad cholesterol are diagnosed and treated.
Of treated patients only about half reach their doctors recommended cholesterol targets using existing treatments.
Study data has shown that the usual 10mg starting dose of Crestor is more effective at lowering LDL C and produces greater achievement of LDL C goals than commonly prescribed doses of other statins.
Crestor also produces an increase in highdensity lipoprotein cholesterol HDL C good cholesterol across the dose range and has again been shown to reduce atherosclerotic plaque in the recently published SATURN study.
BrilintaBrilique ticagrelor is an oral antiplatelet treatment for ACS in a new chemical class called cyclopentyltriazolopyrimidines which are selective adenosine diphospate ADP receptor antagonists that act on the P2Y12 ADPreceptor.
Brilinta was approved by the FDA in July to reduce the rate of heart attack myocardial infarction and CV death in adult patients with ACS compared to clopidogrel.
The FDA approval is based upon data from the PLATO study a superiority trial that compared treatment with Brilinta to clopidogrel when added to aspirin in 18624 ACS patients worldwide.
The overall PLATO results demonstrated the superiority of ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in reducing heart attacks and CV death in patients with ACS treated for 12 months without increasing major or fatal bleeding.
The study provided the basis for regulatory filings worldwide.
In September Brilique the trade name for ticagrelor in Europe received final guidance from The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence NICE in the UK for reimbursement in patients with ACS who have suffered a heart attack or an episode of unstable angina.
In October the final positive Technology Appraisal Guidance TAG from NICE was published.
In December Brilique received a positive final medical benefit assessment for the majority of ACS patients in Germany from the Federal Joint Committee as part of the new AMNOG ArzneimittelmarktNeuordnungsgesetz review process.
Our financial performance World US Western Europe Established ROW Emerging Markets Prior year
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
World sales Crestor 6622 16 13 3074 16 1225 10 5 1691
ToprolXL
Onglyza 21tel BrilintaBrilique 21 nm nm 11 nm 9 nm nm    1 nm nm Total 10212 9 5 3856 6 2356 6 1 2098 18 9 1902 9 8 9403 Crestor 5691 26 24 2640 26 1111 15 20 1502 Atacand 118 736   1436
ToprolXL
Plendil 34 32 14 8  Zestril 157 15 14 10 44 81 23 19 17 11 21 Onglyza 69 nm nm 54 nm 10 nm nm 2 nm nm 3 nm nm 11 Others 262  1 15 25 113 14 11 26 7 14 Total 9403 12 11 3652 7 2230 4 8 1781 28 16 1740 22 18 8376 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Therapy Area Review Cardiovascular 59 Therapy Area Review In September we announced the European Society of Cardiology ESC included Brilique on their nonST elevation myocardial infarction NSTEMI guidelines in a 1st line position ahead of clopidogrel.
This supports its earlier inclusion in the ESCEACTS revascularisation guidelines in 2010.
In November Brilinta received a Class I recommendation in the updated percutaneous coronary intervention PCI guidelines from the American Heart Association AHA the American College of Cardiology Foundation ACCF and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions SCAI.
That month Brilinta was also added to the updated AHAACCF Coronary Artery Bypass Graft CABG and Secondary Prevention and Risk Reduction Guidelines.
BrilintaBrilique remains under regulatory review in 39 countries.
It has been approved in 64 countries including in the US Canada and Brazil under the trade name Brilinta and in the EU Iceland and Norway under the trade name Brilique.
Additional marketing authorisations and regulatory submissions are planned for 2012.
Atacand continues to be an important treatment option for patients with hypertension and symptomatic heart failure.
Atacand is approved for the treatment of hypertension in over 125 countries and for symptomatic heart failure in more than 70 countries.
Most patients with hypertension fail to reach their treatment goals with the use of a single antihypertensive treatment and fixed dose combinations of two or more antihypertensives are commonly prescribed for patients to improve efficacy and attainment of treatment goals.
Atacand Plus candesartan cilexetilhydrochlorothiazide is a fixed dose combination of Atacand and the diuretic hydrochlorothiazide indicated for the treatment of hypertension in patients who require more than one antihypertensive therapy.
Atacand Plus is approved in 98 countries.
Axanum is a single capsule of lowdose ASA and esomeprazole the active ingredient in Nexium.
It is indicated for prevention of CV events in highrisk CV patients in need of daily lowdose ASA treatment and who are at risk of gastric ulcers.
Lowdose ASA is a mainstay of therapy for patients at high risk of having a CV event such as a heart attack or stroke.
Up to 30% of patients with upper gastrointestinal problems discontinue or take deliberate breaks from their lowdose ASA treatment placing them at risk of a potentially lifethreatening CV event as early as eight to 10 days after discontinuation.
In May AstraZeneca received a Complete Response Letter from the FDA for the NDA for Axanum.
AstraZeneca has worked with the FDA and provided additional information.
Due to the time delay caused by the Complete Response Letter and the additional review AstraZeneca has decided to withdraw the NDA for Axanum.
In August Axanum received positive agreement for approval in 23 European member states and in Norway.
Axanum has been approved in 13 of these countries and its first market launch occurred in Germany in November.
Clinical studies of our key marketed products GALAXY our longterm global clinical research programme for Crestor investigates links between optimal lipid control atherosclerosis and CV morbidity and mortality.
The programme has completed a number of studies involving over 65000 patients in over 55 countries some of which are referred to below.
The SATURN study was designed to measure the impact of Crestor 40mg and atorvastatin Lipitor 80mg on the progression of atherosclerosis in highrisk patients.
Results from the SATURN study published in November did not demonstrate a statistically significant greater reduction in favour of Crestor versus atorvastatin Lipitor on the primary endpoint of percent atheroma volume even though the reduction was numerically greater.
For the secondary efficacy The collaboration for saxagliptin excludes Japan. atorvastatin Lipitor.
Statistically significant differences were observed in favour of Crestor for key lipid parameters and once again the study demonstrated that Crestor helps to reduce plaque buildup in the arteries.
In October 2010 AstraZeneca initiated PEGASUS TIMI54 a 21000 patient study in over 30 countries.
The study examines the ability of BrilintaBrilique plus aspirin to prevent adverse CV events safely compared to aspirin alone in higherrisk patients one to three years after a heart attack.
Enrolment for PEGASUS began in December 2010 and is ongoing.
The ATLANTIC trial started recruitment in September and is designed to examine the efficacy of prehospital eg ambulance versus inhospital administration of BrilintaBrilique coadministered with aspirin in approximately 1770 patients presenting with one type of heart attack called STelevated myocardial infarction STEMI.
The aim of this study is to determine whether initiation of BrilintaBrilique as early as possible can lead to improved outcomes for these patients.
Diabetes
Type 2 diabetes is a chronic progressive disease and patients often require multiple medications to control their condition.
The disease continues to grow as a consequence of western lifestyles and it increasingly affects people at a younger age.
There are a number of established oral generic and branded classes such as biguanides and sulfonylureas.
However newer classes such as oral dipeptidyl peptidase IV DPPIV inhibitors are successfully entering the market by offering effective blood sugar control and improved tolerability.
Several new classes of drugs are in development in this area including sodium glucose cotransporter2 inhibitors SGLT2.
CV safety has been given particular emphasis in recent regulatory reviews and guidance documents provided by the FDA and other regulatory authorities.
Our focus Our key marketed products AstraZeneca continues its strong worldwide collaboration with BMS to develop and commercialise two compounds discovered by BMS Onglyza saxagliptin and dapagliflozin for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes.
Onglyza has been submitted for regulatory review in more than 90 countries and approved in 68 including the US Canada Mexico 30 European countries India Brazil and China.
In March 2011 Onglyza became the first DPPIV inhibitor available for use in Europe in Type 2 diabetes patients with moderate or severe renal impairment.
This followed the European Commissions approval of a label update for Onglyza in the treatment of adults with Type 2 diabetes who have moderate or severe renal impairment.
The approved dosage for this patient group is a oncedaily 2.5mg dose.
In November AstraZeneca and BMS were granted approval from the European Commission for the marketing authorisation for Komboglyze a fixed dose combination of Onglyza and metformin immediate release tablets as a treatment for adults with Type 2 diabetes.
The decision applies to the 27 member states of the EU.
This followed FDA approval in November 2010 for Kombiglyze XR a fixed dose combination of Onglyza plus metformin hydrochloride extendedrelease tablets.
Kombiglyze XR is the first and only onceaday metformin extended release plus DPPIV inhibitor combination tablet providing strong comprehensive glycaemic control across glycosylated haemoglobin levels HbA1c fasting plasma glucose and postprandial glucose.
Kombiglyze XR was launched in January 2011 in the US.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 60 Therapy Area Review Cardiovascular In the pipeline Dapagliflozin an investigational compound is a potential firstinclass SGLT2 inhibitor under joint development with BMS as a oncedaily oral therapy for the treatment of adult patients with Type 2 diabetes.
In March 2011 the FDA accepted for review the NDA filed by AstraZeneca and BMS for dapagliflozin as a oncedaily oral therapy for the treatment of adult patients with Type 2 diabetes.
In June AstraZeneca and BMS announced the results of two Phase III trials that showed that dapagliflozin treatment was effective in lowering blood glucose and body weight as initial combination therapy with metformin in drugnave Type 2 diabetes patients with poor glycemic control.
In addition longterm 102 week data from doubleblind extensions of two Phase III studies in Type 2 diabetes patients showed that improvements in blood glucose lowering and weight loss were maintained over two years for dapagliflozin added to metformin.
In July AstraZeneca and BMS reported the outcome of the FDA Advisory Committee meeting on the NDA.
On the question Do the efficacy and safety data provide substantial evidence to support approval of dapagliflozin as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycemic control in adults with Type 2 diabetes mellitus the committee voted against recommending approval by nine no votes to six yes.
AstraZeneca and BMS subsequently submitted additional clinical data to support the FDAs review of dapagliflozin.
This submission represented a major amendment to the NDA and resulted in a threemonth extension to the PDUFA action date to January 2012.
In January 2012 AstraZeneca and BMS received a Complete Response Letter from the FDA requesting additional clinical data to allow a better assessment of the benefitrisk profile for dapagliflozin.
This includes clinical trial data from ongoing studies and may require information from new clinical trials.
AstraZeneca and BMS will work closely with the FDA to determine the appropriate next steps for the dapagliflozin application and remain committed to its development.
In November AstraZeneca and BMS announced results from a prespecified metaanalysis of CV safety data from 14 Phase IIbIII trials in adult patients with Type 2 diabetes.
These showed that dapagliflozin was not associated with an unacceptable increase in CV risk relative to all comparators pooled in the clinical programme.
The review of the MAA for dapagliflozin in the EU is in progress with a decision expected by the second quarter of 2012.
Our activities in the glucokinase activator area were discontinued during 2011 based on Phase IIb data not showing results supporting the intended target product profile TPP.
In addition during 2011 we discontinued AZD8329 and AZD7687 due to clinical results not supporting the intended TPP.
In 2011 AZD2820 was initiated in clinical testing for the treatment of obesity.
Atrial fibrillation Atrial fibrillation AF is the most common cardiac arrhythmia.
Rhythmcontrol therapy to manage the symptoms of AF is dominated by generic amiodarone which is effective at maintaining patients in normal heart rhythm but very poorly tolerated.
AF is associated with an increased risk of cerebral embolism resulting in stroke and disability.
To reduce the risk of such AFrelated complications anticoagulation with vitamin K antagonists can be used.
New anticoagulation therapies with improved convenience are emerging.
In the pipeline For the control of heart rhythm in AF our focus is on atrialspecific agents as a way to reduce the risk of proarrhythmic effects.
Our
AZD2927 recently entering Phase II.
Financial performance 20112010 Performance 2011 Reported performance CV sales grew by 9% to 10212 million up from 9403 million in 2010 driven by the continuing growth in Crestor.
Performance  CER growth rates CV sales increased by 5%.
Global sales of Crestor increased by 13% to 6622 million.
US
Crestor sales increased by 16% to 3074 million.
A competitor to Crestor atorvastatin Lipitor was available in generic form in the US from late 2011.
Crestor sales outside the US increased by 10% to 3548 million.
Volume growth for Crestor in these markets continues to significantly exceed the growth in the overall statin market.
Sales in Western Europe increased by 5% largely due to double digit growth in France and
Sales in Established ROW increased by 15%.
Sales in Emerging Markets increased by 8% where good growth in China was partially offset by generic erosion in Brazil.
US sales of the ToprolXL product range which includes sales of the authorised generic decreased by 41% to 404 million due to declining prescription volume and lower prices.
An additional generic product received regulatory approval in December.
Sales of Seloken in other markets increased by 8% to 582 million with a 15% increase in Emerging Markets.
US Atacand sales decreased by 16%.
Outside the US Atacand sales decreased by 4%.
Alliance revenue from the Onglyza
211 million with alliance revenue in the US of 156 million and 55 million in other markets.
BrilintaBrilique sales were 21 million.
Performance 2010 Reported performance CV sales grew by 12% to 9403 million in 2010 from 8376 million in 2009 driven by the continuing growth in Crestor.
Performance  CER growth rates CV sales were up 11%.
Global sales of Crestor were up 24%.
US sales for Crestor increased by 26% to 2640 million.
Crestor sales outside the US were up 23% to 3051 million with sales in Established ROW up 25% including good growth in Canada 25% Japan 25% and Other Established ROW 23%.
Sales in Western Europe were up 20% driven by good growth in France Italy and Spain.
Sales in Emerging Markets were up 26%.
Sales of SelokenToprolXL decreased by 17%.
US sales of the ToprolXL product range which includes sales of the authorised generic decreased by 29% to 689 million as a result of further generic competition although this was partially offset by 13% growth in Emerging Markets to 391 million.
Atacand sales were up 3% despite US sales being down 18% as a result of strong growth in Established ROW 8% and Emerging Markets 17%.
Alliance revenue from the Onglyza collaboration with BMS totalled 69 million comprising 54 million in the US and 15 million in other markets.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Therapy Area Review Cardiovascular 61 Therapy Area Review
Our financial performance World US Western Europe Established ROW Emerging Markets Prior year
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
World sales Nexium 4429 11 12 2397 11 762 37 39 969 Others  2   133 Total 5536 9 11 2536 10 1050 30 33 088 Nexium 4969   2695 5 1202 2  4959 LosecPrilosec 28 253 3 2 437 6 1 Others  2 6  17 Total 6088 1  2818 4 1500 2  6011 In brief Sales of Nexium were 4.4 billion down 12% from the previous year.
In June and July the Opposition Division of the European Patent Office revoked European Patent EP  relating to Nexium and EP  relating to Nexium i.
AstraZeneca has appealed these decisions.
LosecPrilosec sales down 11% to 946 million.
In September AstraZeneca launched Nexium 10mg and 20mg capsules in Japan for the treatment of acidrelated conditions including NERD reflux esophagitis and PUD following regulatory approval in July.
Nexium also received regulatory approval for prevention of recurrence of gastric ulcer and duodenal ulcer in patients treated with NSAIDs.
Our marketed products Nexium esomeprazole is the first proton pump inhibitor PPI used for the treatment of acidrelated diseases to offer clinical improvements over other PPIs and other treatments.
LosecPrilosec omeprazole is used for the shortterm and longterm treatment of acidrelated diseases.
Entocort budesonide is a locally acting corticosteroid used for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.
39.4bn The gastrointestinal market is valued at 39.4 billion with the proton pump inhibitor market accounting for 23.4 billion.
Therapy area world market MATQ311 bn Market sectors
Other
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 62 Therapy Area Review Gastrointestinal Our strategic objectives We aim to develop our position in gastrointestinal GI treatments by continuing to focus on our existing proton pump inhibitors PPIs.
Our focus Our key marketed products Nexium is marketed in approximately 120 countries and is available in oral tabletcapsules and oral suspension and intravenous i. forms for the treatment of acidrelated diseases.
Nexium is an effective shortterm and longterm therapy for patients with GERD.
In the US the EU and other markets Nexium is approved for use in children from the age of one year for the treatment of GERD.
In December the FDA approved Nexium for delayedrelease oral suspension for the treatment of erosive esophagitis due to acidmediated GERD in patients aged one month to less than one year.
In the EU Nexium in combination with antibiotics is also approved for use for the treatment of duodenal ulcers caused by Helicobacter pylori H. in children from the age of four years.
In the EU and other markets Nexium is approved for the healing and prevention of ulcers associated with NSAID therapy including cyclooxygenase 2 selective inhibitors.
In the US Nexium is approved for reducing the risk of gastric ulcers associated with continuous NSAID therapy in patients at risk of developing gastric ulcers.
Nexium is also approved in the US the EU Canada and Australia for the treatment of patients with the rare gastric disorder ZollingerEllison syndrome.
In September AstraZeneca launched Nexium 10mg and 20mg capsules in Japan for the treatment of acidrelated conditions including NERD reflux esophagitis and PUD following regulatory approval in
Nexium also received regulatory approval for prevention of recurrence of gastric ulcer and duodenal ulcer in patients treated with
AstraZeneca and Daiichi Sankyo will copromote Nexium in Japan under the terms of a 2010 agreement.
AstraZeneca will manufacture and develop the product and Daiichi Sankyo will be responsible for its distribution.
Following treatment with Nexium i. prevention of rebleeding of gastric or duodenal ulcers.
Nexium i. treatment of GERD and upper GI side effects induced by NSAIDs.
It is approved in the EU and other markets for the shortterm maintenance of haemostasis and prevention of rebleeding in patients following therapeutic endoscopy for acute bleeding gastric or duodenal ulcers.
Nexium i. from age one month in the US.
In May 2010 AstraZeneca received a Complete Response Letter for the sNDA for Nexium which was submitted for the risk reduction of lowdose aspirinassociated peptic ulcers.
AstraZeneca has worked with the FDA and provided additional information.
Due to the time delay caused by the Complete Response Letter and subsequent review AstraZeneca withdrew the sNDA in the US in May.
LosecPrilosec was first launched in 1988 and is approved for the treatment of GERD.
We continue to maintain certain patent property covering LosecPrilosec.
LosecPrilosec is available both as a prescriptiononly medication and in some countries as an OTC medication where it offers consumers a more effective selfmedication option for the treatment of heartburn compared with antacids and H2 receptor antagonists.
In the pipeline Our activities in the field of reflux inhibition and hypersensitivity therapy have been discontinued.
We have commenced work with IL 13 inhibition in ulcerative colitis.
Financial performance 20112010 Performance 2011 Reported performance GI sales decreased by 9% to 5536 million from 6088 million in 2010.
Performance  CER growth rates GI sales decreased by 11%.
Nexium sales in the US decreased 11% to 2397 million.
Nexium sales in other markets decreased by 13% to 2032 million.
Sales in Western Europe decreased by 39% largely due to generic competition with France accounting for almost half the decline.
Sales in Established ROW increased by 10% as the launch in Japan more than offset the impact of generic competition in Canada.
Sales in Emerging Markets increased by 20%.
Prilosec sales in the US decreased by 21% to 38 million.
Losec sales outside the US decreased by 10% to 908 million.
Performance 2010 Reported performance GI sales grew by 1% to 6088 million in 2010 from 6011 million in 2009.
Performance  CER growth rates Global GI sales were unchanged.
This was due to Nexium sales being unchanged from 2009 at 4969 million and LosecPrilosec sales showing a small increase of 1% to 986 million.
Nexium sales in the US were down 5% to 2695 million although this was offset by sales outside the US which were up 6% to 2274 million.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Therapy Area Review Gastrointestinal 63 Therapy Area Review Our financial performance World US Western Europe Established ROW Emerging Markets Prior year
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
World sales Synagis 975 6 6 570 12 404 3 3    1   1038
Meronem
Non Seasonal Flu 7 82 82 7 82          39 Others nm nm 20  25 Total 1856 15 15 848 19 593 18 19 73 5 17 342 5 6 2176 Synagis 1038 4 4 646 17 392 31 31       1082
Meronem
Non Seasonal Flu 39 90 90 39 90          389
In brief Synagis sales of 975 million in the US 570 million down 12%.
MerremMeronem sales of 583 million down 30%.
FluMist sales of 161 million down 7%.
In February 2011 the European Commission granted marketing authorisation for Fluenz a nasally administered live attenuated influenza vaccine for the prevention of seasonal influenza for children 24 months to less than 18 years of age.
EU launches are planned for the 20122013 influenza season.
Our marketed products Respiratory syncytial virus RSV Synagis palivizumab is a humanised MAb used for the prevention of serious lower respiratory tract disease caused by RSV in paediatric patients at high risk of acquiring RSV disease.
Serious bacterial infections hospitalised patients.
Cubicin daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide antibacterial used for the treatment of serious infections in hospitalised patients.
Influenza virus FluMistFluenz influenza vaccine live intranasal is an intranasal live attenuated trivalent influenza vaccine.
Licensed from Dainippon Sumitomo.
Licensed from Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc.
91.2bn The world infection market is valued at 91.2 billion with antibacterials accounting for approximately 44% antivirals for 28% and vaccines 15%.
Therapy area world market MATQ311 bn Market sectors
Antivirals
Vaccines
Others
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 64 Therapy Area Review Infection Our strategic objectives We aim to build a leading franchise in the treatment of infectious diseases through continued commercialisation of brands such as Synagis MerremMeronem FluMistFluenz and Cubicin as well as through the development of pipeline products such as Zinforo ceftaroline.
We also aim to make effective use of our structural and genomicbased discovery technologies and antibody platforms vaccines and continued small molecule and biologics research into novel approaches in areas of unmet medical needs.
Complementing our biologics capabilities we are actively evaluating and integrating small molecule antiRSV and antiinfluenza basic research into our overall antiviral approach.
Respiratory syncytial virus Approximately half of all infants are infected with RSV during the first year of life and nearly all children in the US have been infected by the time they reach their second birthday.
RSV is the most common virus that causes lung and airway infections in infants and young children.
Premature babies earlier than 36 weeks gestational age especially those less than 32 weeks and babies with chronic lung disease or congenital heart disease are at increased risk of contracting severe RSV disease than fullterm healthy babies.
Our focus Our key marketed products Synagis is used for the prevention of serious lower respiratory tract disease caused by RSV in children at high risk of the disease.
It was the first MAb approved in the US for an infectious disease and has become the global standard of care for RSV prevention.
Approved in 81 countries worldwide Synagis remains the only immunoprophylaxis in the marketplace indicated for the prevention of RSV in paediatric patients at high risk of RSV.
Synagis is administered by intramuscular injection.
In the pipeline We are developing a live intranasal vaccine for the prevention of lower respiratory tract illness caused by RSV in otherwise healthy infants.
Two vaccine candidates are in clinical development MEDI559 and
Serious bacterial infections World demand for antibiotics and novel therapeutic approaches remains high and will continue to grow due to escalating resistance and the increased risk of serious infections in both immuno suppressed patients and ageing populations.
Many bacterial infections currently have few satisfactory treatment options prompting demand for new and better therapies.
Our focus Our key marketed products MerremMeronem remains the leading carbapenem antibacterial across a significant number of AstraZenecas licensed territories in which it is sold except for the US 36% value share of the carbapenem market.
MerremMeronem maintains a 6% share of the global intravenous antibiotic market by value despite experiencing loss of US market exclusivity in June 2010.
Continued generic growth across the carbapenem class is anticipated over the next 12 months following the launches of numerous generics across Europe and the US.
Cubicin is used for the treatment of serious grampositive infections in hospitalised patients and is sold by AstraZeneca in selected territories in Asia Europe and the Middle East.
Cubicin was submitted for marketing approval by the SFDA in China in September for the additional indication of complicated skin and skin structure infections.
In the pipeline Zinforo ceftaroline is a novel injectable cephalosporin which is being developed in collaboration with Forest.
Zinforo is effective against grampositive organisms and commonly susceptible gramnegative organisms associated with communityacquired pneumonia CAP and complicated skin and soft tissue infections CSSTI.
In particular Zinforo is active against methicillinresistant staphylococcus aureus
Forest received FDA approval for ceftaroline in October 2010 in the US for the treatment of acute bacterial skin and skin structure infections and communityacquired bacterial pneumonia caused by designated susceptible bacteria.
Forest launched in March 2011 under the brand name Teflaro ceftaroline.
AstraZeneca is responsible for registration and marketing outside the US Canada and Japan and filed an MAA for the 27 member states of the EU in December 2010.
Further submissions in other jurisdictions continued in 2011.
Following the acquisition of Novexel in 2010 we are working with Forest on future joint global development programmes including CAZ AVI a combination of ceftazidime and avibactam formerly known as CAZ104 and CXL a combination of ceftaroline and avibactam formerly known as CXL104CEF104.
The CAZ AVI Phase III programme was initiated in 2011 and includes five trials to confirm the efficacy and tolerability of CAZ AVI in adult patients with complicated intraabdominal or complicated urinary tract infections.
Patients with infections which are resistant to commonly used antibiotics will also be included in the Phase III programme.
CXL is in Phase II development for serious infections where coverage against resistant strains is required.
To meet the high and growing need for new and better therapies for resistant bacterial infections we have built an antibacterials discovery capability to ensure that AstraZeneca has the resources to create novel mechanism antibacterials.
Out of this work a candidate antibacterial drug AZD5099 with a novel mechanism of action involving inhibition of bacterial DNA gyrase started single ascending dose Phase I studies in healthy volunteers in June.
We are also actively evaluating and integrating biologics antibacterial modalities MAbs and vaccines into our overall approach to dealing with serious bacterial infection challenges.
Influenza virus Influenza is the most common vaccinepreventable disease in the developed world.
According to WHO estimates seasonal influenza results in three to five million cases of severe illness and up to half a million deaths globally each year primarily among the elderly.
Rates of infection are highest among children with schoolaged children significantly contributing to the spread of the disease.
Our focus Our key marketed products FluMist is a trivalent live attenuated nasally delivered vaccine approved for the prevention of disease caused by influenza virus subtypes A and B in eligible children and adults.
FluMist is now approved for eligible individuals in seven countries including the US Canada and Brazil.
In February 2011 the European Commission granted marketing authorisation to Fluenz the trade name for FluMist in the EU for the prevention of seasonal influenza for children 24 months to less than 18 years of age.
The decision is applicable to the 27 EU member states and the European Economic Area.
It is expected that the Fluenz vaccine will be initially available in select European markets for the 20122013 influenza season.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Therapy Area Review Infection 65 Therapy Area Review In the pipeline In April 2011 our biologics capabilities submitted a supplemental Biological License Application for MEDI3250 a quadrivalent version of FluMist containing protection against two A strains and both B lineages of influenza.
The PDUFA date is 29 February 2012 and if approved launches are anticipated in the US for the 20132014 influenza season.
It is anticipated that the MAA and other regulatory submissions for MEDI3250 will be made from the third quarter of 2012 onwards.
Sepsis
Sepsis is a lifethreatening condition resulting from uncontrolled severe infections.
It remains a significant problem in medical management with approximately three million worldwide incidents annually and a 30% mortality rate.
Current treatment options for patients with severe sepsis or septic shock are extremely limited and although industry pipelines are focused on the development of products specifically for registration for the treatment of sepsis or septic shock there are few products in late stage development.
In the pipeline Our potential treatment for severe sepsis licensed from Protherics
CytoFab is an antiTNF  polyclonal antibody fragment and continues in Phase II development with two studies a global 300patient Phase IIb study still recruiting and a small Phase II study in Japan for which recruitment is complete.
AZD9773 has the potential to be one of a limited number of medicines specifically developed for patients with severe sepsis.
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis TB remains a worldwide threat and is newly diagnosed in over eight million people worldwide every year.
It is one of the greatest causes of death from infectious disease in the developing world.
As part of our commitment to make a contribution to improving health in the developing world we are working to find new improved treatments for TB.
Work ongoing at our research facility in Bangalore India focuses on finding drugs that will act on multiresistant strains will simplify the treatment in current regimens are complex and lengthy meaning many patients give up before the infection is fully treated and will be compatible with HIVAIDS therapies TB and HIV AIDS form a lethal combination each speeding the others progress.
Bangalore scientists work closely with our infection research centre in Boston US as well as with academic leaders in the field and have full access to all AstraZenecas platform technologies such as high throughput screening and compound libraries.
TB remains a complex research area in which collaborations play a very important role.
Our discovery collaboration with the Global Alliance for TB Drug Development continues to work towards progressing suitable compounds through to the lead optimisation stage.
Research funded by a Wellcome Trust grant under the RandD for Affordable Healthcare in India initiative which will be used to identify novel lead molecules for the treatment of TB continues.
Our most advanced programme AZD5847 a novel antitubercular oxazolidinone antibiotic has completed its Phase I programme and is expected to enter Phase IIa trials with support from The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in 2012.
Financial performance 20112010 Performance 2011 Reported performance Infection sales decreased by 15% to 1856 million from 2176 million in 2010.
Performance  CER growth rates Infection sales decreased by 15%.
US Synagis sales decreased by 12% to 570 million.
Outside the US sales were up 3% to 405 million.
FluMist sales were 161 million a 7% decline from 2010.
Sales of MerremMeronem decreased by 30% in 2011 as a result of generic competition in the US and Western Europe.
Performance 2010 Reported performance Infection sales were down 17% to 2176 million from 2631 million in 2009.
Performance  CER growth rates Infection sales were down 18% as the sales of the H1N1 pandemic influenza vaccine in 2009 were not repeated in 2010.
There were only 39 million of sales recorded in 2010 for US government orders for the H1N1 pandemic influenza vaccine.
These sales were recorded in the first quarter of 2010 and compare with 389 million of sales in 2009.
This strain has now been incorporated into the traditional seasonal influenza vaccine.
FluMist sales were 174 million a 20% increase over 2009.
Global Synagis sales were down 4% with sales in the US down 17% to 646 million being partially offset by strong growth in Western Europe where sales were up 31% to 392 million.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 66 Therapy Area Review Infection Neuroscience In brief Total Seroquel sales up 8% to 5.8 billion.
In February 2011 the first patients were enrolled in the Phase IIb clinical trial for TC5214 a neuronal nicotinic receptor modulator being codeveloped with Targacept as a switch monotherapy treatment for major depressive disorder MDD.
In November and December respectively AstraZeneca announced that the first two Phase III trials for TC5214 as an adjunct therapy for MDD did not meet their primary endpoints resulting in a 150 million impairment charge.
In March 2011 the first patients were enrolled in the Phase III clinical programme for NKTR118 an oral peripherallyacting opioid antagonist being investigated for the treatment of opioidinduced constipation.
In September and October respectively AstraZeneca entered into two settlement agreements regarding its US Seroquel XR patent infringement litigation first against Handa and secondly against Accord and Intas Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
Both settlements were in connection with the companies proposed generic versions of AstraZenecas Seroquel XR quetiapine fumarate extended release tablets.
In September AstraZeneca filed a Citizen Petition with the FDA in respect of Seroquel XR requesting the FDA withhold approvals of any generic quetiapine drug product which omits from its labelling certain hyperglycemia and suicidality warning language that the FDA required AstraZeneca to include in its Seroquel XR labelling.
As of 31 January 2012 AstraZeneca was aware of approximately 25 Seroquel product liability claims that have not been settled in principle.
These claims primarily relate to diabetes andor other related injuries.
AstraZeneca has reached agreements in principle on monetary terms with attorneys representing 28575 claimants.
Our marketed products
Seroquel IR quetiapine fumarate is an atypical antipsychotic drug generally approved for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder mania depression and maintenance.
Seroquel XR an extended release formulation of quetiapine fumarate is generally approved for the treatment of schizophrenia bipolar disorder MDD and in some territories for generalised anxiety disorder GAD.
Approved use for Seroquel IR and Seroquel XR varies based on territory.
Analgesia and anaesthesia Zomig zolmitriptan is used for the acute treatment of migraines with or without aura and Zomig Nasal Spray is indicated for the acute treatment of cluster headache in some territories.
Diprivan propofol is an intravenous general anaesthetic used in the induction and maintenance of general anaesthesia for use in intensive care sedation and conscious sedation for surgical as well as diagnostic procedures.
Vimovo naproxenesomeprazole magnesium 3752050020mg delayedrelease tablets is a fixed dose combination of entericcoated naproxen an NSAID and immediate release esomeprazole a proton pump inhibitor PPI.
Vimovo is generally approved for symptomatic relief in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis osteoarthritis and ankylosing spondylitis in patients at risk of developing NSAIDassociated gastric andor duodenal ulcers.
Approved use for Vimovo varies based on territory.
Naropin ropivacaine is used as a longacting local anaesthetic for surgical anaesthesia and acute pain management.
Xylocaine lidocaine is a widely used shortacting local anaesthetic for topical and regional anaesthesia.
EMLA lidocaine and prilocaine is used as a local anaesthetic for topical application to prevent pain associated with injections and superficial surgical procedures.
The neuroscience world market totals 150.9 billion.
Therapy area world market MATQ311 bn Market sectors
Neurology
Analgesia
Anaesthesia
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Therapy Area Review Neuroscience 67 Our strategic objectives There is still significant unmet medical need in the areas of chronic pain cognitive disorders and other serious central nervous system disorders.
Our aim is to strengthen our position in neuroscience through further growth of Seroquel IR and Seroquel XR and to discover and develop new drug candidates with meaningful therapeutic advantages primarily in Alzheimers disease neuropathic pain control and cognition.
Psychiatry
The depression market is currently dominated by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors.
With increasing payer pressure and the need to demonstrate clear value new medicines must either show superior efficacy over current treatments or clear efficacy in welldefined patient segments such as treatmentresistant depression.
We continue to pursue projects in clinical development to address current unmet medical needs.
While no further internal discovery projects are planned we continue to pursue additional opportunities through external alliances.
Our focus Our key marketed products Seroquel IR is an atypical antipsychotic drug with antidepressant properties.
It is approved for the treatment of adult schizophrenia and bipolar disorder mania depression and maintenance.
Its overall clinical efficacy and tolerability profile make it one of the leading atypical antipsychotics in terms of global value share in the atypical antipsychotic market segment.
In the US Seroquel IR is also approved for treatment of acute manic episodes in bipolar disorder in children and adolescents ages 10 to 17 years and for schizophrenia in adolescents ages 13 to 17 years.
To date Seroquel XR has been approved in 76 countries for schizophrenia 66 countries for bipolar mania 55 countries for bipolar depression 41 countries for bipolar maintenance 42 countries for major depressive disorder MDD and six countries for generalised anxiety disorder GAD.
Following referral to the CHMP Seroquel XR was approved as an addon treatment for major depressive episodes in patients with MDD who have had suboptimal response to antidepressant monotherapy.
In the pipeline In September the last patient was enrolled in the RENAISSANCE programme for TC5214 the Phase III trial designed to support an NDA filing in the US planned for the second half of 2012 and an MAA filing in Europe planned for 2015 for TC5214 as an adjunctive treatment for MDD.
TC5214 a nicotinic modulator is being codeveloped with Targacept.
The first two of these Phase III studies did not meet their primary endpoints after eight weeks of treatment with TC5214 as compared to placebo.
Two additional Phase III efficacy and tolerability studies and one longterm safety study are ongoing.
Regulatory filing targets for TC5214 will be reviewed following full results of the remaining studies which are expected in the first half of 2012.
In February 2011 the first patients were enrolled in a multinational Phase IIb clinical trial of TC5214 as a switch monotherapy treatment for patients with MDD with inadequate response to initial antidepressant therapy.
AZD6765 has progressed into Phase IIb development to address the needs of patients with severe treatmentresistant depression.
Development of AZD2066 has been discontinued.
Analgesia and anaesthesia pain control The small number of currently approved products in the neuropathic pain market will become generic between 2014 and 2017.
However few new products are in development and the unmet medical need for improvements in both efficacy and tolerability is such that the market remains highly attractive.
In Asia neuropathic pain drugs are gaining approval shifting cultural and medical treatment barriers.
It is believed that advances in the understanding of the mechanisms which lead to neuropathic pain will allow for improved patient segmentation potentially increasing the success rate of research in this condition.
The chronic nociceptive pain market including osteoarthritis OA and chronic low back pain is steadily growing due to ageing populations combined with longer life expectancy across all regions including
Opioids are considered the gold standard for efficacy for moderate to severe pain across pain segments.
However opioid pain control comes with unwanted side effects such as bowel dysfunction.
There remains a high unmet medical need for products that enable continued opioid pain control by reducing or eliminating side effects.
Led by the antinerve growth factor MAbs biologics are an emerging treatment option for pain control and this is an area in which we have an active interest through our biologics capabilities.
Our financial performance World US Western Europe Established ROW Emerging Markets Prior year
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
World sales Seroquel IR 4338 5 3 3344 8 546 3 8 228 2 8 220 15 17 4148 Seroquel XR 1154
Anaesthetics
Vimovo 34 nm nm 21 nm 6 nm nm 6 nm nm 1 nm nm 5 Others 33 21 24 1  17 37 41 3   Total 7204 7 5 4325 8 1 6704 Seroquel IR 4148 1 1 3107 1 560 14 11   4171 Seroquel XR 1 9telLocal
Diprivan  50 19 16 Others 47 2 4 6 25 27 7 7 3   Total 6704 7 7 4003 8 1433 3  237 Therapy Area Review AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 68 Therapy Area Review Neuroscience Our focus Our key marketed products Vimovo naproxenesomeprazole magnesium 3752050020mg delayedrelease tablets codeveloped by AstraZeneca and Pozen is a fixed dose combination of entericcoated naproxen an NSAID and immediaterelease esomeprazole a stomach acidreducing proton pump inhibitor PPI.
Vimovo is generally approved for symptomatic relief in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis RA osteoarthritis OA and ankylosing spondylitis AS in patients at risk of developing NSAIDassociated gastric andor duodenal ulcers.
The approved use for Vimovo varies based on territory.
Following FDA approval in April 2010 Vimovo launched in the US in July 2010.
In October Vimovo received positive agreement for approval in 23 European member states.
In the EU Vimovo is indicated for the symptomatic treatment of OA RA and AS in patients who are at risk of developing NSAIDassociated gastric andor duodenal ulcers and where treatment with lower doses of naproxen or of other NSAIDs is not considered sufficient.
We are now pursuing pricing and reimbursement and national approvals in each EU member state.
Vimovo is now available in every region around the world.
In the pipeline In March 2011 the first patients were enrolled in the Phase III KODIAC programme for NKTR118 an oral peripherallyacting opioid antagonist being investigated for the treatment of opioidinduced constipation OIC a common gastrointestinal side effect of prescription opioids when used for chronic pain management.
The Phase III programme is designed to investigate the safety and efficacy of NKTR118 as a medicine to relieve OIC and global submissions are anticipated for mid2013.
NKTR118 is part of the exclusive worldwide licence agreement announced in September 2009 between AstraZeneca and Nektar Therapeutics.
AZD2423 continues in Phase IIa studies for the treatment of neuropathic pain.
Cognition
Alzheimers disease AD remains one of the largest areas of unmet medical need and of high risk for neuroscience product development due in part to the challenges of establishing efficacy in clinical studies.
Current treatments which doctors consider inadequate target the symptoms not the underlying cause of the disease.
This area continues to grow but all existing marketed treatments will face patent expiry by 2015.
Disease modification delivered through biologics andor small molecule treatments is clearly the hope for AD patients.
Along with better diagnostics it is expected to allow for earlier intervention and better clinical outcomes but the first wave of disease modifiers is still several years away.
In the pipeline Compounds in Phase II development include products deriving from our relationship with Targacept AZD3480 and AZD1446.
AZD3480 an 42 neuronal nicotinic receptor NNR agonist is currently in Phase IIb clinical testing for AD conducted by Targacept.
AZD1446 has completed Phase I and a Phase IIa trial in AD patients is planned in 2012.
The option on the Targacept compound TC5619 an 7 NNR agonist was not exercised following the completion of Phase IIa studies in cognitive disorders in schizophrenia and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Through our collaboration with the Karolinska Institute in Sweden the Banner Alzheimers Institute in the US the National Institute of Radiological Sciences in Japan and others our RandD capabilities in positron emission tomography PET imaging of the human brain continues to progress.
AstraZenecas amyloid PET ligands may enable us to detect AD early and to assess drug effects in AD.
We have discovered and taken into patient studies one F18 and two C11 amyloid PET ligands which are being developed as research biomarkers.
AZD4694 a radioligand currently in Phase II studies has been outlicensed to Navidea Biopharmaceuticals formerly Neoprobe for Phase III development and commercialisation.
An alliance with the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine aims to generate new AD drug candidates for the clinical development pipeline.
In this collaboration researchers focus on the protein tau which is a key component of neurofibrillary tangles that characterise AD.
Financial performance 20112010 Performance 2011 Reported performance Neuroscience sales increased by 7% to 7204 million up from 6704 million in 2010.
Performance  CER growth rates Neuroscience sales increased by 5% globally with US sales up 8%.
US sales of Seroquel were 4123 million 10% up on 2010.
US sales for Seroquel XR increased 22% to 779 million.
Total prescriptions for Seroquel XR increased by 8% whilst prescriptions for Seroquel IR decreased by 6% compared with 2010.
Seroquel sales outside the US were 1705 million in 2011 a 4% increase.
Sales of Seroquel XR increased by 32% to 711 million.
US Vimovo sales were 21 million.
Sales outside the US were 13 million.
Performance 2010 Reported performance Neuroscience sales were up 7% to 6704 million up from 6237 million in 2009.
Performance  CER growth rates Neuroscience sales were up 7%.
Seroquel sales were up 9% to 5302 million with Seroquel XR sales up 67% to 1154 million partially offset by a 1% decline in Seroquel IR sales to 4148 million.
US sales of Seroquel were 3747 million 10% ahead of last year with Seroquel XR sales up 87% to 640 million and Seroquel IR up 1% to 3107 million.
For 2010 Seroquel sales outside the US increased by 7% to 1555 million.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Therapy Area Review Neuroscience 69 Therapy Area Review
In brief Arimidex sales down 53% to 756 million as a result of patent expiry in the US in 2010 and across the EU.
Zoladex sales 1.2 billion up 3% from the previous year.
Casodex sales 550 million down 12% as a result of continued generic competition across all markets.
Faslodex sales 546 million up 55%.
Iressa sales 554 million up 32%.
We ended the investigation of zibotentan as a potential treatment for cancer following the results of clinical trials in patients with advanced prostate cancer.
In April 2011 vandetanib received FDA approval for the treatment of symptomatic or progressive medullary thyroid cancer MTC that cannot be removed by surgery or that has spread to other parts of the body.
In August the FDA approved the trade name Caprelsa for vandetanib.
In November the MAA for Caprelsa vandetanib received a positive opinion from the CHMP for the treatment of aggressive and symptomatic MTC in patients with unresectable locally advanced or metastatic disease.
In September AstraZeneca received regulatory approval in Japan for Faslodex fulvestrant 500mg for the treatment of post menopausal women with hormone receptorpositive metastatic breast cancer which has recurred or progressed following prior endocrine therapy.
In December AstraZeneca announced its decision to discontinue the development of olaparib AZD2281 for the maintenance treatment of serous ovarian cancer resulting in a 285 million impairment charge.
This followed a review of an interim analysis of a Phase II study which indicated that the previously reported progression free survival benefit was unlikely to translate into an overall survival benefit the definitive measure of patient benefit in ovarian cancer.
Our marketed products Arimidex anastrozole is an aromatase inhibitor used for the treatment of breast cancer.
Zoladex goserelin acetate implant in one and three month depots is a luteinising hormonereleasing hormone agonist used for the treatment of prostate cancer breast cancer and certain benign gynaecological disorders.
Casodex bicalutamide is an antiandrogen therapy used for the treatment of prostate cancer.
Iressa gefitinib is used as an EGFRTK inhibitor that acts to block signals for cancer cell growth and survival in nonsmall cell lung cancer.
Faslodex fulvestrant is an injectable oestrogen receptor antagonist used for the treatment of hormone receptorpositive metastatic breast cancer for postmenopausal women whose disease has progressed following treatment with prior endocrine therapy.
Nolvadex tamoxifen citrate remains a widely used breast cancer treatment outside the US.
Caprelsa vandetanib is a kinase inhibitor indicated for the treatment of symptomatic or progressive MTC in patients with unresectable nonoperable locally advanced or metastatic disease.
60.7bn The world market value for cancer therapies is 60.7 billion and continues to grow.
Therapy area world market MATQ311 bn Market sectors
Hormonal therapies Monoclonal antibodies Small molecule TKIs AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 70 Therapy Area Review Oncology Our strategic objectives We aim to build on our position as one of the world leaders in cancer treatment with established brands such as Zoladex and Arimidex and growing brands such as Faslodex and Iressa.
Our future growth will be driven through targeting the right treatments both small molecules and biologics to the right patients using companion diagnostics where appropriate.
This approach is driving the growth of Iressa and is a key focus in the development of our early stage portfolio.
Our focus Our key marketed products Arimidex first launched in 1995 remains a leading hormonal therapy for patients with early breast cancer globally.
This success is largely based on the extensive longterm efficacy and safety results of the ATAC study which showed Arimidex to be significantly superior to tamoxifen at preventing breast cancer recurrence during and beyond the fiveyear treatment course.
Faslodex 500mg is now approved in many markets including the EU the US and Japan.
It offers an additional efficacious hormonal therapy option for patients with hormonereceptor positive advanced breast cancer.
It is given by oncemonthly injections and is approved for the treatment of hormonereceptor positive advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal women whose disease has progressed following treatment with a prior endocrine therapy.
In markets where 250mg is approved plans are in place to replace the dose with 500mg and in markets where Faslodex is not approved plans are to seek approval for the 500mg dose as the first registration.
Casodex and Zoladex are both leading endocrine therapies for the treatment of prostate cancer.
Casodex is used as a 50mg tablet for the treatment of advanced prostate cancer and as a 150mg tablet for the treatment of locally advanced prostate cancer.
Zoladex a luteinising hormonereleasing hormone LHRH agonist is approved in 120 countries for the treatment of prostate cancer breast cancer and certain benign gynaecological disorders.
In nonmetastatic prostate cancer Zoladex has been shown to improve overall survival both when used in addition to radical prostatectomy and when used in addition to radiotherapy.
In breast cancer Zoladex is widely approved for use in advanced breast cancer in pre menopausal women.
In a number of countries Zoladex is also approved for the adjuvant treatment of early stage premenopausal breast cancer as an alternative to andor in addition to chemotherapy.
Zoladex offers proven survival benefits for breast cancer patients with a favourable tolerability profile.
Launches of generic goserelin the active ingredient in Zoladex are expected in Europe during 2012.
Iressa is approved in 81 countries and is one of the leading epidermal growth factor receptortyrosine kinase EGFRTK inhibitors in Japan and the Asia Pacific region where it is marketed for pretreated advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer NSCLC.
Outside the EU indications are being sought or expanded from the pretreated setting to include 1st line patients whose tumours harbour activating mutations of the EGFRTK inhibitor.
In the EU Iressa has been launched as the first personalised medicine for the treatment of adults with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with activating mutations.
Caprelsa vandetanib fights cancer through two proven mechanisms blocking the development of tumour blood supply by inhibition of the vascular endothelial growth factor VEGF pathway and by inhibiting the growth and survival of the tumour through epidermal growth factor receptor EGFR and rearranged during transfection RET pathways.
Vandetanib was approved by the FDA in April 2011 for the treatment of symptomatic or progressive medullary thyroid cancer MTC in patients with unresectable locally advanced or metastatic disease with approval for the trade name Caprelsa subsequently granted by the FDA in August.
A Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy REMS is required for Caprelsa by the FDA due to the risks of QT prolongation Torsades de pointes and sudden death.
In November the MAA for Caprelsa received a positive opinion from the CHMP for the treatment of aggressive and symptomatic MTC in patients with unresectable locally advanced or metastatic disease.
Caprelsa remains under review by other regulatory agencies.
There are approximately 30 earlystage studies ongoing that look at cancers in which vandetanib might be effective.
These cancers include pancreatic glioblastoma brain biliary tract liver duct and thyroid papillary and follicular.
In the pipeline Cediranib is an antiangiogenic compound that has been evaluated across a range of tumour types.
Study BR 29 a National Cancer Institute of Canada sponsored Phase IIIII study exploring cediranib in combination with carboplatinpaclitaxel in patients with NSCLC was stopped because it did not meet prespecified efficacy criteria to progress to Phase III.
Several ongoing Phase II studies with cediranib will continue to completion however no further development is planned.
Zibotentan ZD4054 is a specific endothelin Areceptor antagonist.
AstraZeneca has ended the investigation of zibotentan as a potential treatment for cancer following the results of clinical trials in patients with advanced prostate cancer.
In February 2011 the Phase III ENTHUSE study 15 which studied zibotentan monotherapy in patients with nonmetastatic castrate resistant prostate cancer CRPC was stopped following the results of an early efficacy review by the Independent Data Monitoring Committee.
This review indicated that zibotentan monotherapy was unlikely to meet its primary efficacy Our financial performance World US Western Europe Established ROW Emerging Markets Prior year
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
World sales Casodex 550 5 12 6 138 80 29 33 364 5 5 Iressa 50 12telOthers Total 3705 8 12 353 51 935 19 22 1440 8 1 977 16 16 4045 Arimidex 1512 21 22 494 44 580 7 4 3 6 1921 Iressa 20 4telOthers Total 4045 10 12 721 41 1153 10 7 1328 3 4 843 15 12 4518 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Therapy Area Review Oncology 71 Therapy Area Review endpoints of progression free survival and overall survival and was therefore unlikely to benefit patients with nonmetastatic CRPC.
In
July the results from the Phase III ENTHUSE study 33 showed that the addition of zibotentan to docetaxel did not improve the overall survival for metastatic CRPC patients.
The full data from both of these studies in addition to the data from the Phase III ENTHUSE study 14 announced in 2010 will be published in due course.
In December AstraZeneca announced its decision to discontinue the development of olaparib AZD2281 for the maintenance treatment of serous ovarian cancer.
This followed a review of an interim analysis of a Phase II study study 19 which indicated that the previously reported progression free survival benefit was unlikely to translate into an overall survival benefit the definitive measure of patient benefit in ovarian cancer.
Our early oncology pipeline includes a range of novel compounds that target signalling pathways believed to be pivotal in cancer cell growth and survival as well as DNA repair mechanisms.
AZD8931 a panerb kinase inhibitor continues in Phase II trials in different segments of metastatic breast cancer.
Selumetinib AZD6244ARRY is a potent MEK mitogen activated protein kinase 1 inhibitor licensed from Array BioPharma
In October data from a Phase II placebocontrolled study of selumetinib in combination with docetaxel in the 2nd line treatment of lung cancer patients was reported.
The studys primary endpoint of overall survival demonstrated a numerically greater increase in survival in favour of selumetinib in combination with docetaxel versus docetaxel alone but did not reach statistical significance.
The secondary endpoints were all demonstrated with statistical significance.
AZD4547 is in Phase II testing for solid tumours.
AZD1480 AZD2014 AZD3514 and AZD5363 are all completing Phase I studies while AZD1208 entered Phase I clinical trials in 2011.
AZD7762 and AZD2461 were terminated in 2011 while AZD8055 a selective TOR kinase inhibitor was discontinued and effort focused on a second compound AZD2014.
We are also developing potential new cancer drugs using a variety of biologics approaches.
Our investigational biologics are directed towards molecular targets with a strong role in cancer progression and incorporate innovative technologies providing the potential to eliminate cancer cells in more effective ways.
Within biologics we continue to progress a discovery and clinical pipeline that is balanced across different antitumour approaches including impacting cancer cells directly growth factor and survival signalling modulating the blood supply that tumours need to grow vascular modulation and activating a patients own immune system to eliminate cancer cells immunemediated killing.
Tremelimumab is a CTLA4 MAb and uses certain parts of the immune system to fight diseases including cancer.
Tumours have mechanisms to evade the immune system and blockade of CTLA4 with tremelimumab can reactivate the immune system to help fight the cancer.
AstraZeneca entered into an inlicensing agreement with Pfizer for tremelimumab in October.
Under the terms of this agreement AstraZeneca will assume global development rights to tremelimumab and Pfizer will retain the rights to use tremelimumab with specified types of combination therapies.
We plan to explore tremelimumab in a number of potential cancer indications.
Our biologics pipeline also includes investigational treatments for cancers of the blood as well as for a variety of solid tumours.
We currently have two investigational drugs in Phase II trials and five investigational drugs in Phase I clinical trials.
Additional drug candidates are expected to progress into Phase I and Phase II trials in 2012.
Financial performance 20112010 Performance 2011 Reported performance Oncology sales decreased by 8% to 3705 million down from 4045 million in 2010.
Performance  CER growth rates Oncology sales decreased globally by 12%.
In the US sales of Arimidex decreased by 91% to 42 million.
Generics now account for 97% of anastrozole prescriptions in the US.
Arimidex sales in other markets decreased by 34% to 714 million.
Arimidex retained market exclusivity in the major EU markets until February 2011.
Casodex sales outside the US decreased by 8% to 556 million.
Iressa sales increased by 32% to 554 million with strong growth in Western Europe and Emerging Markets.
Faslodex sales in the US increased by 71% to 264 million.
Sales outside the US reached 282 million an increase of 42% driven by the increased adoption of the new 500mg dosage regimen.
Performance 2010 Reported performance Oncology sales were down 10% to 4045 million compared with 4518 million in the prior year.
Performance  CER growth rates Oncology sales were down 12%.
Sales of Arimidex were down 22%.
This was mainly due to sales in the US which were down 44% to 494 million reflecting the inroads made by generics since their approval at the end of June 2010.
Arimidex sales outside the US were down 3% to 1018 million.
Casodex sales were down 34% with sales in the US down 89% to 16 million as a result of generic competition that began in the third quarter of 2009.
Sales outside the US were also down 22% to 563 million.
Iressa sales increased by 28% to 393 million including 49 million of sales in Western Europe.
Sales in Japan were up 8%.
Sales in Emerging Markets were up 20% including a 23% increase in China.
Faslodex sales for the full year increased by 35% in the US and grew by 32% outside the US.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 72 Therapy Area Review Oncology Respiratory and Inflammation In brief Total Symbicort sales 3.1 billion up 11%.
Total Pulmicort sales 892 million unchanged.
In March 2011 the production of Pulmicort budesonide 100 and 200 gdose HFA pMDI pressurised metereddose inhaler was discontinued due to complex manufacturing issues related to technical aspects of the device which prevented the ongoing manufacture of the product.
Our marketed products Symbicort pMDI budesonideformoterol in a pressurised metereddose inhaler is used for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease COPD including chronic bronchitis and emphysema in the US.
Symbicort Turbuhaler budesonideformoterol in a dry powder inhaler is a combination of an inhaled corticosteroid and a fast onset longacting bronchodilator used for the treatment of asthma and COPD.
It is also approved for maintenance and reliever therapy SMART in persistent asthma.
Pulmicort Turbuhaler budesonide in a dry powder inhaler is a corticosteroid antiinflammatory inhalation drug that is used to help prevent the symptoms of and improve the control of asthma.
Pulmicort Respules budesonide inhalation suspension is a nebulised corticosteroid used for the treatment of asthma in both children and adults.
Approved use for Pulmicort Respules varies based on territory.
Rhinocort budesonide is a nasal steroid used as a treatment for allergic rhinitis hay fever perennial rhinitis and nasal polyps.
Oxis Turbuhaler formoterol is a fast onset longacting betaagonist used for the treatment of asthma and COPD.
Accolate zafirlukast is an oral leukotriene receptor antagonist used for the treatment of asthma.
64.6bn The prescription respiratory world market value is 64.6 billion.
Therapy area world market MATQ311 bn Market sectors
COPD
Rhinitis
Other
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Therapy Area Review Respiratory and Inflammation 73 Our strategic objectives We aim to build on our strong position in the respiratory and inflammation field through the growth of key products with new indications and market launches including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease COPD as well as through developing a strong pipeline of novel small molecule and biologics approaches to COPD and asthma.
We aspire to enter the rheumatology market through our biologics pipeline and targeted small molecule approaches such as fostamatinib.
COPD and asthma According to WHO COPD a serious lung disease that includes chronic bronchitis andor emphysema is currently the fourth leading cause of death worldwide with future increases anticipated.
Current treatment has recently demonstrated some survival benefit but the impact of medication on the course of the disease is small and the prognosis of the COPD patient remains poor.
In asthma morbidity and mortality remain important issues and disease normalisation is not achieved by any treatment.
The typical treatment for both moderate COPD and asthma is a fixed dose combination of an inhaled corticosteroid ICS with a longacting betaagonist LABA for example Symbicort or for COPD specifically an inhaled longacting muscarinic antagonist LAMA.
Other major asthma treatments include monotherapy ICSs oral leukotriene receptor antagonists andor oral steroids for severe disease and in combination with antibiotics for exacerbations.
Over recent years studies employing patientcentric tools such as the asthma control questionnaire have revealed surprisingly low asthma control at all severities highlighting an underestimated medical need.
Our focus Our key marketed products Symbicort improves symptoms and provides a clinically important improvement in the health of many patients with either asthma or COPD by providing effective and rapid control of the symptoms.
Symbicort pMDI pressurised metereddose inhaler is indicated in the US for the treatment of asthma in patients 12 years of age and older.
The COPD indication was approved and launched in the US in early 2009.
In June 2010 the US Prescribing Information was updated to include the FDAs new recommendations for appropriate use of asthma medications containing LABAs.
The class label changes for all LABAcontaining products are specific to the treatment of asthma and do not apply to the treatment of COPD.
Symbicort Turbuhaler was launched in Japan for the treatment of adult asthma in January 2010 and is copromoted in Japan with Astellas.
Symbicort SMART provides increased asthma control and simplifies asthma management through the use of only one inhaler for both maintenance and relief of asthma symptoms.
As well as being a cost effective treatment for many healthcare payers the Symbicort SMART approach can also result in lower ICS and oral steroid use compared to other treatment options.
Pulmicort is one of the worlds leading inhaled corticosteroids for the treatment of asthma and is available in several forms.
Teva has had an exclusive licence to sell a generic version of Pulmicort Respules in the US since 2009.
In March 2011 the production of Pulmicort budesonide 100 and 200 gdose HFA pMDI pressurised metereddose inhaler was discontinued due to complex manufacturing issues related to technical aspects of the device which prevented the ongoing manufacture of the product.
This issue was not related to the active ingredient budesonide.
The impact of this withdrawal has been minimal representing less than 3% of total Pulmicort sales for 2010.
Our other respiratory products including Pulmicort Turbuhaler and Pulmicort Respules were not affected as they use different devices or device compounds.
Our other pMDI products such as Symbicort were also not affected.
Clinical studies of our key marketed products In 2010 the FDA requested all manufacturers of LABAcontaining products to conduct a postmarketing safety study to evaluate serious asthma outcomes with marketed pharmaceuticals when added to corticosteroids compared to corticosteroids alone to treat asthma.
In December recruitment began for a randomised double blind 26week activecontrolled clinical trial comparing Symbicort pMDI with budesonide HFA pMDI to evaluate the risk of serious asthma outcomes hospitalisations intubation and death in 11700 adult and adolescent patients 12 years of age and older with persistent asthma.
In the pipeline Building on our capabilities in combinations and device development demonstrated through our experience with Symbicort we are aiming to further improve the mainstay of treatment for COPD patients by combining bronchodilators such as the LAMA AZD8683 being developed in collaboration with Pulmagen Therapeutics Synergy Limited with inhaled antiinflammatory compounds such as inhaled selective glucocorticoid receptor agonists AZD5423 being developed in collaboration with Bayer Schering Pharma AG which recently commenced Phase II studies.
Additionally we are targeting Therapy Area Review Our financial performance World US Western Europe Established ROW Emerging Markets Prior year
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
World sales Symbicort 3 1434 5  746 Others 216 15 19 8 80 109 8 13 23 5  Total 4468 9 6 1207 4 1769 2 3 099 Symbicort 2 1 2294 Others 254 4 5 41 15 118 4 3 22 4 13 Total 4099 1 1 1160 21 1739   4132 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 74 Therapy Area Review Respiratory and Inflammation inflammation in COPD using oral routes of administration and have commenced a Phase II study of AZD5069 a CXCR2 antagonist that targets neutrophils.
A biological approach MEDI8968 a MAb targeting the IL 1 receptor has also commenced a Phase II trial in COPD.
We are targeting uncontrolled asthmaasthma exacerbations through small molecule approaches such as a CRTh2 receptor antagonist and tolllike receptor 7 agonists being developed in collaboration with Dainippon Sumitomo as well as biological approaches such as benralizumab MEDI563 a MAb that binds to the interleukin5 receptor which results in depletion of eosinophils and basophils and tralokinumab CAT354 a MAb that targets interleukin13.
Rheumatology
Rheumatoid arthritis RA is currently treated with generic disease modifying antirheumatic agents and where the relevant criteria are met biologic diseasemodifiers.
There remains a need for novel effective treatments since only about a third of patients treated with biologics achieve their treatment goals.
We anticipate that the RA market will experience modest annual growth over the next decade on top of the current revenues of approximately 10 billion to 12 billion Sales of the biologic tumour necrosis factor TNF alpha blockers accounted for 75% of majormarket RA sales in 2011.
Use of other biologic approaches currently reserved for TNF blocker failures is expected to increase due to new entrants new subcutaneous formulations and use earlier in the treatment pathway.
Novel oral drugs targeting intracellular signalling pathways that provide antiTNFlike levels of efficacy and potentially more convenient dosing will likely be used both after and ahead of the TNF blockers especially in patients who currently choose not to take are anxious about taking or are ineligible to take injectable biologic agents.
Current treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus SLE focuses on controlling disease flares preventing renal failure and suppressing symptoms to an acceptable level while minimising toxicity.
Although a diseasemodifying agent has been launched for SLE most emerging biologic agents will likely be used initially in combination with corticosteroids or immunosuppressants to provide incremental benefit andor allow reduced doses or numbers of these agents.
In the pipeline Fostamatinib previously known as R788 was inlicensed from Rigel in 2010.
Fostamatinib is at the most advanced stage of development of the oral spleen tyrosine kinase SYK inhibitors being evaluated for an RA indication.
It is thought to block reversible signalling in multiple cell types involved in inflammation and tissue degradation in RA.
The ongoing Phase III programme called OSKIRA commenced in September 2010.
A further Phase IIb monotherapy study OSKIRA 4 was initiated in January 2011.
This study will provide important information on the profile of fostamatinib unconfounded by background diseasemodifying antirheumatic drugs such as methotrexate.
The first anticipated regulatory filings based on the OSKIRA programme are currently anticipated for 2013.
In 2011 we continued to invest in several novel multifunctional MAbs in inflammatory and autoimmune conditions.
Sifalimumab MEDI545 which targets interferonalpha commenced a Phase IIb study in patients with SLE.
MEDI546 which targets the Type I IFN receptor is initiating a Phase IIb study in patients with SLE.
Mavrilimumab
CAM3001 licensed from CSL Limited which targets the alpha subunit of the granulocytemacrophage colony stimulating factor receptor successfully completed a Phase II study evaluating the efficacy and safety in subjects with RA and is being prepared for a Phase IIb study in RA patients.
Financial performance 20112010 Performance 2011 Reported performance Respiratory and Inflammation RandI sales increased by 9% to 4468 million compared with 4099 million in 2010.
Performance  CER growth rates RandI sales increased by 6% globally.
US sales of Symbicort were 846 million an increase of 17%.
Symbicort sales in other markets increased to 2302 million 9% ahead of last year fuelled by strong growth in Japan up 88% and in Emerging Markets up 19%.
US Pulmicort sales decreased by 9% to 279 million.
Sales of Pulmicort outside the US increased by 4% to 613 million.
Performance 2010 Reported performance RandI sales were down 1% to 4099 million compared with 4132 million in 2009.
Performance  CER growth rates RandI sales were down 1%.
Total sales of Symbicort were up 20% to 2746 million with strong growth both in the US which was up 48% to 721 million and outside the US which was up 13% to 2025 million.
Sales of Pulmicort were down 34% mainly as a result of US sales which decreased by 62% to 305 million as a result of the launch under licence from AstraZeneca of the Teva generic budesonide inhaled suspension product in December 2009.
Sales of Pulmicort outside the US were up 10% to 567 million.
Decision Resources 2011.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Therapy Area Review Respiratory and Inflammation 75 healthinnovation Reducing the number of heartrelated deaths Germany is proud of its healthcare system yet still has high mortality rates for coronary heart disease.
Herzbewusst heart conscious is a programme designed to help people help themselves in preventing acute coronary syndromes and for the first time in Germany has included a variety of stakeholders from the outset.
In 2004 150 out of every 100000 German male coronary patients died whereas in the Netherlands it was less than 100.
One in eight of those who survive a heart attack in Germany dies within a year.
Combating this requires better education encouraging people to make healthier lifestyle choices such as improving diet taking more exercise and quitting smoking  this can help not only prevent the first heart attack but also safeguard patients lives after the event.
We developed the Herzbewusst programme in conjunction with the German Federation of Cardiologists in Private Practice and in cooperation with public and private health insurance funds.
In addition to physicians and healthcare practitioners the campaign launched in October 2010 is aimed at the public.
A series of highprofile events and advertising has included installations at a Berlin train station and Regional Heartdays offering free consultations from cardiologists and nutritional guidance.
76 Health Innovation AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Geographical Review This section contains further information about the performance of our products within the geographical areas in which our sales and marketing efforts are focused.
For more information regarding our products see the Therapy Area Review from page 56.
Details of material legal proceedings can be found in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184 and details of relevant risks are set out in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 130.
See the Market definitions table on page 209 for information about AstraZenecas market definitions.
2011 in brief In the US sales were down 2% to 13426 million 2010 13727 million.
The pricing impact from US healthcare reform measures lowered revenue by around 3.3%.
Good growth for Crestor the Seroquel franchise Symbicort and Onglyza declines in Nexium.
Sales in Western Europe were down 11% to 8501 million 2010 9168 million due largely to volume erosion on Nexium Arimidex and Merrem.
This was partially offset by volume growth attributable to Crestor Seroquel XR Symbicort Iressa and Faslodex.
Established ROW sales were up 4% driven by continued growth for Symbicort Crestor Nexium and Seroquel.
In 2011 AstraZeneca became the largest researchbased pharmaceutical company in Canada by sales value.
Emerging Markets sales increased by 10% to 5763 million 2010 5198 million with sales growth in China of 15% and Russia of 19%.
Sales in Brazil were down as a result of generic competition for Crestor and Seroquel IR.
AstraZeneca is the fourth largest pharmaceutical company in the US with a 6% market share of US prescription pharmaceuticals by sales value and is the sixth largest prescriptionbased pharmaceutical company in Western Europe with a 4.4% market share of prescription sales by value.
Our financial performancetel
Reported growth %
Sales
Reported growth %
Sales
US 13426 2 2 13727 7 7 14777 Western Europe 8501 7 11 9168 1 2 9252 Canada 1604 6 1 1510 26 14 1203 Japan 3064 17 6 2617 11 4 2367 Other Established ROW 1233 18 4 1Established ROW 5901 14 4 5176 17 7 4423 Emerging Europe 1244 7 7 1165 7 6 1091 China 1261 20 15 1Emerging Asia Pacific Other Emerging ROW 2290 9 12 2096 26 20 1670 Emerging Markets 5763 11 10 5198 19 16 4352 Total 33591 1 2 33269 1  32804 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Geographical Review 77 Geographical Review
AstraZeneca is the fourth largest pharmaceutical company in the US with a 6% market share of US prescription pharmaceuticals by sales value.
Sales in the US decreased by 2% to 13426 million 2010 13727 million as strong performance from our key growth brands was offset by the impact of increased generic competition experienced by our mature brands.
Combined sales of our key growth brands namely Brilinta Crestor Onglyza Seroquel Symbicort and Faslodex were up by 16% to 8474 million 2010 7316 million.
Increased generic competition for Arimidex and ToprolXL and its authorised generic resulted in a sales decline in these brands of 62% to 446 million 2010 1183 million.
Brilinta was approved by the FDA in July to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and heart attacks in patients with acute coronary syndromes ACS.
Unrestricted managed markets access was 59% and trial among target interventional cardiologist initiators was 6% at the end of 2011.
Crestor achieved sales of 3074 million 2010 2640 million and a total prescription growth of 4.4% within the statin market.
This growth outpaced the market almost fourfold.
A competitor to Crestor atorvastatin was available in generic form in the US beginning in late 2011.
Seroquel continued to be the most prescribed atypical antipsychotic with sales up 10% to 4123 million 2010 3747 million.
Total
Seroquel prescriptions declined by 1% driven by Seroquel IR erosion of 4% due to increased generic and branded competition.
Strong
Seroquel XR prescription volume growth of 17% partially offset the total Seroquel IR prescription volume decline.
Seroquel XR accounts for 18% of total Seroquel prescription volume in the US up from 16% at the end of 2010.
Symbicort pMDI continued to deliver steady growth in the US with sales up 17% to 846 million 2010 721 million and prescription growth of 10% leading the fixed combination class in total prescription growth.
It achieved a 20.3% total prescription share and a 21.5% new prescription share of the inhaled corticosteroidlongacting beta agonist market.
OnglyzaKombiglyze XR captured one in four new dipeptidyl peptidase IV DPPIV patient treatment decisions and achieved a 6.5% total prescription market share gain in 2011 ending the year with a total prescription market share of 16.5% of the DPPIV inhibitor market.
Kombiglyze XR was launched in January 2011 and doctors are now prescribing it to one in 10 new patients.
Onglyza revenues in the US were 156 million 2010 54 million.
Nexium was the fifth most prescribed branded pharmaceutical in the US.
In the face of continuing generic OTC and pricing pressures Nexium sales declined 11% to 2397 million 2010 2695 million.
Nexium remains the branded market leader retaining significant market share and volume within the proton pump inhibitor class.
Sales of ToprolXL and its authorised generic metoprolol succinate extendedrelease tablets which is marketed and distributed by Par Pharmaceutical Companies Inc.
Par decreased 41% to 404 million 2010 689 million due to the impact of generic competition from Watson Pharmaceuticals Inc. the market in 2010.
In December Mylan Inc. subsidiary Mylan Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Mylan received final approval from the FDA for its ANDA for metoprolol succinate extendedrelease tablets in 25mg 50mg 100mg and 200mg doses.
Following multiple generic anastrozole products entering the US market in June 2010 sales of Arimidex declined by 91% to 42 million 2010 494 million.
In June the US District Court ruled that Mylan did not infringe the Entocort formulation patent EC patent no.
5643602.
Following
Mylans entry of its generic AstraZeneca launched an authorised generic with marketing and distribution by Par Pharmaceutical Inc.
In 2011 sales of Synagis were down 12% to 570 million 2010 646 million.
Sales in the 20102011 RSV season started slower than anticipated due to later than forecast seasonal onset coupled with payer pressure resulting from wider adoption of more restrictive guidelines regarding the use and dosing of Synagis by the American Academy of Pediatrics.
Sales for Aptium Oncology increased by 2% to 224 million 2010 219 million and sales for Astra Tech were down 24% to 77 million 2010 101 million all recorded in the period prior to its disposal to DENTSPLY International Inc. which completed in August.
In March 2010 the Affordable Care Act came into force.
It has had and is expected to continue to have a significant impact on our US sales and the US healthcare industry as a whole.
For 2010 the impact of higher minimum Medicaid rebates on prescription drugs was a reduction in our pretax profit for the period of nearly 230 million.
In 2011 the overall reduction in our profit before tax for the year due to higher minimum Medicaid rebates on prescription drugs discounts on branded pharmaceutical sales to Medicare Part D beneficiaries and an industrywide excise fee was 750 million.
These amounts reflect only those effects of the Affordable Care Act that we know have had or will have a direct impact on our financial condition or results of operations and which we are therefore able to quantify based on known and isolatable resulting changes in individual financial items within our financial statements.
There are other potential indirect or associated consequences of these legislative developments which continue to evolve and which cannot be estimated but could have similar impacts.
These include broader changes in access to or eligibility for coverage under Medicare Medicaid or similar governmental programmes such as the recent proposals to limit Medicare benefits.
These could indirectly impact our pricing or sales of prescription products within the private sector.
By their nature and the fact that these potentially numerous consequences are not directly linked to a corresponding and quantifiable impact on our financial statements it is not possible to accurately estimate the financial impact of these potential consequences of the Affordable Care Act or related legislative changes when taken together with the number of other market and industry related factors that can also result in similar impacts.
Further details of the potential impact of the Affordable Care Act are contained in the Pricing pressure section from page 18 and the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 130.
Currently there is no direct government control of prices for commercial prescription drug sales in the US.
However some publicly funded programmes such as Medicaid and TRICARE Department of Veterans Affairs have statutorily mandated rebates and discounts that have the effect of price controls for these programmes.
Additionally pressure on pricing availability and utilisation of prescription drugs for both commercial and public payers continues to increase.
This is driven by among other things an increased focus on generic alternatives.
Primary drivers of increased generic use are budgetary policies within healthcare systems and providers including the use of generics only formularies and increases in patient coinsurance or copayments.
In 2011 80% of the prescriptions dispensed in the US were generic.
While it is unlikely that there will be widespread adoption of a broad national pricecontrol scheme in the near future there will continue to be increased attention to pharmaceutical prices and their impact on healthcare costs for the foreseeable future.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 78 Geographical Review Rest of World Sales performance outside the US in 2011 was down by only 2% to 20165 million 2010 19542 million despite the continuing challenging economic environment.
Combined sales of key products Arimidex Crestor Nexium Seroquel and Symbicort were down 1% with sales of 10301 million 2010 9923 million.
Emerging
Markets delivered particularly strong sales up 10% with sales of 5763 million 2010 5198 million.
Western Europe AstraZeneca is the sixth largest prescriptionbased pharmaceutical company in Western Europe with a 4.4% market share of prescription sales by value.
Total sales in Western Europe were down 11% to 8501 million 2010 9168 million due largely to volume erosion on Nexium Arimidex and Merrem following generic entrants and the negative price impact from price reductions primarily related to government interventions.
This development was partially offset by volume growth attributable to Crestor Seroquel XR Symbicort Iressa and Faslodex.
Crestor outperformed the statin class with strong 13% sales growth by volume.
Likewise Seroquel outperformed the atypical antipsychotics market segment more than twice in value with strong growth of Seroquel XR up by 31% primarily driven by the bipolar indication.
Generic versions of Nexium are now available in most markets with overall sales down 39% to 762 million 2010 1202 million.
Brilique was launched in Germany the UK Italy Spain Norway Sweden Denmark Finland Austria Greece and Switzerland and sales exceeded 9 million.
The macroeconomic situation has deteriorated leading to increased pressure on healthcare budgets with some European markets beginning to emerge from the crisis and others still facing major issues with the implementation of new austerity measures.
Most governments in Europe intervene directly to control the price volume and reimbursement of medicines.
Several governments have imposed price reductions and increased the use of generic medicines as part of healthcare expenditure control.
Several countries are applying strict criteria for cost effectiveness evaluations of medicines which has delayed and reduced access to medicines for patients in areas of important unmet medical need.
These and other measures all contribute to an increasingly difficult environment for branded pharmaceuticals in Europe.
In Germany sales growth fell by 8% to 1 189 million 2010 1235 million as the increased compulsory rebates for Symbicort and Seroquel were carried over from mid2010 and reference pricing for Symbicort and Atacand commenced.
However Seroquel Faslodex and Iressa all showed a strong performance on an underlying volume basis.
As a result of the debt crisis in Greece the Greek government implemented significant price cuts in 2010 and 2011 which resulted in an overall sales decline of 9% to 305 million 2010 322 million.
In the UK an 18% decrease in sales to 866 million 2010 1022 million reflected strong volume erosion on Nexium by 56% Merrem by 86% and Arimidex by 76% respectively following generic entry which was not offset by the solid performance from Symbicort and Seroquel XR.
Overall sales in France decreased by 12% to 1740 million 2010 1889 million driven by Nexium erosion down to 266 million 2010 448 million a 42% fall following generic entry at the end of April 2011 which was not entirely offset by double digit growth of Crestor and continued strong growth of Symbicort Faslodex and Iressa despite significant competition.
Sales in Italy were down by 11% to 1113 million 2010 1198 million.
Our main sales were hit by price cuts on off patent products to align their prices with the EU average price and by price cuts and prescription controls on Crestor.
Despite this we achieved double digit volume growth for Crestor Seroquel and Symbicort.
Established ROW Sales in Established ROW increased by 4%.
The key products driving sales growth in 2011 were Crestor Symbicort Nexium and Seroquel.
Canada
In 2011 AstraZeneca became the largest researchbased pharmaceutical company in Canada by sales value.
Despite loss of exclusivity for Atacand after expiry of the compound patent Canadian patent no.
2040955 and the atrisk launch of a generic version of Nexium by a competitor total Canadian sales increased by 1% to 1604 million 2010 1510 million.
Combined sales of Crestor Nexium Symbicort and Seroquel were 1171 million 2010 1055 million.
Crestor became the largest prescription product in Canada by sales value with yearonyear sales growth of 14% to 716 million 2010 600 million.
The Canadian provinces continue to adopt provincial and regional approaches to pharmaceutical funding from one end of the continuum in Quebec with more open access to more restricted access in British Columbia.
Overall the trend in Canada indicates that provinces will continue to introduce policy changes that drive cost savings and exert pricing pressure on new and existing medicines for example conditional listings product listing agreements and bulk purchasing while providing reasonable patient access to innovative medicines.
Japan
Sales in Japan increased by 6% to 3064 million 2010 2617 million.
The Tohoku earthquake and tsunami did not significantly disrupt supply of AstraZeneca medicines and did not have a material impact on financial performance.
Strong volume gains of 7% were driven mainly by the continued growth of primary care brands.
Sales of Crestor which is copromoted with Shionogi and Co.
Limited grew by 16% while sales of Symbicort Turbuhaler grew by 88% in its second year in the market.
Sales growth of Losec slowed by 5% following the September launch of Nexium copromoted with Daiichi Sankyo.
Our oncology business remains one of the leaders in Japan based on the performance of established brands including Iressa Arimidex Zoladex and Casodex.
In November we also completed the launch of Faslodex the approval and launch of an additional indication for Iressa and the signing of an agreement with Daiichi Sankyo to copromote Ranmark disorders stemming from bone metastasis.
Daiichi Sankyo acquired the denosumab rights in 2007 from Amgen Inc. in January 2012.
Other Established ROW Sales in Other Established ROW showed robust growth of 4% to 1233 million 2010 1049 million.
Strong volume growth in Australia for our key products was partially offset by the full year impact of price cuts imposed in April 2010 on Crestor and Nexium and continued price adjustments imposed by the Australian authorities in 2011.
Crestor Nexium and Symbicort all gained market share in the year with Crestor achieving a 28% volume share in the statin class.
Brilique has achieved registration in 2011 in both Australia and New Zealand with Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme reimbursement in Australia expected in 2012.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Geographical Review 79 Geographical Review Emerging Markets In the Emerging Markets sales increased by 10% to 5763 million 2010 5198 million which was principally driven by growth in China and Latin America.
In many of the larger markets such as Brazil and Mexico patients tend to pay directly for prescription medicines and consequently these markets are at less risk of direct government interventions on pricing and reimbursement.
In other markets such as South Korea Taiwan and Turkey where governments do pay for medicines we are seeing continued efforts to reduce the cost of prescriptions in line with the systems in Western Europe Canada and Australia.
Emerging Europe Sales in Emerging Europe grew by 7% to 1244 million 2010 1165 million driven by increased sales in Russia and Romania which more than offset reduced sales in Turkey.
We have continued to build our presence in Russia where sales increased by 19% to 284 million 2010 232 million mainly due to increased sales of Symbicort by 41% Nexium by 33% and Crestor by 25% driven by growth in the retail segment.
We have also consolidated our position among the leaders in the hospital and regional reimbursement segments.
In Romania we delivered a strong performance with sales up 24% to 154 million 2010 119 million largely as a result of sales of Atacand increasing by 63% Seroquel increasing by 43% and Symbicort increasing by 86%.
In late 2009 the Turkish government imposed unprecedented levels of price reductions on the pharmaceutical industry.
As a result our sales were down in Turkey in 2010 but recovered in 2011 up 7% to 297 million 2010 304 million.
China
Our sales in China excluding Hong Kong increased by 15% to 1261 million 2010 1047 million.
The slow down in growth rate versus 2010 was primarily driven by a reduction in overall Chinese market growth which was particularly evident in major cities as well as weaker performance in our gastrointestinal and anaesthesia businesses.
Our cardiovascular CV and oncology businesses continued to grow ahead of the market due to strong performances by Crestor and Betaloc Zok SelokenToprolXL despite delays in activation of reimbursement in Beijing Shanghai and Guangzhou.
We continue to be one of the leading multinational pharmaceutical companies in China and the second largest in the prescription market by sales value.
In November we announced our decision to invest 200 million in a new manufacturing facility to further strengthen our position in China.
In December we announced we had entered into an agreement to acquire Guangdong BeiKang Pharmaceutical Company Limited a generics company based in Conghua City Guangdong province.
This agreement which remains subject to regulatory approval in China will provide us with access to a portfolio of injectable medicines used to treat infections.
Emerging Asia Pacific Sales in Emerging Asia Pacific grew 5% to 968 million 2010 890 million.
This was driven by strong sales growth in India up 21% Vietnam up 29% and Indonesia up 11%.
Growth was more subdued in markets which were more significantly impacted by government interventions on pricing or by measures which promoted local generic penetration primarily in Taiwan Thailand and the Philippines.
Other Emerging ROW Our sales grew by 12% to 2290 million 2010 2096 million largely due to strong sales growth in Venezuela and Argentina.
We achieved double digit yearonyear sales growth for most of our key products Nexium Seroquel XR Symbicort Zoladex Atacand and Seloken.
Excluding Brazil where generic competitors entered the market for the first time in 2011 Crestor sales grew by around 12% across the region.
In Latin America the pharmaceutical market continues to grow strongly underpinned by a relatively stable political and economic climate.
Strong competition from local nonmultinational companies with branded generic products is increasingly becoming a feature of the region.
Brazilian sales for the year were impacted by loss of exclusivity not only on Crestor but also Atacand monotherapy and Seroquel IR.
The
Brazilian pharmaceutical market continues to experience double digit growth.
Mexican yearonyear sales were flat mirroring a market that is currently showing low single digit growth.
2011 saw successful launches of Brilinta in Brazil Vimovo in a number of countries in Central America and the Caribbean and Onglyza in Colombia.
In the Middle East and Africa despite political challenges arising from the Arab Spring revolutions we further accelerated our growth with sales up 12%.
Our largest markets were South Africa Saudi Arabia the UAE and Algeria where we achieved steady growth.
South African growth was mainly driven by Symbicort up 12% Seroquel up 14% and Crestor up 10%.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 80 Geographical Review healthinnovation Expanding access and affordability for our medicines In Brazil our Faz Bem Wellbeing programme provides discounts to the cost of our medicines.
It also provides additional incentives for those who adhere to treatment regimes and so helps improve health outcomes.
Our Faz Bem programme of wellbeing in Brazil has the goal of increasing patient access to our medicines and improving treatment adherence rates.
Patients are provided with information about the programme from their doctor and once enrolled in the scheme they receive a discount on a range of our products.
The Faz Bem website supports patients with information about a range of diseases their treatment and the benefits of a healthy lifestyle.
Faz Bem reflects our commitment to making the most meaningful difference to patient health by providing access to the growing middle class in Brazil.
As well as providing patients with access to medicines for the first time the programme improves patient health awareness.
In doing so Faz Bem both benefits our business and supports the efforts of the government to improve healthcare in Brazil.
Business Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Health Innovation 81 Our strong cash flow enabled us to deliver increased net cash distributions of 9.4 billion to shareholders while continuing to invest to drive future growth and value.
Simon Lowth Chief Financial Officer
83 Introduction 83 2011 Business background and results overview 84 Measuring performance Results of operations  summary analysis of year to 31 December 2011 86 Cash flow and liquidity  2011 88 Financial position  2011 90 Capitalisation and shareholder return 90 Future prospects Results of operations  summary analysis of year to 31 December 2010 92 Cash flow and liquidity  2010 93 Financial position  2010 93 Financial risk management 94 Critical accounting policies and estimates 97 SarbanesOxley Act Section 404 Disciplined execution of our strategy delivered a good performance in 2011 in the face of intensified pricing pressure and generic competition with revenue down 2% in constant currency terms.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 82 Financial Review Financial Review Core operating profit was down 4%.
Core RandD expense included a significant increase in intangible impairments compared with last year without these Core operating profit would have declined broadly in line with the revenue.
Core earnings per share increased by 7% benefiting from a lower tax rate and fewer shares outstanding as a result of share repurchases.
The actions related to the first two phases of our restructuring programmes are now completed and are on track to deliver 4.3 billion in annual benefits by the end of 2014.
These programmes have played an integral part in the significant improvement in our Core operating margin since they were launched in early 2007.
A new phase was announced in February 2012 and this programme is expected to deliver a further 1.6 billion in annual benefits by the end of 2014 at a planned cost of 2.1 billion.
Our cash generation remains strong enabling us to invest for future growth and value by funding organic investment in RandD externalisation and capital expenditures while also providing 9.4 billion in net cash distributions to shareholders by way of dividends and net share repurchases.
Simon Lowth Chief Financial Officer The purpose of this Financial Review is to provide a balanced and comprehensive analysis of the financial performance of the business during 2011 the financial position as at the end of the year and the main business factors and trends which could affect the future financial performance of the business.
All growth rates in this Financial Review are expressed at CER unless noted otherwise.
2011 Business background and results overview The business background is covered in The pharmaceutical industry section from page 15 the Therapy Area Review from page 56 and the Geographical Review from page 77 and describes in detail the developments in both our products and geographical regions.
As described earlier in our Annual Report sales of our products are directly influenced by medical need and are generally paid for by health insurance schemes or national healthcare budgets.
Our
The adverse impact on pharmaceutical prices as a result of the macroeconomic and regulatory environment.
For instance although there is no direct governmental control on prices in the US action from federal and individual state programmes and health insurance bodies is leading to downward pressures on realised prices.
In other parts of the world there is a variety of price and volume control mechanisms and retrospective rebates based on sales levels that are imposed by governments.
The risk of generic competition following loss of patent protection or patent expiry or an at risk launch by a competitor with the potential adverse effects on sales volumes and prices.
For example in 2011 our performance was affected by generic competition in the US for Arimidex and ToprolXL.
Further details of patent expiries for our key marketed products are included in the Patent expiries section on page 35.
The timings of new product launches which can be influenced by national regulators and the risk that such new products do not succeed as anticipated together with the rate of sales growth and costs following new product launches.
Currency fluctuations.
Our functional and reporting currency is the US dollar but we have substantial exposures to other currencies in particular the euro Japanese yen pound sterling and Swedish krona.
Macro factors such as greater demand from an ageing population and increasing requirements of servicing Emerging Markets.
Over the longer term the success of our RandD is crucial and we devote substantial resources to this area.
The benefits of this investment emerge over the long term and there is considerable inherent uncertainty as to whether and when it will generate future products.
The most significant features of our financial results in 2011 are Revenue was down 2% at 33591 million Reported up 1%.
Strong double digit sales growth at CER for Crestor Seroquel XR and Symbicort.
Emerging Markets revenue increased by 10% Reported 11%.
Revenue performance reflects the loss of nearly 2 billion of revenue from generic competition as well as a further 1 billion lost to the impact of government price interventions.
Core operating profit was down 4% Reported 3% to 13167 million.
Operating profit up 10% Reported 11% to 12795 million.
The sale of Astra Tech which resulted in a gain of 1483 million and was excluded from Core operating profit.
Core operating margin of 39.2% of revenue was down 1.2 percentage points Reported 1.6 percentage points as benefits arising from higher gross margin and lower SGandA spend at CER were more than offset by increased expenditures in RandD and lower Core other income.
Reported operating margin was 38.1%.
Core EPS increased by 7% Reported 9% to 7.28.
Basic EPS was up 29% Reported 31% to 7.33.
Basic and Core EPS benefited from the lower number of shares outstanding resulting from net share repurchases and a lower effective tax rate compared with last year.
Dividends paid increased to 3764 million 2010 3361 million.
Net share repurchases totalled 5606 million.
Total restructuring costs associated with the global programme to reshape the cost base of the business were 1161 million in 2011.
This brings the total restructuring costs charged to 31 December 2011 to 4869 million.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Financial Review 83 Financial Review
Measuring performance The following measures are referred to when reporting on our performance both in absolute terms but more often in comparison to earlier years in this Financial Review Reported performance.
Reported performance takes into account all the factors including those which we cannot influence principally currency exchange rates that have affected the results of our business as reflected in our Group Financial Statements prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as issued by the IASB.
Core financial measures.
These are nonGAAP measures because unlike Reported performance they cannot be derived directly from the information in the Groups Financial Statements.
These measures are adjusted to exclude certain significant items such as charges and provisions related to our global restructuring programmes amortisation and impairment of the significant intangibles relating to the acquisition of MedImmune in 2007 the amortisation and impairment of the significant intangibles relating to our current and future exit arrangements with Merck in the US and other specified items.
See the 2011 Reconciliation of Reported results to Core results table on page 85 for a reconciliation of Reported to Core performance.
Constant exchange rate CER growth rates.
These are also nonGAAP measures.
These measures remove the effects of currency movements by retranslating the current years performance at previous years exchange rates and adjusting for other exchange effects including hedging.
A reconciliation of the Reported results adjusted for the impact of currency movements is provided in the 2011 Reported operating profit table on page 85.
Gross and operating profit margin percentages and Core preRandD operating margin.
These measures set out the progression of key performance margins and illustrate the overall quality of the business.
Core preRandD operating margin is a nonGAAP measure of our Core financial performance.
A reconciliation of Core preRandD operating margin to our operating profit is provided on pages 85 and 91.
Prescription volumes and trends for key products.
These measures can represent the real business growth and the progress of individual products better and more immediately than invoiced sales.
Net fundsdebt.
This represents our cash and cash equivalents current investments and derivative financial instruments less interestbearing loans and borrowings.
CER measures allow us to focus on the changes in sales and expenses driven by volume prices and cost levels relative to the prior period.
Sales and cost growth expressed in CER allows management to understand the true local movement in sales and costs in order to compare recent trends and relative return on investment.
CER growth rates can be used to analyse sales in a number of ways but most often we consider CER growth by products and groups of products and by countries and regions.
CER sales growth can be further analysed into the impact of sales volumes and selling price.
Similarly CER cost growth helps us to focus on the real local change in costs so that we can manage the cost base effectively.
We believe that disclosing Core financial and growth measures in addition to our Reported financial information enhances investors ability to evaluate and analyse the underlying financial performance of our ongoing business and the related key business drivers.
The adjustments made to our Reported financial information in order to show Core financial measures illustrate clearly and on a yearon year or periodbyperiod basis the impact upon our performance caused by factors such as changes in sales and expenses driven by volume prices and cost levels relative to such prior years or periods.
As shown in the 2011 Reconciliation of Reported results to Core results table on page 85 our reconciliation of Reported financial information to Core financial measures includes a breakdown of the items for which our Reported financial information is adjusted and a further breakdown of those items by specific line item as such items are reflected in our Reported income statement.
This illustrates the significant items that are excluded from Core financial measures and their impact on our Reported financial information both as a whole and in respect of specific line items.
Core preRandD operating margin is our Core operating margin before research and development costs recorded in the year.
This measure reflects Core operating performance before reinvestment in internal research and development.
Management presents these results externally to meet investors requirements for transparency and clarity.
Core financial measures are also used internally in the management of our business performance in our budgeting process and when determining compensation.
Core financial measures are nonGAAP adjusted measures.
All items for which Core financial measures are adjusted are included in our Reported financial information as they represent actual costs of our business in the periods presented.
As a result Core financial measures merely allow investors to differentiate between different kinds of costs and they should not be used in isolation.
You should also refer to our Reported financial information in the 2011 Reported operating profit table on page 85 our reconciliation of Core financial measures to Reported financial information in the Reconciliation of Reported results to Core results table on page 85 and to the Results of operations  summary analysis of year to 31 December 2010 section from page 91 for our discussion of comparative Reported growth measures that reflect all factors that affect our business.
Our determination of nonGAAP measures and our presentation of them within this financial information may differ from similarly titled nonGAAP measures of other companies.
The SET retains strategic management of the costs excluded from Reported financial information in arriving at Core financial measures tracking their impact on Reported operating profit and EPS with operational management being delegated on a caseby case basis to ensure clear accountability and consistency for each cost category.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 84 Financial Review Results of operations  summary analysis of year to 31 December 2011 2011 Reported operating profit 2011 2010 Percentage of sales 2011 compared with 2010
CER growth
Reported
Reported %
CER growth %
Revenue 33591 601 923 33269 2 1 Cost of sales 6026 625 262 6389 17.9 19.2 10 6 Gross margin 27565 24 661 26880 82.1 80.8  3 Distribution costs 346 3 14 335 1.0 1.0 1 3 Research and development 5523 15 190 5318 16.5 16.0  4 Selling general and administrative costs 11161 409 307 10445 33.2 31.4 4 7 Profit on disposal of Astra Tech 1483 1483   4.4  na na Other operating income and expense .3 2.1 8 9 Operating profit 12795 1145 156 11494 38.1 34.5 10 11 Net finance expense 428 517 Profit before tax 12367 10977 Taxation 2351 2896 Profit for the period 10016 8081 Basic earnings per share  7.33 5.60 2011 Core operating resultstel compared with 2010
CER growth
Core
CER growth %
Core growth % Gross margin 27619 63 658 27024  2 Gross margin % 82.2% 81.2% Distribution costs 346 3 14 335 1 3 Research and development 5033 639 175 4219 15 19 Selling general and administrative costs 9918 160 301 9777 2 1 Other operating income and expense 845 71 6 910 8 7 Operating profit 13167 610 174 13603 4 3 Operating margin % 39.2% 40.8% Net finance expense 428 517 Profit before tax 12739 13086 Taxation 2797 3416 Profit for the period 9942 9670 Basic earnings per share  7.28 6.71 2011 Reconciliation of Reported results to Core results
Restructuring costs Merck and MedImmune Profit on sale of Astra Tech
Intangible
Legal settlements
Gross margin 27565 54     27619 Distribution costs 346      346 Research and development 5523 468  22   5033 Selling general and administrative costs 11161 639 469  135  9918 Profit on disposal of Astra Tech 1483     1483 Other operating income and expense 777  68    845 Operating profit 12795 11483 13167 Add back Research and development 5523 468  22   5033 PreRandD operating margin 18318 693 537  135 1483 18200 PreRandD operating margin % 54.5% 54.2% Net finance expense 428      428 Profit before tax 12367 11483 12739 Taxation 2351 306 98 6 36  2797 Profit for the period 10 1483 9942 Basic earnings per share  7.33 0.63 0.32 0.01 0.07 1.08 7.28 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Financial Review 85 Financial Review
Results of operations  summary analysis of year to 31 December 2011 continued Revenue increased by 1% on a Reported basis but decreased by 2% on a CER basis.
As in 2010 revenue benefited from strong growth of Crestor Symbicort and Seroquel but was offset by lower revenues for Nexium Arimidex and SelokenToprolXL.
Emerging Markets sales growth of 10% Reported 11% and Established ROW 4% Reported 14% was offset by a decline in US sales of 2% Reported 2% and Western Europe of 11% Reported 7%.
Further details of our sales performance are contained in the Performance 2011 sections of the Therapy Area Review from page 56 and the Geographical Review from page 77.
Core gross margin of 82.2% increased 1.3 percentage points Reported 1.0 percentage points.
The yearonyear improvement in the margin was largely due to the impact of the intangible impairment related to lesogaberan on 2010 gross margin and a 131 million benefit from the settlement of patent disputes with PDL Biopharma Inc. in 2011.
Core RandD expenditure was 5033 million 15% higher than last year Reported 19% driven by higher intangible impairments charged to RandD expenditure in 2011 including 285 million for olaparib and 150 million for TC5214 and late stage project spend.
Core SGandA costs of 9918 million were 2% lower than in 2010 Reported 1% higher.
Investment in Emerging Markets and recently launched brands as well as the impact of the US healthcare reform excise tax were more than offset by operational efficiencies across Established Markets.
Core other income of 845 million was 65 million less than the previous year principally as a result of a higher level of disposal gains in 2010.
Core preRandD operating margin was 54.2% up 1.0 percentage points Reported 0.7 percentage points as the higher gross margin was only slightly offset by lower Core other income and higher SGandA costs as a percentage of revenue.
Core operating profit was 13167 million a decrease of 4% Reported 3%.
Core operating margin declined by 1.2 percentage points Reported 1.6 percentage points to 39.2% as a result of the higher RandD spend and lower Core other operating income.
Core EPS were 7.28 up 7% Reported 9% with the lower operating profit offset by a lower effective tax rate lower net interest as well as the benefit of a lower average number of shares outstanding.
Within Core adjustments restructuring costs and amortisation were broadly in line with last years level.
Noncore intangible impairments and legal provisions were significantly reduced from 2010.
In 2011 Core adjustments also included the profit on the sale of our dental and healthcare subsidiary Astra Tech.
Excluded from Core results were Impairment charges of 22 million 2010 568 million arising from impairments of assets capitalised as part of the MedImmune acquisition.
135 million 2010 612 million of legal provision charges in respect of the ongoing Seroquel product liability litigation Average Wholesale Price litigation in the US and the ToprolXL antitrust litigation.
In line with prior years these have been excluded from our Core performance and full details of these matters are included in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 184.
Restructuring costs totalling 1161 million 2010 1202 million incurred as the Group continues its previously announced efficiency programmes.
Amortisation totalling 537 million 2010 518 million relating to assets capitalised as part of the MedImmune acquisition and the Merck exit arrangements.
Profit on sale of our subsidiary Astra Tech of 1483 million.
On
31 August we completed the sale of Astra Tech to DENTSPLY International Inc. for a net cash consideration of 1772 million.
Further details of this disposal are included in Note 22 to the Financial Statements on page 170.
Reported operating profit was up 10% at CER Reported 11% at 12795 million largely as a result of the impact of the profit on the disposal of Astra Tech.
Reported EPS were 7.33 up 29% Reported 31% as a result of the same factors affecting Core EPS along with the profit recognised on the disposal of Astra Tech.
Net finance expense was 428 million against 517 million in 2010 due to reduced interest payable on lower debt balances 46 million and a lower net pension interest expense of 55 million principally due to increased pension assets held by our defined benefit schemes.
The 2011 taxation charge of 2351 million 2010 2896 million consists of a current tax charge of 2578 million 2010 3435 million and a credit arising from movements on deferred tax of 227 million 2010 539 million.
The current year tax charge includes a prior period current tax credit of 102 million 2010 charge of 370 million.
The reported effective tax rate for the year was 19.0% 2010 26.4%.
The reported effective tax rate has benefited from the nontaxable gain on the disposal of Astra Tech and an adjustment in respect of prior periods following the announcement in March 2011 that HM Revenue and Customs in the UK and the US Internal Revenue Service IRS agreed the terms of an Advance Pricing Agreement regarding transfer pricing arrangements for AstraZenecas US business for the period from 2002 to the end of 2014 and a related valuation matter as detailed more fully in Note 4 to the Financial Statements from page 152.
Excluding these benefits the effective tax rate for the year was 26.4% on a reported basis.
This
26.4% tax rate is applied to the taxable Core adjustments to operating profit resulting in a Core effective tax rate for the year of 22.0% including the benefit of the Advanced Pricing Agreement and related valuation matter settlement.
A description of our tax exposures is set out in Note 25 to the Financial Statements on page 189.
Total comprehensive income for the year increased by 1364 million from 2010 to 9470 million.
This was driven by the increase in profit for the year of 1935 million offset by a decrease of 571 million in other comprehensive income principally due to 741 million of actuarial losses on our defined benefit schemes arising from lower discount rates being applied to our longterm pension obligations reflecting external market conditions.
Cash flow and liquidity  2011 All data in this section is on a Reported basis.
Cash generated from operating activities was 7 821 million in the year to 31 December 2011 compared with 10680 million in 2010.
The decrease of 2859 million is primarily driven by higher tax payments made this year including a net amount of 1.1 billion in relation to the Advance Pricing Agreement between the UK and US governments tax authorities and the settlement of a related valuation matter an increase in trade and other receivables and higher contributions made to our UK defined benefit pension fund.
Investment cash inflows of 577 million include the sale of Astra Tech 1772 million.
Cash outflows on the purchase of tangible fixed assets amounted to 839 million in the year in line with 2010.
Further details of the Astra Tech disposal are included in Note 22 to the Financial Statements from page 170.
Net cash distributions to shareholders increased from 5471 million in 2010 to 9370 million in 2011 through dividend payments of 3764 million and net share repurchases of 5606 million a significant increase on 2010 repurchases of 2110 million.
This reflects the Boards 2010 stated objective of 4 billion share repurchases in 2011 with the target increased in 2011 following the Boards decision to use the net proceeds from the Astra Tech sale to increase share repurchases.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 86 Financial Review Summary cash flows Net fundsdebt brought forward at 1 January 3653 535 7174 Earnings before interest tax depreciation amortisation and impairment EBITDA 15345 14235 13630 Profit on disposal of Astra Tech 1483 EBITDA before profit on disposal of Astra Tech 13862 14235 13630 Movement in working capital and provisions 897 82 1329 Tax paid 3999 2533 2381 Interest paid 548 641 639 Other noncash movements 597 463 200 Net cash available from operating activities 7821 10680 11739 Purchase of intangibles net 458 1180 355 Other capital expenditure net 737 708 824 Acquisitions  348 Net cash received on disposal of Astra Tech 1772 Investments 577 2236 1179 Dividends 3764 3361 2977 Net share repurchasesissues 5606 2110 135 Distributions 9370 5471 2842 Other movements 168 145 9 Net funds carried forward at 31 December 2849 3653 535 At 31 December 2011 outstanding gross debt interestbearing loans and borrowings was 9328 million 2010 9222 million.
Of this gross debt 1990 million is due within one year 2010 125 million.
Closing net funds include 3765 million of US Treasury Bills with a maturity date greater than 90 days.
These are included in shortterm investments.
Net funds of 2849 million have decreased by 804 million during the year as a result of the net cash outflow described above.
Offbalance sheet transactions and commitments We have no offbalance sheet arrangements and our derivative activities are nonspeculative.
The table below sets out our minimum contractual obligations at the year end.
Net funds Cash and cash equivalents 7571 11068 9918 Shortterm investments 4248 1482 1484 Net derivative financial instruments 358 325 196 Cash shortterm investments and derivatives 12177 12875 11598 Overdraft and shortterm borrowings 221 125 136 Current instalments of loan 1769  1790 Loans due after one year 7338 9097 9137 Loans and borrowings 9328 9222 11063 Net funds 2849 3653 535 Payments due by period Less than 1 year 13 years 35 years
5 years
Total
Bank loans and other borrowings 2493 1574 1684 9764 15515 15964 Operating leases 92 116 6telContracted capital expenditure 190    190 259 Total 2775 1690 1746 9886 16097 16729 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Financial Review 87 Financial Review
Financial position  2011 All data in this section is on a Reported basis.
Summary statement of financial position
Movement
Property plant and equipment 6425 532 6957 350 7307 Goodwill and intangible assets 20842 1187 22029 86 22115 Inventories 1852 170 1682 68 1750 Trade and other receivables 8754 907 7847 138 7709 Trade and other payables 9360 326 9034 103 8931 Provisions 1862 76 1938 252 1686 Net income tax payable 2334 1521 3855 1002 2853 Net deferred tax liabilities 1221 449 1670 285 1955 Retirement benefit obligations 2674 202 2472 882 3354 Noncurrent other investments 201 10 211 27 184 Net funds 2849 804 3653 3118 535 Net assets 23472 62 23410 2589 20821 In 2011 net assets increased by 62 million to 23472 million.
The increase in net assets as a result of the Group profit of 10016 million was offset by dividends of 3752 million and share repurchases of 6015 million.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment decreased by 532 million to 6425 million.
Additions of 807 million 2010 808 million were offset by depreciation of 1086 million 2010 1076 million and disposals of 233 million 2010 73 million including 151 million of assets on the sale of Astra Tech.
Goodwill and intangible assets Our goodwill of 9862 million 2010 9871 million principally arose on the acquisition of MedImmune and the restructuring of our US joint venture with Merck in 1998.
No goodwill has been capitalised in 2011.
Intangible assets amounted to 10980 million at 31 December 2011 2010 12158 million.
Intangible asset additions were 442 million in 2011 2010 1791 million amortisation was 911 million 2010 810 million and impairments totalled 553 million 2010 833 million.
113 million of assets were disposed of on the sale of Astra Tech.
Intangible asset impairment charges recorded in 2011 include 285 million following the termination of development of olaparib for the maintenance treatment of serous ovarian cancer and an impairment of 150 million reflecting a lower probability of success assessment for TC5214 based on the results of the first two of four Phase III efficacy and tolerability studies.
See pages 72 and 68 respectively of the Therapy Area Review for more information.
Included within our intangible assets are rights we have acquired as a result of our Merck termination arrangements.
Further details of these arrangements are included in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 181.
2012 is the first year that AstraZeneca may exercise the second and final option in relation to these termination arrangements.
If the option is exercised in 2012 this will effectively end AstraZenecas relationships with and obligations to Merck other than some residual manufacturing arrangements.
Receivables payables and provisions Trade receivables increased by 383 million to 6630 million driven principally by higher gross sales in the US in December 2011 and the way calendar working days fell at the 2011 year end.
Other receivables increased by 566 million to 1237 million driven by an increase in our Seroquel related settlement funds.
Included within trade receivables is approximately 650 million of net receivables representing 10% of our trade receivables due from customers in eurozone countries that have a sovereign credit rating of A or lower Spain 300 million Italy 270 million Portugal 50 million and Greece 30 million.
Within this balance is approximately 230 million of overdue government debt.
In light of current market conditions debts within these euro countries have been subject to enhanced monitoring and scrutiny by the Group.
Our bad debt provisioning against these debts reflects our current estimate of the recoverability of these balances based on consideration of a number of factors such as the status of current negotiations past payment history and individual countries budget constraints.
In 2011 our revenue from these four countries was 1113 million Italy 709 million Spain 305 million Greece and 223 million Portugal.
Trade and other payables increased by 326 million in 2011 driven by increases in accruals of 177 million and rebates and chargebacks of 446 million offset by a decrease in other payables of 215 million.
The increase in rebates and chargebacks arose principally from increased managedcare and group purchasing organisation rebates.
Further details of the movements on rebates and chargebacks are included on page 94.
The movement in provisions of 76 million in 2011 includes 716 million of additional charges recorded in the year offset by 657 million of cash payments.
Included within the 716 million of charges for the year is 135 million in respect of legal charges and 450 million for our global restructuring initiative.
Cash payments of 657 million include 377 million against our ongoing global restructuring initiatives and 153 million related to legal matters.
Further details of the charges made against our provisions are contained in Notes 17 and 25 to the Financial Statements.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 88 Financial Review Tax payable and receivable Net income tax payable has decreased by 1521 million to 2334 million principally due to the payment of a net amount of 1.1 billion in relation to the Advance Pricing Agreement between the UK and US governments tax authorities and the settlement of a related valuation matter.
Our tax receivable balance of 1056 million largely comprises tax owing to AstraZeneca from certain governments expected to be received on settlements of transfer pricing audits and disputes see Note 25 to the Financial Statements on page 189.
Net deferred tax liabilities reduced by 449 million in the year.
Retirement benefit obligations Net retirement benefit obligations increased by 202 million due to an increase in postretirement scheme obligations of 954 million driven by a reduction in the discount rate applied to longterm scheme obligations reflecting present market conditions for corporate bonds offset by pension fund employer contributions made in the year of 733 million 2010 469 million as detailed in Note 18 to the Financial Statements from page 165.
In recent years the Group has undertaken several initiatives to reduce its net pension obligation exposure.
For the UK defined benefit pension scheme which represents AstraZenecas largest defined benefit scheme these initiatives have included agreeing funding principles for cash contributions to be paid to the UK pension scheme to target a level of assets in excess of the current expected cost of providing benefits and in 2010 amendments to the scheme to freeze pensionable pay at 30 June 2010 levels reducing the pension fund obligation by 693 million.
In addition to the cash contributions to be paid into the UK pension scheme AstraZeneca makes contributions to an escrow account which is held outside the pension scheme.
The escrow account assets are payable to the fund in agreed circumstances for example in the event of AstraZeneca and the pension fund trustee agreeing on a change to the current longterm investment strategy.
AstraZeneca has agreed to fund the UK defined benefit scheme shortfall by making lump sum payments totalling 715 million 1103 million before 30 June 2013.
The first of these lump sum payments of 180 million 278 million was paid into the pension scheme from the escrow account in December 2011.
A further 300 million 463 million was paid into the pension scheme during January 2012 with the balance payable by 30 June 2013.
In 2011 132 million 213 million was paid into the escrow account and a further 230 million 355 million was paid in during January 2012.
At 31 December 2011 296 million escrow fund assets are included within other investments as detailed in Note 10 to the Financial Statements on page 160.
In 2011 approximately 96.7% 2010 96.5% of the Groups obligations were concentrated in the UK the US Sweden and Germany.
Further details of the Groups pension schemes are included in Note 18 to the Financial Statements from page 165.
Commitments and contingencies The Group has commitments and contingencies which are accounted for in accordance with the accounting policies described in the Financial Statements in the Group Accounting Policies section from page 146.
The Group also has taxation contingencies.
These are described in the Taxation section in the Critical accounting policies and estimates section on page 97 and in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 189.
Research and development collaboration payments Details of future potential research and development collaboration payments are also included in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 181.
As detailed in Note 25 payments to our collaboration partners may not become payable due to the inherent uncertainty in achieving the development and revenue milestones linked to the future payments.
As part of our overall externalisation strategy we may enter into further collaboration projects in the future that may include milestone payments and therefore as certain milestone payments fail to crystallise due to for example development not proceeding they may be replaced by potential payments under new collaborations.
Investments divestments and capital expenditure As detailed earlier in the Research and Development section from page 30 AstraZeneca views collaborations including externalisation arrangements in the field of research and development as a crucial element of the development of our business.
The Group has completed over 90 major externalisation transactions over the past three years one of which was a business acquisition and all others were strategic alliances and collaborations.
Details of our business acquisitions and disposals in the past three years are contained in Note 22 to the Financial Statements from page 170.
Details of our significant externalisation transactions are given below In January 2007 AstraZeneca signed an exclusive codevelopment and copromotion agreement with BMS for the development and commercialisation of saxagliptin a dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitor DPPIV and dapagliflozin a selective sodiumglucose co transporter 2 SGLT2 inhibitor both for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes.
The agreement is global with the exception of Japan for saxagliptin.
Under each agreement the two companies jointly develop the clinical and marketing strategy and share development and commercialisation expenses on a global basis.
To date AstraZeneca has made upfront and milestone payments totalling 300 million for saxagliptin and 170 million for dapagliflozin and may make future milestone payments of 230 million on dapagliflozin contingent on achievement of regulatory milestones and launch in key markets.
Following launch profits and losses globally are shared equally and an additional 300 million of salesrelated payments for each product may be triggered based on worldwide sales success.
The Group made milestone payments to BMS of 120 million in 2011 50 million in 2010 and 150 million in 2009.
In December 2009 AstraZeneca and Targacept entered into an inlicence agreement for AstraZeneca to obtain exclusive global development and commercialisation rights to Targacepts investigational product for major depressive disorder MDD
Under the deal AstraZeneca made an upfront payment of 200 million and may make milestone payments to a maximum of 540 million up to launch.
In addition Targacept will be entitled to receive royalties on worldwide product sales and further milestone payments linked to worldwide product sales.
As detailed in Note 9 to the Financial Statements from page 158 the carrying value of the intangible asset in relation to TC5214 was impaired by 150 million in 2011 based on the results of the first two of four Phase III efficacy and tolerability studies of the compound.
The Group determines the above externalisation transactions to be significant using a range of factors.
We look at the specific circumstances of the individual externalisation arrangement and apply several quantitative and qualitative criteria.
Because we consider our externalisation strategy to be an extension of our RandD strategy the expected total value of development payments under the transaction and its proportion of our annual RandD spend both of which are proxies for overall research and development effort and cost are important elements of the significance determination.
Other quantitative criteria we apply include without limitation expected levels of future sales the possible value of milestone payments and the resources used for commercialisation activities for example the number of staff.
Qualitative factors we consider include without limitation new market developments new territories new areas of research and strategic implications.
In aggregate milestones capitalised under the Groups other externalisation arrangements totalled 123 million in 2011 337 million in 2010 and 306 million in 2009 and the Group recognised other income in respect of other externalisation arrangements totalling 18 million in 2011 82 million in 2010 and 440 million in 2009.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Financial Review 89 Financial Review
Capitalisation
The total number of shares in issue at 31 December 2011 was 1292 million.
10.7 million shares were issued in consideration of share option exercises for a total of 409 million.
Share repurchases amounted to 127.4 million Ordinary Shares at a cost of 6015 million.
Shareholders equity increased by a net 33 million to 23246 million at the year end.
Noncontrolling interests increased to 226 million 2010 197 million.
Dividend and share repurchases In recognition of the Groups strong balance sheet sustainable significant cash flow and the Boards confidence in the strategic direction and longterm prospects for the business the Board has adopted a progressive dividend policy intending to maintain or grow the dividend each year.
The Board has recommended a 5% increase in the second interim dividend to 1.95 123.6 pence 13.21 SEK to be paid on 19 March 2012.
This brings the full year dividend to 2.80 175.5 pence per share 18.54 SEK an increase of 10%.
In 2010 the Group recommenced its share repurchase programme.
The Group completed net share repurchases of 5606 million in 2011 2010 2110 million.
The Board has announced that the Group intends to complete net share repurchases in the amount of 4.5 billion during 2012 subject to market conditions and business needs.
In setting the distribution policy and the overall financial strategy the Boards aim is to continue to strike a balance between the interests of the business our financial creditors and our shareholders.
After providing for business investment funding the progressive dividend policy and meeting our debt service obligations the Board will keep under review the opportunity to return cash in excess of these requirements to shareholders through periodic share repurchases.
Future prospects As described earlier in our Annual Report the coming years will be challenging for the industry and for AstraZeneca as its revenue base transitions through a period of exclusivity losses and new product launches.
AstraZeneca makes highlevel planning assumptions for revenue evolution margins cash flow and business reinvestment to help guide the management of the business.
AstraZeneca assumes that the global biopharmaceutical industry can grow at least in line with real GDP over the planning horizon.
While downward pressures on revenue from government interventions in the marketplace have intensified AstraZenecas assessment remains that as yet these do not yet constitute a sustained step change in trend.
The assumptions going forward for revenue margins and cash flow assume no material mergers acquisitions or disposals.
In addition our plans assume no premature loss of exclusivity for key AstraZeneca products.
It is expected that revenue in 2012 will continue to be affected by government interventions on pricing and ongoing generic competition including the anticipated loss of market exclusivity for Seroquel IR and Atacand in global markets as well as for Crestor in Canada.
Over the last several years the Group has undertaken significant restructuring initiatives aimed at reshaping the cost base to improve longterm competitiveness.
The second phase of restructuring which was announced in January 2010 comprised a significant change programme in RandD as well as additional productivity improvement initiatives in the supply chain and SGandA.
The first two phases of the restructuring programme are now largely complete at a cumulative cost of 4.6 billion.
This programme will deliver annual benefits to the Group by 2014.
In February 2012 the Group announced the next phase of restructuring.
Further details are set out in the Our strategic priorities to 2014 section from page 21.
A planning assumption remains that continued productivity improvements including successful completion of restructuring initiatives will aid the achievement of levels of revenue and margins to generate the requisite operating cash flow over the planning period to support the reinvestment needs of the business debt service obligations and shareholder distributions.
Capitalisation and shareholder return Dividend for 2011 Pence SEK Payment date First interim dividend 0.85 51.9 5.33 12 September 2011 Second interim dividend 1.95 123.6 13.21 19 March 2012 Summary of shareholder distributions
Cost
Dividend per share
Shareholder distributions 2000 9.4 352 0.70 1236 1588 2001 23.5 1080 0.70 1225 2305 2002 28.3 1190 0.70 1206 2396 2003 27.2 1154 0.795 1350 2504 2004 50.1 2212 0.94 1555 3767 2005 67.7 3001 1.30 2068 5069 2006 72.2 4147 1.72 2649 6796 2007 79.9 4170 1.87 2740 6910 2008 13.6 610 2.05 2971 3581 2009   2.30 3339 3339 2010 53.7 2604 2.55 3604 6208 2011 127.4 6015 2.80 3678 Total 553.0 26535 18.425 27621 54156 Total dividend cost estimated based upon number of shares in issue at 31 December 2011.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 90 Financial Review Results of operations  summary analysis of year to 31 December 2010 2010 Reported operating profit 2010 2009 Percentage of sales 2010 compared with 2009
CER growth
Reported
Reported %
CER growth %
Revenue 33269 164 301 32804  1 Cost of sales 6389 497 117 5775 19.2 17.6 9 11 Gross margin 26880 333 184 27029 80.8 82.4 1 1 Distribution costs 335 31 6 298 1.0 0.9 10 12 Research and development 5318 871 38 4409 16.0 13.5 20 21 Selling general and administrative costs 10445 955 68 11332 31.4 34.5 8 8 Other operating income and expense 712 159  553 2.1 1.7 29 29 Operating profit 11494 121 72 11543 34.5 35.2 1 Net finance expense 517 736 Profit before tax 10977 10807 Taxation 2896 3263 Profit for the period 8081 7544 Basic earnings per share  5.60 5.19 2010 Core operating resultstel compared with 2009
CER growth
Core
CER growth %
Core growth % Gross margin 27024 386 193 27217 1 1 Gross margin % 81.2% 83.0% Distribution costs 335 30 7 298 10 12 Research and development 4219 176 61 4334 4 3 Selling general and administrative costs 9777 190 77 9890 2 1 Other operating income and expense 910 16  926 2 2 Operating profit 13603 66 48 13621 Operating margin % 40.8% 41.5% Net finance expense 517 736 Profit before tax 13086 12885 Taxation 3416 3703 Profit for the period 9670 9182 Basic earnings per share  6.71 6.32 2010 Reconciliation of Reported results to Core results
Restructuring costs Merck and MedImmune Post retirement plan amendments
Intangible
Legal settlements
Gross margin 26880 144     27024 Distribution costs 335      335 Research and development 5318 654  445   4219 Selling general and administrative costs 10445 404 443  612 791 9777 Other operating income and expense 712  75 123   910 Operating profit 11494 120tel791 13603 Add back Research and development 5318 654  445   4219 PreRandD operating margin 1681tel612 791 17822 PreRandD operating margin % 50.5% 53.5% Net finance expense 517      517 Profit before tax 10977 120tel791 13086 Taxation 2896 317 100 150 162 209 3416 Profit for the period 808tel450 582 9670 Basic earnings per share  5.60 0.62 0.29 0.29 0.31 0.40 6.71 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Financial Review 91 Results of operations  summary analysis of year to 31 December 2010 continued 2010 revenue was unchanged Reported up 1%.
Revenue in 2010 benefited from strong growth of Crestor Symbicort and Seroquel offset by lower revenues for Pulmicort Arimidex and Casodex and the absence of H1N1 vaccine revenue.
Emerging Markets sales growth of 16% Reported 19% and Established ROW 7% Reported 17% was offset by a decline in US sales of 7% Reported 7% with sales in Western Europe up 2% Reported down 1%.
Further details of our sales performance are contained in the Performance 2010 sections of the Therapy Area Review from page 56.
Core gross margin in 2010 of 81.2% declined 1.6 percentage points Reported 1.8 percentage points.
The impairment of lesogaberan the 2009 benefit from the release of a provision with respect to the resolution of an issue related to a third party supply contract higher royalties and adverse regional and product mix were only partially offset by lower payments to Merck.
Core RandD expenditure in 2010 was 4219 million 4% lower than 2009 Reported 3%.
Increased investment in biologics was more than offset by lower project costs and operational efficiencies.
The lower project costs in 2010 were the result of several late stage projects completing their trials partially offset by the commencement of Phase III programmes for TC5214 and fostamatinib.
2010 Core SGandA costs of 9777 million were 2% lower than 2009 Reported 1%.
Investment in Emerging Markets and recently launched brands were more than offset by operational efficiencies across Established Markets.
Core other income of 910 million in 2010 was 16 million less than 2009.
2009 benefited from disposal gains related to Abraxane
Tevas generic version of Pulmicort Respules.
Core preRandD operating margin was 53.5% in 2010 down 1.0 percentage points Reported 1.2 percentage points with the lower gross margin only partially offset by efficiencies within selling general and administrative areas.
2010 Core operating profit was 13603 million unchanged at CER.
2010 Core operating margin declined by 0.4 percentage points to 40.8% with lower RandD expense and operational efficiencies only partially offsetting the decline in the gross margin.
Core EPS were 6.71 in 2010 up 5% Reported 6% with the operating performance boosted by lower net finance expense the benefit of a lower average number of shares outstanding and a lower effective tax rate.
Core adjustments in 2010 were broadly in line with 2009 with increased restructuring costs and intangible impairments offset by gains chiefly attributable to changes in the Groups UK pension arrangements.
Excluded from Core in 2010 were Impairment charges of 568 million arising from impairments in respect of motavizumab 445 million and our HPV cervical cancer vaccine income stream 123 million both capitalised as part of the MedImmune acquisition.
Total impairment charges relating to intangible fixed assets were 833 million in 2010.
612 million of legal settlements of which 592 million was in respect of the ongoing Seroquel product liability litigation and state attorney general investigations into sales and marketing practices in aggregate.
In line with prior years these have been excluded from our Core performance.
Restructuring costs totalling 1202 million incurred as the Group continues its previously announced efficiency programmes.
Amortisation totalling 518 million relating to assets capitalised as part of the MedImmune acquisition and the Merck exit arrangements.
A credit of 791 million chiefly attributable to a curtailment gain related to changes made to benefits under the Groups UK pension arrangements.
In 2010 we amended our UK defined benefit fund.
Pensionable pay was frozen at its 30 June 2010 level but the defined benefit fund remains open to existing members.
Members of the pension fund were given the option of remaining in the fund or leaving the fund.
Those that chose to leave the fund were offered funding which they could contribute to a new Group Self Invested Personal Pension Plan.
This change to the UK defined benefit scheme represented an accounting curtailment of certain pension obligations and in accordance with IAS 19 Employee Benefits these obligations were revalued by the scheme actuaries immediately prior to the curtailment and the assumptions updated at that date.
2010 operating profit was down 1% at CER Reported unchanged at 11494 million.
Basic EPS were 5.60 up 7% Reported 8% as a result of the factors affecting Core EPS.
Net finance expense was 517 million in 2010 versus 736 million in 2009.
Fair value gains of 5 million were recorded on longterm bonds in 2010 versus fair value losses of 145 million for 2009.
In addition to this there was reduced interest payable on lower debt balances and slightly increased returns from higher cash and cash equivalent balances.
The 2010 taxation charge of 2896 million 2009 3263 million consisted of a current tax charge of 3435 million 2009 3105 million and a credit arising from movements on deferred tax of 539 million 2009 charge of 158 million.
The 2010 current year tax charge included a prior period current tax adjustment of 370 million 2009 251 million relating mainly to an increase in provisions for tax contingencies and double tax relief partially offset by a benefit of 342 million arising from a number of tax settlements and tax accrual to tax return adjustments.
The 2009 prior period current tax adjustments related mainly to tax accrual to tax return adjustments an increase in provisions in respect of a number of transfer pricing audits and double tax relief.
The effective tax rate for 2010 was 26.4% 2009 30.2% 28.8% excluding the impact of legal provisions.
Total comprehensive income for 2010 increased by 616 million from 2009.
This was driven by the increase in profit of 537 million and an increase of 79 million in other comprehensive income.
Cash flow and liquidity  2010 All data in this section is on a Reported basis.
Cash generated from operating activities was 10680 million in the year to 31 December 2010 compared with 11739 million in 2009.
The decline of 1059 million was primarily driven by legal settlements of 709 million relating to Seroquel sales and marketing practices and product liability and Average Wholesale Price Litigation in the US and the first instalment of 562 million 350 million in respect of the UK tax settlement.
Investments cash outflows of 2236 million in 2010 included the acquisition of Novexel 348 million the payment of 647 million to Merck resulting in the Group acquiring Mercks interest in certain AstraZeneca products and a further 537 million paid out on other externalisation arrangements.
Cash outflows on the purchase of tangible fixed assets amounted to 791 million in 2010.
Further details of the Novexel business acquisition and our arrangements with Merck are included in Note 22 and Note 25 to the Financial Statements respectively.
Net cash distributions to shareholders increased from 2842 million in 2009 to 5471 million in 2010 through dividend payments of 3361 million and net share repurchases of 2110 million.
Financial Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 92 Financial Review At 31 December 2010 outstanding gross debt interestbearing loans and borrowings was 9222 million 2009 11063 million.
The reduction in gross debt of 1841 million during 2010 was principally due to the repayment on maturity of euro bonds of euro 500 million and euro 750 million.
The first repayment was the euro 500 million 18 month bond issued in July 2008 and maturing in January 2010 and the second was the euro 750 million 3 year bond issued in November 2007 and maturing in November 2010.
Of the gross debt outstanding at 31 December 2010 125 million was due within one year 2009 1926 million.
Strong business cash flows improved net funds by 3118 million resulting in net funds of 3653 million at 31 December 2010.
Financial position  2010 All data in this section is on a Reported basis.
In 2010 net assets increased by 2589 million to 23410 million.
The increase in net assets as a result of the Group profit of 8081 million was offset by dividends of 3494 million and share repurchases of 2604 million.
Shares issued in 2010 increased net assets by 494 million.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment decreased by 350 million to 6957 million as at 31 December 2010.
Additions of 808 million 2009 967 million were offset by depreciation of 1076 million 2009 893 million.
Goodwill and intangible assets Our goodwill of 9871 million 2009 9889 million principally arose on the acquisition of MedImmune and on the restructuring of our US joint venture with Merck in 1998.
No goodwill was capitalised in 2010 the movement of 18 million in 2010 being due to exchange rate movements.
Intangible assets amounted to 12158 million at 31 December 2010 2009 12226 million.
Intangible assets additions were 1791 million in 2010 2009 1003 million amortisation was 810 million 2009 729 million and impairments totalled 833 million 2009 415 million.
Additions to intangible assets in 2010 included 647 million paid to Merck under preexisting arrangements under which Mercks interest in our products in the US will be terminated and 548 million from our acquisition of Novexel of which 239 million of intangible assets acquired were subsequently sold to Forest as detailed in Note 22 to the Financial Statements.
Intangible asset impairment charges recorded in 2010 included 445 million following our decision to withdraw our FDA biological license application for motavizumab and 128 million related to our decision to discontinue further development of lesogaberan.
The 2010 impairment balance also included 123 million following reassessment of the licensing income generated by the HPV cervical cancer vaccine and 126 million written off other products in development.
Receivables payables and provisions In 2010 exchange rate movements contributed 119 million of the overall increase of 138 million in receivables with an increase in the trade receivables balance being offset by a reduction on other receivables mainly due to a reduction in our Seroquel related insurance receivable balance during the year.
Trade and other payables increased by 103 million.
The movement in provisions of 252 million in 2010 included 1361 million of additional charges recorded in 2010 offset by 1109 million of cash payments.
Included within the 1361 million of charges in 2010 was 592 million in respect of the ongoing Seroquel product liability litigation and state attorney general investigations into sales and marketing practices in aggregate and 497 million for our global restructuring initiative.
Cash payments of 1109 million included 335 million against our global restructuring initiative and 709 million related to legal provisions.
Tax payable and receivable Net income tax payable in 2010 increased by 1002 million to 3855 million principally due to an increase in accruals for tax contingencies cash tax timing differences and exchange rate movements.
Tax receivable largely comprised tax owing to AstraZeneca from certain governments expected to be received on settlements of transfer pricing audits and disputes.
Net deferred tax liabilities reduced by 285 million in 2010.
This movement included a reclassification from deferred tax to current tax of amounts provided in relation to tax contingencies for prior periods.
Retirement benefit obligations Net retirement benefit obligations reduced by 882 million in 2010 principally as a result of recognising a gain of 791 million arising from changes made to benefits under certain of the Groups post retirement benefits plans chiefly the Groups UK pension plan.
Financial risk management Financial risk management policies
Our risk management processes are described in the Managing risk section from page 129.
These processes enable us to identify risks that can be partly or entirely mitigated through the use of insurance.
We negotiate best available premium rates with insurance providers on the basis of our extensive risk management procedures.
In the current insurance market the level of cover is decreasing while premium rates are increasing.
Rather than simply paying higher premiums for lower cover we focus our insurance resources on the most critical areas or where there is a legal requirement and where we can get best value for money.
Risks to which we pay particular attention include business interruption Directors and Officers liability and property damage.
Recently insurance for product liability has not been available on commercially acceptable terms and the Group has not held product liability insurance since February 2006.
Taxation
Tax risk management forms an integrated part of the Group risk management processes.
Our tax strategy is to manage tax risks and tax costs in a manner consistent with shareholders best longterm interests taking into account both economic and reputational factors.
We draw a distinction between tax planning using artificial structures and optimising tax treatment of business transactions and we engage only in the latter.
Treasury
The principal financial risks to which the Group is exposed are those arising from liquidity interest rate foreign currency and credit.
The Group has a centralised treasury function to manage these risks in accordance with Boardapproved policies.
Specifically liquidity risk is managed through maintaining access to a number of sources of funding to meet anticipated funding requirements including committed bank facilities and cash resources.
Interest
Accordingly the Groups net interest charge is not significantly affected by movements in floating rates of interest.
We do not currently hedge the impact on earnings and cash flow of changes in exchange rates with the exception of the currency exposure that arises between the booking and settlement dates on nonlocal currency purchases and sales by subsidiaries and the external dividend.
Credit risk is managed through setting and monitoring credit limits appropriate for the assessed risk of the counterparty.
Our capital and risk management objectives and policies are described in further detail in Note 23 to the Financial Statements from page 171 and in the Risk section from page 129.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Financial Review 93 Sensitivity analysis of the Groups exposure to exchange rate and interest rate movements is also detailed in Note 23 to the Financial Statements from page 171.
Critical accounting policies and estimates Our Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU adopted IFRS and as issued by the IASB and the accounting policies employed are set out in the Group Accounting Policies section in the Financial Statements from page 146.
In applying these policies we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
The actual outcome could differ from those estimates.
Some of these policies require a high level of judgement because the areas are especially subjective or complex.
We believe that the most critical accounting policies and significant areas of judgement and estimation are in Revenue recognition Research and development Impairment testing of goodwill and intangible assets
Postretirement benefits
Revenue recognition Revenue is recorded at the invoiced amount excluding intercompany sales and value added taxes less movements in estimated accruals for rebates and chargebacks given to managedcare and other customers and product returns  a particular feature in the US.
The impact in the rest of the world is not significant.
It is the Groups policy to offer a credit note for all returns and to destroy all returned stock in all markets.
Cash discounts for prompt payment are also deducted from sales.
Revenue is recognised at the point of delivery which is usually when title passes to the customer either on shipment or on receipt of goods by the customer depending on local trading terms.
Income from royalties and from disposals of IP brands and product lines is included in other operating income.
Rebates chargebacks and returns in the US When invoicing sales in the US we estimate the rebates and chargebacks that we expect to pay.
These rebates typically arise from sales contracts with third party managedcare organisations hospitals longterm care facilities group purchasing organisations and various federal or state programmes Medicaid best price contracts supplemental rebates etc.
They can be classified as follows Chargebacks where we enter into arrangements under which certain parties typically hospitals the Department of Veterans Affairs Public Health Service Covered Entities and the Department of Defense are able to buy products from wholesalers at the lower prices we have contracted with them.
The chargeback is the difference between the price we invoice to the wholesaler and the contracted price charged by the wholesaler.
Chargebacks are paid directly to the wholesalers.
Regulatory including Medicaid and other federal and state programmes where we pay rebates based on the specific terms of agreements with the US Department of Health and Human Services and with individual states which include product usage and information on best prices and average market prices benchmarks.
Contractual under which entities such as third party managedcare organisations longterm care facilities and group purchasing organisations are entitled to rebates depending on specified performance provisions which vary from contract to contract.
The effects of these deductions on our US pharmaceuticals revenue and the movements on US pharmaceuticals revenue provisions are set out below.
Accrual assumptions are built up on a productbyproduct and customerbycustomer basis taking into account specific contract provisions coupled with expected performance and are then aggregated into a weighted average rebate accrual rate for each of our products.
Accrual rates are reviewed and adjusted on a monthly basis.
There may be further adjustments when actual rebates are invoiced based on utilisation information submitted to us in the case of contractual rebates and claimsinvoices are received in the case of regulatory rebates and chargebacks.
We believe that we have made reasonable estimates for future rebates using a similar methodology to that of previous years.
Inevitably however such estimates involve judgements on aggregate future sales levels segment mix and the customers contractual performance.
Gross to net sales  US Pharmaceuticals Gross sales 23613 22909 22646 Chargebacks 1958 2075 1841 Regulatory  US government and state programmes 2293 1949 1357 Contractual  Managedcare and group purchasing organisation rebates 5437 4755 4752 Cash and other discounts 452 437 428 Customer returns 72 21 193 Net sales 13125 13407 13879 Movement in provisions  US Pharmaceuticals
1 January Provision for current year Adjustment in respect of prior years Returns and payments
31 December Chargebacks 523 2012 54 2086 395 Regulatory  US government and state programmes 1122 2364 71 2125 1290 Contractual  Managedcare and group purchasing organisation rebates 1194 5452 15 5031 1600 Cash and other discounts 41 452  452 41 Customer returns 133 75 3 84 121 Total 3077 10631 143 10038 3527
Financial Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 94 Financial Review Movement in provisions  US Pharmaceuticals continued
1 January Provision for current year Adjustment in respect of prior years Returns and payments
31 December Chargebacks 396 2107 32 1948 523 Regulatory  US government and state programmes 775 1984 35 1602 1122 Contractual  Managedcare and group purchasing organisation rebates 1447 4826 71 5008 1194 Cash and other discounts 41 438 1 437 41 Customer returns 177 22 1 65 133
2895 9646 144 9320 3077
1 January Provision for current year Adjustment in respect of prior years Returns and payments
31 December Chargebacks 359 Regulatory  US government and state programmes 520 Contractual  Managedcare and group purchasing organisation rebates 1084 Cash and other discounts 39 Customer returns 77 Other 57
8872 105 8008 The large increase in managedcare and group purchasing organisation rebates in 2011 is principally driven by the impacts of the Affordable Care Act.
See page 78 of the Geographical Review for more information.
Cash discounts are offered to customers to encourage prompt payment.
Accruals are calculated based on historical experience and are adjusted to reflect actual experience.
Industry practice in the US allows wholesalers and pharmacies to return unused stocks within six months of and up to 12 months after shelflife expiry.
The customer is credited for the returned product by the issuance of a credit note.
Returned product is not exchanged for product from inventory and once a return claim has been determined to be valid and a credit note has been issued to the customer the returned goods are destroyed.
At the point of sale in the US we estimate the quantity and value of goods which may ultimately be returned.
Our returns accruals in the US are based on actual experience.
Our estimate is based on the preceding 12 months for established products together with marketrelated information such as estimated stock levels at wholesalers and competitor activity which we receive via third party information services.
For newly launched products we use rates based on our experience with similar products or a predetermined percentage.
For products facing generic competition such as Arimidex and ToprolXLSeloken in the US our experience is that we usually lose the ability to estimate the levels of returns from wholesalers with the same degree of precision that we can for products still subject to patent protection.
This is because we have limited or no insight into a number of areas the actual timing of the generic launch for example a generic manufacturer may or may not have produced adequate prelaunch inventory the pricing and marketing strategy of the competitor the takeup of the generic and in cases where a generic manufacturer has approval to launch only one dose size in a market of several dose sizes the likely level of switching from one dose to another.
Under our accounting policy revenue is recognised only when the amount of the revenue can be measured reliably.
Our approach in meeting this condition for products facing generic competition will vary from product to product depending on the specific circumstances.
The closing adjustment in respect of prior years benefited 2011 net US pharmaceuticals revenue by 1.1% 2010 increased revenue by 1.1% 2009 increased revenue by 0.8%.
However taking into account the adjustments affecting both the current and the prior year 2010 revenue was not impacted by adjustments between years and 2009 revenue benefited by 0.3%.
We have distribution service agreements with major wholesaler buyers which serve to reduce the speculative purchasing behaviour of the wholesalers and reduce shortterm fluctuations in the level of inventory they hold.
We do not offer any incentives to encourage wholesaler speculative buying and attempt where possible to restrict shipments to underlying demand when such speculation occurs.
Sales of intangible assets A consequence of charging all internal RandD expenditure to the income statement in the year in which it is incurred which is normal practice in the pharmaceutical industry is that we own valuable intangible assets which are not recorded on the balance sheet.
We also own acquired intangible assets which are included on the balance sheet.
As a consequence of regular reviews of product strategy from time to time we sell such assets and generate income.
Sales of product lines are often accompanied by an agreement on our part to continue manufacturing the relevant product for a reasonable period often about two years while the purchaser constructs its own manufacturing facilities.
The contracts typically involve the receipt of an upfront payment which the contract attributes to the sale of the intangible assets and ongoing receipts which the contract attributes to the sale of the product we manufacture.
In cases where the transaction has two or more components we account for the delivered item for example the transfer of title to the intangible asset as a separate unit of accounting and record revenue on delivery of that component provided that we can make a reasonable estimate of the fair value of the undelivered component.
Where the fair market value of the undelivered component for example a manufacturing agreement exceeds the contracted price for that component we defer an appropriate element of the upfront consideration and amortise this AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Financial Review 95 over the performance period.
However where the fair market value of the undelivered component is equal to or lower than the contracted price for that component we treat the whole of the upfront amount as being attributable to the delivered intangible assets and recognise that part of the revenue upon delivery.
No element of the contracted revenue related to the undelivered component is allocated to the sale of the intangible asset.
This is because the contracted revenue relating to the undelivered component is contingent on future events such as sales and so cannot be anticipated.
Research and development Our business is underpinned by our marketed products and development portfolio.
The RandD expenditure on internal activities to generate these products is generally charged to profit in the year that it is incurred.
Purchases of IP and product rights to supplement our RandD portfolio are capitalised as intangible assets.
Further details of this policy are included in the Group Accounting Policies section of our Financial Statements from page 146.
Such intangible assets are amortised from the launch of the underlying products and are tested for impairment both before and after launch.
This policy is in line with practice adopted by major pharmaceutical companies.
Impairment testing of goodwill and intangible assets We have significant investments in goodwill and intangible assets as a result of acquisitions of businesses and purchases of assets such as product development and marketing rights.
Details of the estimates and assumptions we make in our annual impairment testing of goodwill are included in Note 8 to the Financial Statements on page 157.
No impairment of goodwill was identified.
Impairment reviews have been carried out on all intangible assets that are in development and not being amortised all major intangible assets acquired during the year and all intangible assets that have had indications of impairment during the year.
Sales forecasts and specific allocated costs which have both been subject to appropriate senior management signoff are discounted using appropriate rates based on AstraZenecas riskadjusted pretax weighted average cost of capital.
In building to the range of rates used in our internal investment appraisal of future projects and capital investment decisions we adjust our weighted average cost of capital for other factors which reflect without limitation local matters such as risk on a case by case basis.
Intangible asset impairment charges recorded in 2011 included 285 million following the termination of development of olaparib for the maintenance treatment of serous ovarian cancer and an impairment of 150 million reflecting a lower probability of success assessment for TC5214 based on the results of the first two of four Phase III efficacy and tolerability studies.
See pages 72 and 68 respectively of the Therapy Area Review for more information.
The majority of our investments in intangible assets and goodwill arose from the restructuring of the joint venture with Merck in 1998 the acquisition of MedImmune in 2007 and the payments to partially retire Mercks interests in our products in the US in 2008 and 2010.
We are satisfied that the carrying values at 31 December 2011 are fully justified by estimated future cash flows.
The accounting for our arrangements with Merck is fully explained in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 181.
Further details of the estimates and assumptions we make in impairment testing of intangible assets are included in Note 9 to the Financial Statements from page 158.
Litigation
In the normal course of business contingent liabilities may arise from productspecific and general legal proceedings from guarantees or from environmental liabilities connected with our current or former sites.
Where we believe that potential liabilities have a less than 50% probability of crystallising or where we are unable to make a reasonable estimate of the liability we treat them as contingent liabilities.
These are not provided for but are disclosed in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 181.
In cases that have been settled or adjudicated or where quantifiable fines and penalties have been assessed and which are not subject to appeal or other similar forms of relief or where a loss is probable more than 50% assessed probability and we are able to make a reasonable estimate of the loss we indicate the loss absorbed or the amount of the provision accrued.
Where it is considered that the Group is more likely than not to prevail or in the rare circumstances where the amount of the legal liability cannot be estimated reliably legal costs involved in defending the claim are charged to profit as they are incurred.
Where it is considered that the Group has a valid contract which provides the right to reimbursement from insurance or otherwise of legal costs andor all or part of any loss incurred or for which a provision has been established and we consider recovery to be virtually certain then the best estimate of the amount expected to be received is recognised as an asset.
Assessments as to whether or not to recognise provisions or assets and of the amounts concerned usually involve a series of complex judgements about future events and can rely heavily on estimates and assumptions.
AstraZeneca believes that the provisions recorded are adequate based on currently available information and that the insurance recoveries recorded will be received.
However given the inherent uncertainties involved in assessing the outcomes of these cases and in estimating the amount of the potential losses and the associated insurance recoveries we could in future periods incur judgments or insurance settlements that could have a material adverse effect on our results in any particular period.
The position could change over time and there can therefore be no assurance that any losses that result from the outcome of any legal proceedings will not exceed the amount of the provisions that have been booked in the accounts.
Although there can be no assurance regarding the outcome of legal proceedings we do not currently expect them to have a material adverse effect on our financial position but they could significantly affect our financial results in any particular period.
Postretirement benefits We offer postretirement benefit plans which cover many of our employees around the world.
In keeping with local terms and conditions most of these plans are defined contribution in nature where the resulting income statement charge is fixed at a set level or is a set percentage of employees pay.
However several plans mainly in the UK which has by far the largest single scheme the US and Sweden are defined benefit plans where benefits are based on employees length of service and final salary typically averaged over one three or five years.
The UK and US defined benefit schemes were closed to new entrants in 2000.
All new employees in these countries are offered defined contribution schemes.
As detailed in Note 18 to the Financial Statements from page 165 the benefits provided by the UK pension plan were also modified during 2010.
Financial Review
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 96 Financial Review In applying IAS 19 we recognise all actuarial gains and losses immediately through reserves.
This methodology results in a less volatile income statement charge than under the alternative approach of recognising actuarial gains and losses over time.
Investment
The trustees follow a strategy of awarding mandates to specialist active investment managers which results in a broad diversification of investment styles and asset classes.
The investment approach is intended to produce less volatility in the plan asset returns.
In assessing the discount rate applied to the obligations we have used rates on AA corporate bonds with durations corresponding to the maturities of those obligations except in Sweden where we have used rates on government bonds as the market in high quality bonds is insufficiently deep.
In all cases the pension costs recorded in the Financial Statements are assessed in accordance with the advice of independent qualified actuaries but require the exercise of significant judgement in relation to assumptions for future salary and pension increases longterm price inflation and investment returns.
Taxation
Accruals for tax contingencies require management to make judgements and estimates in relation to tax audit issues and exposures.
Amounts accrued are based on managements interpretation of countryspecific tax law and the likelihood of settlement.
Tax benefits are not recognised unless the tax positions are probable of being sustained.
Once considered to be probable management reviews each material tax benefit to assess whether a provision should be taken against full recognition of the benefit on the basis of potential settlement through negotiation andor litigation.
All such provisions are included in current liabilities.
Any recorded exposure to interest on tax liabilities is provided for in the tax charge.
AstraZeneca faces a number of transfer pricing audits in jurisdictions around the world and in some cases is in dispute with the tax authorities.
These disputes usually result in taxable profits being increased in one territory and correspondingly decreased in another.
Our balance sheet positions for these matters reflect appropriate corresponding relief in the territories affected.
Further details of the estimates and assumptions we make in determining our recorded liability for transfer pricing audits and other tax contingencies are included in the tax section of Note 25 to the Financial Statements on page 189.
SarbanesOxley Act Section 404 As a consequence of our NYSE listing AstraZeneca is required to comply with those provisions of the SarbanesOxley Act applicable to foreign issuers.
Section 404 of the SarbanesOxley Act requires companies annually to assess and make public statements about the quality and effectiveness of their internal control over financial reporting.
Our approach to the assessment has been to select key transaction and financial reporting processes in our largest operating units and a number of specialist areas such as financial consolidation and reporting treasury operations and taxation so that in aggregate we have covered a significant proportion of each of the key line items in our Financial Statements.
Each of these operating units and specialist areas has ensured that its relevant processes and controls are documented to appropriate standards taking into account in particular the guidance provided by the SEC.
We have also reviewed the structure and operation of our entity level control environment.
This refers to the overarching control environment including structure of reviews checks and balances that are essential to the management of a wellcontrolled business.
The Directors have concluded that our internal control over financial reporting is effective at 31 December 2011 and the assessment is set out in the Directors Responsibilities for and Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting on page 140.
KPMG Audit Plc has audited the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting at 31 December 2011 and as noted in the Auditors Reports on the Financial Statements and on Internal Control over Financial Reporting SarbanesOxley Act Section 404 on page 141 their report is unqualified.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011
Business Review
Financial Review 97 healthcollaboration Fighting the rise of cardiovascular disease According to some studies up to 50% of people in certain Gulf states are affected by high cholesterol.
To fight this we have launched a unique educational programme called Safe  Heart designed to bring together all stakeholders to improve awareness and reduce cholesterol levels.
In 2009 a partnership between local cardiac societies and AstraZeneca launched the first large observational study of its kind CEPHEUS in the Gulf states and Saudi Arabia.
It analysed the current management of cholesterol treatment among more than 5000 adult patients being treated with statins.
Preliminary results showed that 50% of the studied population did not reach their cholesterol treatment goals.
The Safe  Heart programme is a practical response to this issue taking a holistic societywide approach to driving improvements.
The programme includes working with physicians to stress the importance of reaching cholesterol goals and helping them improve cholesterol management.
It works with patients carers and the general public to increase awareness and promote treatment adherence and lifestyle changes.
We are also working with health authorities and governments in the fight against the rise of cardiovascular disease in the region.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 98 Health Collaboration Corporate Governance Board of Directors and Senior Executive Team A diverse team with the skills and experience to lead the business This section briefly describes how the Group is organised including the overall structure and principal roles and responsibilities of the Board its committees and the SET.
Board composition processes and responsibilities The Board comprises two Executive Directors the CEO and the CFO and nine NonExecutive Directors.
The membership of the Board at 31 December 2011 and information about individual Directors is contained in the Board of Directors section below and overleaf.
All Directors are collectively responsible for the success of the Group.
In addition the NonExecutive Directors are responsible for exercising independent objective judgement in respect of Board decisions and for scrutinising and challenging management.
The NonExecutive Directors also have various responsibilities concerning the integrity of financial information internal controls and risk management.
Length of tenure of NonExecutive Directors years Gender split of Directors
Female
Directors nationalities
US
UK
Swedish
Board composition AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance Board of Directors and Senior Executive Team 99 1 Louis Schweitzer 69 NonExecutive Chairman Chairman of the Nomination and Governance Committee and member of the Remuneration Committee Appointed as a Director in March 2004 and as Chairman in January 2005.
Louis Schweitzer has extensive leadership experience at both executive and nonexecutive levels in large multinational companies.
He is NonExecutive Chairman of AB Volvo and a NonExecutive Director of BNPParibas Veolia Environnement SA and L Oral SA.
Previously he has held the roles of NonExecutive Chairman Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Renault SA.
2 David Brennan 58
Executive Director and Chief Executive Officer
Appointed as a Director in March 2005 and as CEO in January 2006.
David Brennan is President of the International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Associations IFPMA and a member of the executive board of the European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations EFPIA.
He is a past Chairman of the board of the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America PhRMA and remains a member of the PhRMA board.
From 2001 until January 2006 he was President and Chief Executive Officer of the Companys North American subsidiary.
He was Chairman of the board of the Southeastern Pennsylvania Chapter of the American Heart Association 20042006.
He began his career in 1975 at Merck where he started as a sales representative in the US division and later worked in sales and marketing management in the US and international divisions.
He joined Astra Merck in 1992 and helped to build the joint venture into a multibillion dollar business in the US.
He is an alumnus of Gettysburg College where he studied Business
3 Simon Lowth 50 Executive Director and Chief Financial Officer Appointed as a Director and as CFO in November 2007.
Simon Lowth is also a NonExecutive Director of Standard Chartered PLC.
He was previously at ScottishPower Energy where he was Finance Director a position he left following completion of the sale of the company to Iberdrola S.
His move to ScottishPower followed 15 years experience with the global management consultancy McKinsey and Company where he advised leading multinational companies on a wide range of strategic financial and operational issues.
He has an engineering degree from Cambridge University and an MBA from the London Business School.
4 Michele Hooper 60 Senior independent NonExecutive Director Chairman of the Audit Committee and member of the Nomination and Governance Committee Appointed as a Director in July 2003 and as senior independent NonExecutive Director in April 2007.
Michele Hooper is a recognised corporate governance expert and has considerable healthcare industry expertise.
She is President and Chief Executive Officer of The Directors Council a private company which she cofounded in 2003 that works with corporate boards to increase their independence effectiveness and diversity and a nonexecutive member of the boards of UnitedHealth Group Inc. and PPG Industries Inc.
Previously she was President and Chief Executive Officer of Stadtlander Drug Company Inc.
International Businesses of Caremark International.
5 Bruce Burlington 63 NonExecutive Director and member of the Science Committee and the Audit Committee Appointed as a Director in August 2010.
Bruce Burlington is a pharmaceutical product development and regulatory affairs consultant and brings extensive experience in those areas to the Board.
He is also a nonexecutive board member of Cangene Corporation and a member of the scientific advisory boards of the International Medical Foundation and H.
Lundbeck AS.
Previously he spent 17 years with the FDA serving as director of the FDAs Center for Devices and Radiological Health as well as holding a number of senior roles in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.
After leaving the FDA he served in a series of senior executive positions at Wyeth now part of Pfizer.
6 JeanPhilippe Courtois 51 NonExecutive Director and member of the Audit Committee Appointed as a Director in February 2008.
JeanPhilippe Courtois has close to 30 years experience in the global technology industry and is President of Microsoft International a board member of PlaNet Finance and Microsofts official representative at the Institut
Previously he was Chief Executive Officer and President of Microsoft EMEA and has served as cochairman of the World Economic Forums Global Digital Divide Initiative Task Force and on the European Commission Information and Communication Technology Task Force.
In 2009 he also served as an EU Ambassador for the Year of Creativity and Innovation and in 2011 was named as one of Techs Top 25 by The Wall Street Journal Europe.
Board of Directors Board of Directors and Senior Executive Team AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 100 Board of Directors and Senior Executive Team 7 Rudy Markham 65 NonExecutive Director and member of the Audit Committee and the Remuneration Committee Appointed as a Director in September 2008.
Rudy Markham has significant international business and financial experience having formerly held a number of senior commercial and financial positions worldwide with Unilever culminating in his appointment as Chief Financial Officer of Unilever.
He is currently Chairman and Non Executive Director of Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and a nonexecutive member of the boards of United Parcel Services Inc.
PLC and Legal and General plc.
He is also a nonexecutive member of the board of the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office a member of the supervisory board of CSM NV a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants and a Fellow of the Association of Corporate Treasurers.
8 Dame Nancy Rothwell 56 NonExecutive Director Chairman of the Science Committee member of the Remuneration Committee and the Nomination and Governance Committee Appointed as a Director in April 2006.
Nancy Rothwell has responsibility for overseeing Responsible Business.
Nancy Rothwell is a distinguished life scientist and academic and is the President and ViceChancellor of the University of Manchester.
She is also President of the Society of Biology and a member of the Prime Ministers Council for Science and Technology.
Previously she has served as President of the British Neuroscience Association and has been on the councils of the Medical Research Council the Royal Society the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council the Academy of Medical Sciences and Cancer Research UK.
9 The Right Honourable Baroness Shriti Vadera 49 NonExecutive Director and member of the Audit Committee Appointed as a Director in January 2011.
Shriti Vadera has significant experience of emerging markets and knowledge of global finance and public policy.
She is a NonExecutive Director of BHP Billiton Plc and BHP Billiton Limited.
She advises funds governments and companies and has recently undertaken a number of international assignments including advising the Republic of Korea as Chair of the G20 the government of Dubai on the restructuring of Dubai World Temasek Holdings Singapore on strategy and Allied Irish Banks on restructuring and European policy.
She was Minister in the UK government from 2007 to 2009 most latterly in the Cabinet Office and Business Department working on the governments response to the financial crisis.
From 1999 to 2007 she was on the Council of Economic Advisers HM Treasury focusing on business and international economic issues.
Prior to that she spent 14 years in investment banking with S G Warburg UBS in banking project finance and corporate finance specialising in emerging markets.
10 John Varley 55 NonExecutive Director Chairman of the Remuneration Committee and member of the Nomination and Governance Committee Appointed as a Director in July 2006.
John Varley was formerly Group Chief Executive of the Barclays Group having held a number of senior positions with the bank during his career including that of Group Finance Director.
He brings additional international executive business leadership experience to the
He is also a NonExecutive Director of BlackRock Inc.
Rio Tinto plc and Rio Tinto Limited Chairman of Business Action on Homelessness and of Marie Curie Cancer Care President of the Employers Forum on Disability a member of the International Advisory Panel of the Monetary Authority of Singapore and Honorary President of the UK Drug Policy Commission.
11 Marcus Wallenberg 55 NonExecutive Director and member of the Science Committee Appointed as a Director in April 1999.
Marcus Wallenberg has international business experience across a broad range of industry sectors including the pharmaceutical industry from his directorship with Astra AB prior to 1999.
He is the Chairman of Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB AB Electrolux Saab AB and LKAB and a NonExecutive Director of Stora Enso Oyj Temasek Holdings Limited and the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation.
Other officers of the Company at 31 December included members of the SET as set out on page 102 and Adrian Kemp Company Secretary.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance Board of Directors and Senior Executive Team 101 1 David Brennan
Chief Executive Officer
See page 100.
2 Simon Lowth Chief Financial Officer See page 100.
3 Katarina Ageborg Chief Compliance Officer Katarina Ageborg was appointed Chief Compliance Officer in July and has overall responsibility for the delivery design and implementation of AstraZenecas compliance responsibilities.
Since joining AstraZeneca in 1998 she has held a series of senior legal roles supporting Commercial and Regulatory and most recently led the Global IP function from 2008 to 2011.
Prior to joining AstraZeneca she established her own law firm in Sweden and worked as a lawyer practising on both civil and criminal cases.
4 Martin Mackay President Global RandD Martin Mackay joined AstraZeneca in July 2010.
He leads a global organisation tasked with advancing a portfolio of investigational medicines across a range of disease areas.
Prior to joining AstraZeneca he was the President of PharmaTherapeutics RandD at
His career at Pfizer spanned 15 years where he held various leadership roles including the President of RandD.
He serves on the Scientific and Regulatory Committee of the industry trade group PhRMA and cochairs the USIndia BioPharma and Healthcare Summit Advisory Board.
He is a Visiting Professor at the University of Lincoln UK.
5 Jeff Pott General Counsel Jeff Pott was appointed General Counsel in January 2009 and has overall responsibility for all aspects of AstraZenecas Legal and IP function.
He joined AstraZeneca in 1995 and has worked in various litigation roles where he has had responsibility for IP antitrust and product liability litigation.
Prior to joining AstraZeneca he spent five years at the US legal firm Drinker Biddle and Reath LLP where he specialised in pharmaceutical product liability litigation and antitrust advice and litigation.
He received his bachelors degree in political science from Wheaton College and his Juris Doctor Degree from Villanova University School of Law.
Senior Executive Team Board of Directors and Senior Executive Team David Smith Executive VicePresident Operations and Information Services David Smith joined AstraZeneca in 2006 as Executive VicePresident
He leads AstraZenecas global manufacturing and supply organisation and is also responsible for the Safety Health and Environment Regulatory Compliance Procurement and Engineering functions and has overall responsibility for IS.
He spent his early career in pharmaceuticals initially with the Wellcome Foundation in the UK.
He subsequently spent nine years in the consumer goods sector working for Este Lauder Inc. chain roles.
In 2003 he returned to the pharmaceutical sector and joined Novartis in Switzerland.
7 Lynn Tetrault Executive VicePresident Human Resources and Corporate Affairs Lynn Tetrault was appointed Executive VicePresident Human Resources and Corporate Affairs in 2007  having previously been VicePresident Corporate Affairs.
She has also held the role of VicePresident HR Global Drug Development and VicePresident HR for the US subsidiary of AstraZeneca following the merger between Astra and Zeneca.
She started her career in private law practice where she specialised in general corporate and healthcare law.
She joined Astra USA in 1993 as Associate General Counsel in the companys legal department.
She received her bachelors degree from Princeton University and her law degree from the University of Virginia Law School.
8 Tony Zook Executive VicePresident Global Commercial Operations Tony Zook was appointed Executive VicePresident of AstraZenecas Global Commercial organisation in January 2010.
He has responsibility for worldwide sales and marketing activities as well as the commercial infrastructure in support of those efforts.
Prior to his current role he was President and CEO for AstraZenecas US business and headed AstraZenecas Global Marketing function.
He was also President of
He has held various other positions in AstraZenecas sales and marketing organisation.
He joined Astra USA in 1997 as VicePresident Marketing and Sales having begun his pharmaceutical career at Berlex Laboratories Inc.
He earned a bachelors degree in biology from Frostburg University and an associates degree in chemical engineering from Pennsylvania State University.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 102 Board of Directors and Senior Executive Team The principles set out in the UK Corporate Governance Code remain the primary standards and guidance for corporate governance within
The Board its Committees and individual Directors apply those principles in all aspects of their work.
The Boards Committees play an essential role in good governance.
Under the chairmanship of Michele Hooper and John Varley respectively the Audit Committee and the Remuneration Committee carry significant workloads and discharge their responsibilities on behalf of the Board with rigour and diligence.
More information about their work is set out in the report that follows and in the
Directors Remuneration Report.
As Chairman of the Nomination and Governance Committee I believe we have made good progress in recent years in succession planning at Board and senior executive level.
Our work includes paying attention to the composition of the Board and its Committees consideration of both planned and unplanned succession scenarios and recognition of the importance of gender and other diversity in good governance.
For reasons of confidentiality it is often not possible to report in detail on much of this work.
The Board itself is mindful of the need to monitor its own performance and improve it where we can.
We approach each annual performance evaluation of the Board and its Committees with an open mind.
While reassured by the results of the evaluation in 2011 which was facilitated by external consultants the report that follows summarises areas for further improvement which include expanding the role played by the Science Committee in assurance work under the competent and committed chairmanship of Nancy Rothwell.
Louis Schweitzer
In this part of the Annual Report we explain our approach to corporate governance and describe in general terms how our business is organised and managed.
Corporate governance We have prepared this Annual Report with reference to the UK Corporate Governance Code published by the UK Financial Reporting Council FRC in May 2010.
This Corporate Governance Report together with other sections of this Annual Report describes how we apply the main principles of good governance in the UK Corporate Governance Code.
We have complied throughout the accounting period with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code which is available on the FRCs websitesite
The roles of Chairman and CEO are split.
Louis Schweitzer our NonExecutive Chairman is responsible for leadership of the
Our CEO David Brennan leads the SET and has executive responsibility for running our business.
The Board comprises nine NonExecutive Directors including the Chairman and two Executive Directors  the CEO and the CFO Simon Lowth.
All Directors are collectively responsible for our longterm success.
In addition the NonExecutive Directors are responsible for exercising independent objective judgement in respect of Board decisions and for scrutinising and challenging the actions of executive management.
The Board runs an annual strategy review process.
The CEO the CFO and the SET take the lead in developing our strategy which is then reviewed constructively challenged and approved by the Board.
Michele Hooper who joined the Board as a NonExecutive Director in 2003 was appointed as our senior independent NonExecutive Director in April 2007.
The role of the senior independent Non Executive Director is to provide a sounding board for the Chairman and to serve as an intermediary for the other Directors when necessary.
The senior independent NonExecutive Director is also available to shareholders if they have concerns that contact through the normal channels of Chairman or Executive Directors has failed to resolve or for which such contact is inappropriate.
There are four principal Board Committees the Audit Committee the Remuneration Committee the Nomination and Governance Committee and the Science Committee.
The membership and work of these Committees is described below.
In addition there may from time to time be constituted ad hoc Board Committees for specific projects or tasks.
In these cases the scope and responsibilities of the Committee are documented.
The Board provides adequate resources to enable each Committee to undertake its duties.
Reserved matters and delegation of authority The Board maintains and periodically reviews a list of matters that are reserved to and can only be approved by the Board.
These include the appointment termination and remuneration of any Director approval of the annual budget any item of fixed capital expenditure or any proposal for the acquisition or disposal of an investment or business which exceeds 150 million the raising of capital or loans by the Company subject to certain exceptions the giving of any guarantee in respect of any borrowing of the Company and allotting shares of the Company.
The matters that have not been expressly reserved to the Board are either delegated by the Board to its Committees or to the CEO.
The CEO is responsible to the Board for the management development and performance of our business in relation to those matters in respect of which he has been delegated authority from the Board.
Although the CEO retains full responsibility for the authority delegated to him by the Board he has established and chairs the SET which is the vehicle through which he exercises certain of that authority in respect of our business.
The roles of the Board the Board Committees the Chairman the CEO and the SET are documented as are the Boards delegated authorities and reserved powers.
Corporate Governance Report Louis Schweitzer Chairman and Chairman of the Nomination and Governance Committee AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance Report 103 Corporate Governance Corporate Governance Report Operation of the Board The Board is responsible for setting our strategy and policies oversight of risk and corporate governance and also monitors progress towards meeting our objectives and annual plans.
The Board discharges these responsibilities through a programme of meetings that includes regular reviews of financial performance and critical business issues and the formal annual strategy review day.
The
Board also aims to ensure that a good dialogue with our shareholders takes place and that their issues and concerns are understood and considered.
The Board held seven meetings and its annual strategy review day in 2011.
With the exception of two Board meetings in September and the strategy day in the same month which were held at our site in Wilmington in the US all the meetings took place in London UK.
The Board is currently scheduled to meet six times and hold a strategy review day in 2012 and will meet at such other times as may be required to conduct business.
As part of the business of each Board meeting the CEO typically submits a progress report on each key business area giving details of progress against the goals the Board has approved.
To ensure that the Board has good visibility of the key operating decisions of the business members of the SET routinely attend Board meetings on a rotational basis and Board members regularly meet other senior executives throughout the year.
The Board also receives accounting and other management information about our resources and presentations from internal and external speakers on legal governance and regulatory developments.
At the end of Board meetings the NonExecutive Directors meet without the Executive Directors present to review and discuss any matters that have arisen during the meeting andor such other matters as may appear to the NonExecutive Directors to be relevant in properly discharging their duty to act independently.
Board effectiveness Composition of the Board succession planning and diversity The Nomination and Governance Committee and where appropriate the full Board regularly review the composition of the Board and the status of succession to both senior executive management and Boardlevel positions.
Directors have regular contact with and access to succession candidates for senior executive management positions.
The Board aims to maintain a balance in terms of the range of experience and skills of individual Board members which includes relevant international business pharmaceutical industry and financial experience as well as appropriate scientific and regulatory knowledge.
The biographies of Board members set out from pages 100 to 101 give more information about current Directors in this respect.
The Board views gender nationality and cultural diversity among Board members as important considerations when reviewing the composition of the Board.
The Board recognises in particular the importance of the debate about gender diversity prompted by the publication in the UK in February 2011 of the report by Lord Davies Women on Boards.
Since the formation of AstraZeneca in 1999 the proportion of women Board members has been approximately 25% and the Board intends to continue with its current approach to diversity in all its aspects while at the same time seeking Board members of the highest calibre and with the necessary experience and skills to meet the needs of the Company and its shareholders.
Information about our approach to diversity in the organisation below Boardlevel can be found in the People section on page 41.
The following changes to the composition of the Board have occurred during the period covered by this Annual Report Shriti Vadera was appointed as a NonExecutive Director and a member of the Audit Committee with effect from 1 January 2011.
Jane Henney a NonExecutive Director retired from the Board on 28 April 2011.
Independence of the NonExecutive Directors During 2011 the Board considered the independence of each NonExecutive Director for the purposes of the UK Corporate Governance Code and the corporate governance listing standards of the NYSE Listing Standards.
With the exception of Marcus Wallenberg the Board considers that all of the NonExecutive Directors are independent.
Louis Schweitzer was considered by the Board to be independent upon his appointment as Chairman in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the test of independence is not appropriate in relation to the Chairman after his appointment.
Marcus Wallenberg was appointed as a Director of Astra in May 1989 and subsequently became a Director of the Company in 1999.
Until September 2005 he was a member of the board of directors and the Chief Executive Officer of Investor AB which has a 4.02% interest in the issued share capital of the Company as at 2 February 2012.
Wallenberg family foundations remain Investor ABs largest shareholders in terms of votes controlled.
For these reasons the Board does not believe that Marcus Wallenberg can be determined independent under the UK Corporate Governance Code.
However the Board believes that he has brought and continues to bring considerable business experience and makes a valuable contribution to the work of the Board.
In April 2010 Marcus Wallenberg was appointed by the Board as a member of the Science Committee reflecting his interest in innovation and RandD knowledge of the history of the Company and its scientific heritage and culture and his broad experience of other industries and businesses in which innovation and RandD are important determinants of success.
The Board has also considered in particular the position of Michele Hooper who joined the board of UnitedHealth Group as a Non Executive Director in 2007.
The Boards approval of this appointment was conditional on Michele Hooper resigning from the board of UnitedHealth Group in the event of a conflict or nonindependence.
It is the Boards view that Michele Hooper is independent and that she discharges her duties in a properly independent manner constructively and appropriately challenging the Executive Directors and the Board.
Conflicts of interest The Articles enable the Directors to authorise any situation in which a Director has an interest that conflicts or has the potential to conflict with the Companys interests and which would otherwise be a breach of the Directors duty under section 175 of the Companies Act 2006.
The Board has a formal system in place for Directors to declare such situations to be considered for authorisation by those Directors who have no interest in the matter being considered.
In deciding whether to authorise a situation the nonconflicted Directors must act in the way they consider in good faith would be most likely to promote the success of the Company and they may impose limits or conditions when giving the authorisation or subsequently if they think this is appropriate.
Situations considered by the Board and authorisations given are recorded in the Board minutes and in a register of conflicts maintained by the Company Secretary and reviewed annually by the Board.
The Board considers that this system continues to operate effectively.
Appointments to the Board The Nomination and Governance Committee section on page 109 gives information about the appointment process for new Directors.
Newly appointed Directors are provided with comprehensive documentation containing information about the Group and their role as NonExecutive Directors.
They also typically attend tailored induction programmes that take account of their individual skills and experience.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 104 Corporate Governance Report Time commitment Our expectation is that NonExecutive Directors should be prepared to commit about 15 days per annum as a minimum to the Groups business.
In practice Board members time commitment usually exceeds this minimum expectation when all the work that they undertake for the Group is considered particularly in the case of the Chairman of the Board and the Chairmen of the Board Committees.
As well as their work in relation to formal Board and Board Committee meetings the NonExecutive Directors also commit time throughout the year to meetings and telephone calls with various levels of executive management visits to AstraZenecas sites throughout the world and for new NonExecutive Directors induction sessions and site visits.
The Audit Committee section from page 107 contains information about Audit Committee members visits to our business in Brazil Russia and China during 2011.
In addition Board or Board Committee meetings were held at our sites in Wilmington US Gaithersburg US Mlndal Sweden and Alderley Park UK during the year.
On occasions when a Director is unavoidably absent from a Board or Board Committee meeting for example through illness or where a meeting clashes with his or her existing commitments he or she still receives and reviews the papers for the meeting and typically provides verbal or written input ahead of the meeting usually through the Chairman of the Board or the Chairman of the Board Committee so that his or her views are made known and considered at the meeting.
In addition given the nature of the business to be conducted some Board meetings are convened at short notice which can make it difficult for some Directors to attend due to prior commitments.
Information and support The Company Secretary is responsible to the Chairman for ensuring that all Board and Board Committee meetings are properly conducted that the Directors receive appropriate information prior to meetings to enable them to make an effective contribution and that governance requirements are considered and implemented.
The Company maintained directors and officers liability insurance cover throughout 2011.
The Directors are also able to obtain independent legal advice at the expense of the Company as necessary in their capacity as Directors.
The Company has entered into a deed of indemnity in favour of each Board member since 2006.
These deeds of indemnity are still in force and provide that the Company shall indemnify the Directors to the fullest extent permitted by law and the Articles in respect of all losses arising out of or in connection with the execution of their powers duties and responsibilities as Directors of the Company or any of its subsidiaries.
This is in line with current market practice and helps us attract and retain highquality skilled Directors.
Performance evaluation During the year the Board conducted the annual evaluation of its own performance and that of its Committees and individual Directors.
The review was facilitated by an external consultancy Lintstock Ltd Lintstock a Londonbased corporate advisory firm that provides objective and independent counsel to leading European companies.
For a number of years Lintstock has supplied software and services to the Company Secretarys team for the webbased questionnaires used for internal Board performance evaluations and for the management of insider lists.
Other than these limited instances Lintstock is not a supplier to the Company and was able to act as a robust and independent external facilitator for the Board performance evaluation.
The 2011 evaluation involved a series of webbased questionnaires and individual meetings between Lintstock and each Board member.
Lintstock then prepared and discussed with the Chairman and the Company Secretary a draft report of their findings.
The final report was circulated to the full Board and discussed at the Board meeting held in December.
The evaluation covered a range of topics including the composition of the Board the effectiveness of its strategic oversight Board members involvement in the affairs of the Company outside Board meetings decision making and time management the nature and quality of the information and general support provided to the Board its approach to risk management and oversight of internal controls and succession planning and how effectively it prioritises matters.
Separate questionnaires covered the operation and effectiveness of the Boards committees.
The review concluded that the Board operates effectively and in an open manner.
Board members have a good level of involvement in matters between Board meetings.
The points to be addressed arising from the review include further improvements in the use of the Boards time in terms of Board meeting arrangements and how agenda items are scheduled and approached further refinement of the composition of the Board over time consideration of a short strategic update during the year between the annual strategy days in September minor improvements to the information provided to Board members in terms of content and format more involvement by the Science Committee in assurance work on behalf of the Board and continuing the improvements made in 2011 to the review by the Board of SETlevel succession plans.
As part of the assessment process each Director responded to a questionnaire about their individual contribution to the work of the Board and personal development needs following which they had individual discussions with the Chairman to follow up their responses.
Each Director continues to perform effectively and to demonstrate commitment to the role.
Board and Board Committee meeting attendance in 2011 Name Board Audit Remuneration Nomination and Governance David Brennan 7 7 Bruce Burlington 7 7 3 3 JeanPhilippe Courtois 6 7 4 6 Jane Henney Michele Hooper 7 7 6 6  4 4 Simon Lowth 7 7 Rudy Markham 7 7 5 6 5 5 Nancy Rothwell 7 7  5 5 3 3 Louis Schweitzer 7 7  5 5 4 4 Shriti Vadera 7 7 6 6 John Varley 7 7  5 5 4 4 Marcus Wallenberg 6 7 Jane Henney retired from the Board on 28 April 2011.
Number in brackets denotes number of meetings during the year which Board members are entitled to attend.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance Report 105 Corporate Governance Corporate Governance Report The Boards annual performance evaluation was previously externally facilitated in 2008.
The Board intends to continue to comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code guidance that the evaluation should be externally facilitated at least every three years.
Reelection of Directors In accordance with Article 66 of the Articles all Directors retire at each AGM and may offer themselves for reelection by shareholders.
Accordingly all the Directors will retire at the AGM in April 2012.
The
Notice of AGM will give details of those Directors seeking reelection.
Accountability
Risk management and internal control The NonExecutive Directors have various responsibilities concerning the integrity of financial information internal controls and risk management.
The Board has overall responsibility for our system of internal controls and risk management policies and is also responsible for reviewing their effectiveness.
During 2011 the Directors have continued to review the effectiveness of our system of controls risk management and our highlevel internal control processes.
These reviews have included an assessment of internal controls and in particular financial operational and compliance controls and risk management and their effectiveness supported by management assurance of the maintenance of controls reports from GIA as well as the external auditor on matters identified in the course of its statutory audit work.
The system is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable not necessarily absolute assurance of effective operation and compliance with laws and regulations.
Underpinning these reviews is an annual letter of assurance process by which responsible managers confirm the adequacy of their systems of internal financial and nonfinancial controls their compliance with Group policies and relevant laws and regulations including the industrys regulatory requirements and that they have reported any control weaknesses through our continuous assurance process.
The internal control framework has been in operation throughout 2011 and continues to operate up to the date of the approval of this Annual
The Directors believe that the Group maintains an effective embedded system of internal controls and complies with the Turnbull Report guidance and in the view of the Directors no significant deficiencies have been identified in the system.
Further information about the ways in which we manage our business risks is set out in the Risk section from page 129 which also contains a list of the principal risks and uncertainties that we face.
Remuneration
Information about our approach to remuneration and the role and work of the Remuneration Committee including our policy on executive remuneration is set out in the Directors Remuneration Report from page 113.
Relations with shareholders In our financial and business reporting to shareholders and other interested parties by means of quarterly halfyearly and annual reports we aim to present a balanced and understandable assessment of our strategy financial position and prospects.
We make information about the Group available to shareholders through a range of media including a fully integrated html corporate websitesite containing a wide range of data of interest to institutional and private investors.
We consider our website to be an important means of communication with our shareholders.
The Company has been authorised by shareholders to place shareholder communications such as the Notice of AGM and this Annual Report on the corporate website in lieu of sending paper copies to shareholders unless specifically requested by shareholders.
While recognising and respecting the fact that some of our shareholders may have different preferences about how they receive information from us we will continue to promote the benefits of electronic communication given the advantages that this has over traditional paperbased communications both in terms of the configurability and accessibility of the information provided and the consequent cost savings and reduction in environmental impact associated with reduced printing and distribution costs.
We have frequent discussions with institutional shareholders on a range of issues.
These include individual meetings with some of our largest institutional shareholders to seek their views.
Board members are kept informed of any issues and receive regular reports and presentations from executive management and our brokers in order to assist them to develop an understanding of major shareholders views about the Group.
From time to time we conduct an audit of institutional shareholders to ensure that we are communicating clearly with them and that a highquality dialogue is being maintained.
The results of this audit are reported to and discussed by the full Board.
In November we invited corporate governance representatives from our largest institutional shareholders to a meeting attended by Louis Schweitzer Chairman of the Board Michele Hooper senior independent NonExecutive Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee John Varley Chairman of the Remuneration Committee and Rudy Markham member of the Remuneration Committee and the Audit Committee.
Although the meeting was primarily focused on executive remuneration matters it provided an opportunity for shareholders to raise any broader corporate governance issues for discussion as well.
Board Committee membership Name Audit Remuneration Nomination and Governance Science Independent David Brennan na Bruce Burlington 3 3 3 JeanPhilippe Courtois 3 3 Jane Henney Michele Hooper Chair 3 3 Simon Lowth na Rudy Markham 3 3 3 Nancy Rothwell 3 3 Chair 3 Louis Schweitzer 3 Chair na Shriti Vadera 3 3 John Varley Chair 3 3 Marcus Wallenberg 3 As determined by the Board for UK Corporate Governance Code purposes.
Jane Henney retired from the Board on 28 April 2011.
Michele Hooper is the senior independent NonExecutive Director.
Louis Schweitzer was considered independent by the Board upon his appointment as Chairman.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the test of independence is not appropriate in relation to the Chairman after his appointment.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 106 Corporate Governance Report We also respond to individual ad hoc requests for discussions from institutional shareholders and analysts.
Our Investor Relations team acts as the main point of contact for investors throughout the year.
As discussed above the senior independent NonExecutive Director currently Michele Hooper is also available to shareholders if they have concerns that contact through the normal channels of Chairman CEO andor CFO has failed to resolve or in relation to which such contact is inappropriate.
All shareholders including private investors have an opportunity at the AGM to put questions to members of the Board about our operation and performance.
Formal notification of the AGM is sent to shareholders at least one month in advance.
The Chairmen of the Board Committees ordinarily attend the AGM to answer questions raised by shareholders.
In line with the UK Corporate Governance Code details of proxy voting by shareholders including votes withheld are given at the AGM and are posted on our website following the AGM.
Audit Committee The members of the Audit Committee are Michele Hooper Chairman of the Audit Committee JeanPhilippe Courtois Rudy Markham Shriti Vadera Bruce Burlington and until her retirement at the 2011 AGM Jane Henney.
They are or in the case of Jane Henney were all NonExecutive Directors.
The Board considers each member to be independent under the UK Corporate Governance Code and under the general guidance and specific criteria of the Listing Standards concerning the composition of audit committees applicable to nonUS companies listed on the NYSE.
In April 2011 we submitted the required annual written affirmation to the NYSE confirming our full compliance with those standards.
For the purposes of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Board remains satisfied that at least one member of the Audit Committee has recent and relevant financial experience.
At its meeting in December the Board determined that Michele Hooper and Rudy Markham are audit committee financial experts for the purposes of the SarbanesOxley Act.
The Deputy Company Secretary acts as secretary to the Audit Committee.
The core terms of reference of the Audit Committee include reviewing and reporting to the Board on Matters relating to the audit plans of the external auditor and GIA as well as oversight of the work of the Global Compliance function.
Our overall framework for internal control over financial reporting and for other internal controls and processes.
Our overall framework for risk management particularly financial risks.
Our accounting policies and practices.
Our annual and quarterly financial reporting including the critical estimates and judgements contained in our reporting.
Compliance with the Corporate Integrity Agreement CIA.
The Audit Committee is responsible for notifying the Board of any significant concerns of the external auditor or the VicePresident GIA arising from their audit work any matters that may materially affect or impair the independence of the external auditor any significant deficiencies or material weaknesses in the design or operation of our internal control over financial reporting or other internal controls and any serious issues of noncompliance.
It oversees the establishment implementation and maintenance of our Code of Conduct and other related policies.
It monitors the Companys response to letters requesting information and investigations initiated by regulatory and governmental authorities such as the SEC and the US Department of Justice pertaining to matters within the remit of the Audit Committees work.
It has established procedures for the receipt and handling of complaints concerning accounting or audit matters.
It recommends to the Board the appointment of the external auditor subject to the approval of the Companys shareholders at a general meeting.
Shareholders in a general meeting authorise the Directors to fix the remuneration of the external auditor.
The Audit Committee reviews and approves the appointment and dismissal of the VicePresident GIA.
The Audit Committee maintains policies and procedures for the preapproval of all audit services and permitted nonaudit services undertaken by the external auditor the principal purpose of which is to ensure that the independence of the external auditor is not impaired.
The policies and procedures cover three categories of work audit services auditrelated services and tax services.
The policies define the type of work that falls within each of these categories and the nonaudit services that the external auditor is prohibited from performing under the rules of the SEC and other relevant UK and US professional and regulatory requirements.
The preapproval procedures permit certain audit auditrelated and tax services to be performed by the external auditor during the year subject to fee limits agreed with the Audit Committee in advance.
The CFO supported by the VicePresident Group Finance monitors the status of all services being provided by the external auditor.
The procedures also deal with placing nonaudit work out for tender where appropriate.
Authority to approve work in excess of the preagreed fee limits is delegated to the Chairman of the Audit Committee in the first instance.
A standing agenda item at Audit Committee meetings covers the operation of the preapproval procedures and regular reports are provided to the full Audit Committee.
The Audit Committee held six scheduled meetings in 2011.
The individual attendance record of members of the Audit Committee is set out in the Board and Board Committee meeting attendance in 2011 table on page 105.
Following each Audit Committee meeting the Chairman of the Audit Committee reported to the Board on the principal matters covered at the meeting and minutes of the meetings were circulated to all Board members.
In addition the Chairman of the Audit Committee held regular scheduled calls between Audit Committee meetings with each of the VicePresident GIA the Chief Compliance Officer the CFO and the lead partner of the external auditor.
During 2011 members of the Audit Committee met individual managers or groups of managers on a number of occasions in order to gain a deeper insight into areas relevant to the Audit Committees work and to provide an opportunity to discuss specific areas of interest.
In particular members of the Audit Committee travelled to our marketing companies in Brazil and Russia as well as to our marketing company and RandD and manufacturing sites in China to meet senior leaders in these important Emerging Markets.
During these visits Audit Committee members were able to gain a greater understanding of the unique business and cultural dynamics of each of these markets and to hear how our local operations meet the challenges presented by these developing economies within the context of our global compliance framework.
During the year in line with its normal practice the Audit Committee also held a number of private meetings without management present with the VicePresident GIA the Global Compliance Officer and following her appointment the Chief Compliance Officer which position replaced the Global Compliance Officer the General Counsel and the lead partner from the Companys external audit firm.
The purpose of these meetings was to facilitate free and open discussions between Audit Committee members and those individuals separately from the main sessions of the Audit Committee which were also attended by the CEO the CFO the General Counsel and the VicePresident Group Finance.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance Report 107 Corporate Governance Corporate Governance Report During 2011 and January 2012 in addition to the discussions noted above the Audit Committee also considered and discussed the following matters The key elements of the financial statements and estimates and judgements contained in our financial disclosures which were reviewed and various accounting matters considered.
The reports received from the external auditor concerning its audit of the Financial Statements of the Group and from management GIA Global Compliance and the external auditor on the effectiveness of our system of internal controls and in particular our internal control over financial reporting.
This included review and discussion of the results of the continuous assurance and annual letter of assurance processes.
The Audit Committee also reviewed quarterly activity reports of audit work carried out by GIA and the status of follow up actions with management as well as reports from the Global Compliance function.
The systems and processes that management has developed pertaining to risk identification classification and mitigation.
Compliance with the applicable provisions of the SarbanesOxley
In particular the Audit Committee regularly reviewed the status of compliance with the programme of internal controls over financial reporting implemented pursuant to section 404 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act.
The Audit Committee increased its focus on ISIT controls in the context of the changes to the Groups ISIT environment described below.
Further information about this is set out in the SarbanesOxley Act Section 404 section on page 97.
Data about reports made by employees via the AZethics telephone and online facilities and other routes regarding potential breaches of the Code of Conduct together with the results of inquiries into these matters.
Quarterly reports received from the US Compliance Officer responsible for monitoring the US businesss compliance with the CIA for more information about the obligations imposed on the Board by the CIA see below.
The decision to terminate AstraZenecas existing outsource relationship for IS infrastructure services and transition to a new multisourcing operating model.
In addition regular progress updates from ISIT on the status of the transition from the existing outsource provider to the new providers.
Accounting issues relevant to litigation and taxation matters.
Reports from the Group Treasury function and in particular reports concerning the Groups liquidity and cash position and the appropriateness of its cash management policies in the context of the current economic situation.
Other reports concerning the GIA Global Compliance and Finance functions including the internal audit plan and progress and plans of the Global Compliance function.
Reports from the General Counsel on the status of certain litigation matters and governmental investigations.
The provisions of the new UK Bribery Act the Companys revised Global AntiBribery Policy and its Global External Interactions Policy.
These revised policies are available on our websitesite The amount of audit and nonaudit fees of the external auditor throughout 2011.
The Audit Committee was satisfied throughout the year that the objectivity and independence of the external auditor were not in any way impaired by the nature of the nonaudit work undertaken by the external auditor during the year the level of nonaudit fees charged for such work or any other facts or circumstances.
Further information about the audit and nonaudit fees for 2011 is disclosed in Note 27 to the Financial Statements on page 190.
A review of compensation policy across the Commercial organisation.
This review was held with the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
A review and assessment of the Audit Committees performance including an externally facilitated review of performance which concluded that such performance was satisfactory.
In addition to the quarterly reporting stipulated by the CIA as described above a number of other obligations required by the CIA were discharged by members of the Board and the Audit Committee during 2011.
For example all members of the Board completed the annual CIArequired training addressing the Code of Conduct and the elements of the CIA and the US compliance programme.
Furthermore the Board adopted a resolution signed by each member in respect of the first 12 month reporting period under the CIA.
The resolution summarised the Boards oversight of the US compliance programme and stated that to the best of the Boards knowledge AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP and AstraZeneca LP AstraZenecas principal US trading entities have implemented an effective US compliance programme to meet Federal healthcare programme FDA and CIA requirements.
In line with best practice we periodically consider how the audit requirements of the Group are best served in the context of business need and the prevailing external environment and against the background of this review consider whether to undertake a formal tendering programme with audit firms of appropriate size and calibre.
In accordance with its normal practice the Audit Committee reviewed a satisfaction survey and performance evaluation of our external auditor which included in addition to the Audit Committees own consideration assessment and input from key stakeholders within the Group.
In addition in 2011 the Audit Committee requested and reviewed a formal proposal from KPMG Audit Plc KPMG to continue as the Companys auditors for the period 2012 to 2014.
The Audit Committee considered KPMGs compliance with the independence criteria under the relevant statutory regulatory and ethical standards applicable to auditors and assessed its objectivity taking into account the level of challenge provided around the critical estimates and judgements involved in our financial reporting and the quality of our internal control over financial reporting.
Having considered all these factors and weighed them against its experience of working with other external firms the Audit Committee unanimously recommended to the Board that a resolution for the reappointment of KPMG as the Companys external auditor for the year ending 31 December 2012 be proposed to shareholders at the AGM in April 2012.
Consistent with current market practice KPMGs services to the Company are provided pursuant to terms of engagement which are reviewed by the Audit Committee.
These terms of engagement do not include any contractual obligations under which the Directors would be prevented from appointing a different audit firm were they to consider this to be in the best interests of the Group.
The Audit Committee through management continues to maintain contact and dialogue with other major audit firms who are familiar with the Groups business for succession purposes as required.
This is reported to the Audit Committee in order to ensure a smooth transition from the current auditor should this be necessary.
At the January 2012 meeting the CFO presented to the Audit Committee the conclusions of the CEO and the CFO following the evaluation of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures required by Item 15a of Form 20F at 31 December 2011.
Based on their evaluation the CEO and the CFO concluded that as at that date we maintain an effective system of disclosure controls and procedures.
There was no change in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the period covered by this Annual Report that has materially affected or is reasonably likely to materially affect our internal control over financial reporting.
The Audit Committee is currently scheduled to meet six times in 2012 and will meet at such other times as may be required.
The Audit Committees terms of reference are available on our websitesite AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 108 Corporate Governance Report Code of Conduct Our Code of Conduct the Code which is available on our websitesite applies to all Directors officers fulltime parttime and temporary staff at all levels in every country where we operate.
Further information relating to the Code can be found in the Compliance section on page 43.
A Group Finance Code of Conduct complements the Code.
It applies to the CEO the CFO the Groups principal accounting officers including key Finance staff in major overseas subsidiaries and all Finance function employees.
This reinforces the importance of the integrity of the Groups Financial Statements the reliability of the accounting records on which they are based and the robustness of the relevant controls and processes.
Remuneration Committee The principal role of the Remuneration Committee is to consider and set on behalf of the Board the remuneration including pension rights and compensation payments of Executive Directors and other senior executives.
It also considers and sets the remuneration of the Chairman in conjunction with the senior independent NonExecutive Director and in the absence of the Chairman.
No Director is involved in deciding his or her own remuneration.
More information is set out in the Directors Remuneration Report from page 113.
Nomination and Governance Committee The Nomination and Governance Committees role is to recommend to the Board any new Board appointments and to consider more broadly succession plans at Boardlevel.
Any decisions relating to the appointment of Directors are made by the entire Board based on the merits of the candidates and the relevance of their background and experience measured against objective criteria with care taken to ensure that appointees have enough time to devote to our business.
The Nomination and Governance Committee also advises the Board periodically on significant developments in corporate governance and the Companys compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
During 2011 the members of the Nomination and Governance Committee were Louis Schweitzer Chairman of the Nomination and Governance Committee Michele Hooper John Varley Jane Henney until her retirement from the Board on 28 April 2011 and Nancy Rothwell from 28 April 2011.
They are all NonExecutive Directors.
The Board considers them all to be independent.
Louis Schweitzer was considered by the Board to be independent upon his appointment as Chairman in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the test of independence is not appropriate in relation to the Chairman after his appointment.
The Company Secretary acts as secretary to the Nomination and Governance Committee.
The Nomination and Governance Committee met four times in 2011.
The individual attendance record of its members is set out in the Board and Board Committee meeting attendance in 2011 table on page 105.
During the year it reviewed the knowledge experience and balance of the Board overall and considered its likely future requirements given the strategic and business objectives of the
In addition the Nomination and Governance Committee received reports about the most significant corporate governance developments and their potential impact on the Group.
The Nomination and Governance Committees terms of reference are available on our websitesite Science Committee The Science Committees core role continues to be to provide assurance to the Board regarding the quality competitiveness and integrity of the Groups RandD activities by way of meetings and dialogue with our RandD leaders and other scientist employees visits to our RandD sites throughout the world and review and assessment of the approaches we adopt in respect of our chosen Therapy Areas scientific technology and RandD capabilities deployed decision making processes for RandD projects and programmes quality of our scientists.
The Science Committee also reviews from time to time important bioethical issues that we face and assists in the formulation of and agrees on behalf of the Board appropriate policies in relation to such issues.
It may also consider from time to time future trends in medical science and technology.
The Science Committee does not review individual RandD projects.
During 2011 the members of the Science Committee all of whom have a knowledge of or an interest in life sciences were Nancy Rothwell Chairman of the Science Committee Bruce Burlington Marcus Wallenberg and Jane Henney until her retirement from the Board on 28 April 2011 all NonExecutive Directors.
The President Global RandD the Executive VicePresident Innovative Medicines the Executive VicePresident Biologics RandD and the Executive Vice President Global Medicines Development attend meetings of the Science Committee.
The VicePresident Strategy Portfolio and Performance RandD also attends all meetings and acts as secretary to the Science Committee.
The Science Committee met twice in 2011 at Alderley Park UK and at Mlndal Sweden.
The Science Committees terms of reference are available on our websitesite US corporate governance requirements Our ADSs are traded on the NYSE and accordingly we are subject to the reporting and other requirements of the SEC applicable to foreign private issuers.
Section 404 of the SarbanesOxley Act requires companies to include in their annual report on Form 20F filed with the SEC a report by management stating its responsibility for establishing internal control over financial reporting and to assess annually the effectiveness of such internal control.
We have complied with those provisions of the SarbanesOxley Act applicable to foreign private issuers.
The Board continues to believe that the Group has a sound corporate governance framework good processes for the accurate and timely reporting of its financial position and results of operations and an effective and robust system of internal controls.
We have established a Disclosure Committee further details of which can be found in the Disclosure Committee section on page 110.
The Directors assessment of the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting is set out in the Directors Responsibilities for and Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting section in the Financial Statements on page 140.
We are required to disclose any significant ways in which our corporate governance practices differ from those followed by US companies under the Listing Standards.
In addition we must comply fully with the provisions of the Listing Standards relating to the composition responsibilities and operation of audit committees applicable to foreign private issuers.
These provisions incorporate the rules concerning audit committees implemented by the SEC under the SarbanesOxley Act.
We have reviewed the corporate governance practices required to be followed by US companies under the Listing Standards and our corporate governance practices are generally consistent with those standards.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance Report 109 Corporate Governance Corporate Governance Report Business organisation Senior Executive Team The CEO has established and chairs the SET.
The SET normally meets once a month to consider and decide major business issues or as otherwise required by business needs.
Typically it also reviews in advance of submission to the Board those matters that are to be submitted to the Board for review and decision.
Katarina Ageborg joined the SET as Chief Compliance Officer on 1 July 2011.
In addition to the CEO the SETs members are the CFO the President Global RandD the Executive VicePresident Global Commercial Operations the General Counsel the Chief Compliance Officer the Executive VicePresident Human Resources and Corporate Affairs and the Executive VicePresident Operations and Information
The Company Secretary acts as secretary to the SET.
Portfolio Investment Board PIB The CEO has established and chairs the PIB a seniorlevel crossfunctional governance body which seeks to maximise the value of our internal and external RandD investments through robust transparent and wellinformed decisions that drive business performance and accountability.
Specifically the PIB has responsibility for Reviewing the RandD portfolio by conducting an objective and transparent review of RandD performance product launch profile and alignment with corporate strategy.
The review is also an important step in reconfirming the RandD threeyear budget.
Approving the business plans of the Innovative Medicines Units and the Global Medicines Development demand forecast by confirming the allocation of resources across early and late stage elements of RandD as well as assessing licensing and acquisition opportunities.
Approving late stage internal and external investment decisions.
Monitoring environmental events that could have a major transformational or disruptive impact on our business.
In addition to the CEO the PIBs members are the CFO the President Global RandD the Executive VicePresident Global Commercial Operations the Executive VicePresident Innovative Medicines the Executive VicePresident Biologics RandD the Executive VicePresident Global Medicines Development and the Vice President Strategic Partnering and Business Development.
The PIB has a permanent secretary and typically meets at around the time of the monthly SET meetings or as otherwise required by business needs.
Disclosure Committee Our disclosure policy provides a framework for the handling and disclosure of inside information and other information of interest to shareholders and the investment community.
It also defines the role of the Disclosure Committee.
The members of the Committee are the CEO the CFO who chairs the Committee the President Global RandD the General Counsel the VicePresident Corporate Affairs the VicePresident Investor Relations and the VicePresident Group
The Deputy Company Secretary acts as secretary to this
The Committee meets regularly to assist and inform the decisions of the CEO concerning inside information and its disclosure.
Periodically it reviews our disclosure controls and procedures and its own operation as part of work carried out to enable management and the Board to assure themselves that appropriate processes are operating for our planned disclosures such as our quarterly results announcements and scheduled investor relations events.
Disclosure of information to auditors The Directors who held office at the date of approval of this Annual Report confirm that so far as they are each aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware and each Director has taken all the steps that he or she ought to have taken as a Director to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditors are aware of that information.
Compliance and Group Internal Audit The role of the Global Compliance function is to manage and maintain the compliance programme infrastructure and to help embed a culture of ethics and integrity in the Group.
Global Compliance works closely with GIA with whom it provides assurance reporting to the Audit
During 2012 the Global Compliance function will continue to focus on ensuring the delivery of an aligned approach to compliance that addresses key risk areas across the business.
During 2011 a new Chief Compliance Officer formerly designated Global Compliance Officer was appointed to head the Global Compliance function.
The reporting of all Global Compliance programme resources including regional and local compliance officers is centralised under the Chief Compliance Officer who reports to the CEO and is a member of the SET.
The Chief Compliance Officer heads the Global Compliance leadership team whose remit is to oversee and coordinate the implementation of an effective global compliance programme and evaluate its effectiveness.
It does this by assessing key compliance risks within and across the SET functions working with GIA to ensure coordination of compliance auditing and monitoring reviewing results addressing significant policy violations and identifying trends.
Global Compliance provides direct assurance to the Audit Committee on matters concerning compliance issues with a particular focus on compliance with antibribery and anticorruption legislation as well as IFPMA EFPIA and PhRMA codes.
Complementing this GIA carries out a range of audits that include compliancerelated audits and reviews of the assurance activities of other Group assurance functions.
The results from these activities are reported to the Audit Committee.
GIA is an independent appraisal function that derives its authority from the Board through the Audit Committee.
Its primary role is to provide reasonable and objective assurance to the Directors regarding the adequacy and effectiveness of the Groups risk management and control framework and the internal controls over key business risks including financial controls and compliance with laws regulations and policies.
GIA seeks to discharge the responsibilities set down in its charter by reviewing The processes for ensuring that key business risks are effectively managed.
The financial and operational controls that help to ensure that the Groups assets are properly safeguarded from losses including fraud.
The controls that help to ensure the reliability and integrity of management information systems.
The processes for ensuring compliance with policies and procedures external legislation and regulation.
In addition to fulfilling its primary remit of assurance to the Audit Committee GIA acts as a source of constructive advice and best practice assisting senior management to improve governance control compliance and risk management.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 110 Corporate Governance Report Other matters Corporate governance statement under the UK Disclosure and Transparency Rules The disclosures that fulfil the requirements of a corporate governance statement under the Disclosure and Transparency Rules can be found in this section and in other parts of this Annual Report as listed below each of which is incorporated into this section by reference Significant holders of the Companys shares contained in the Shareholder Information section from page 203.
Articles contained in the Corporate Information section on page 208.
Amendments to the Companys Articles contained in the Corporate Information section on page 208.
Subsidiaries and principal activities The Company is the holding company for a group of subsidiaries whose principal activities are described in this Annual Report.
Principal subsidiaries and their locations are given in the Principal Subsidiaries section in the Financial Statements on page 191.
Branches and countries in which the Group conducts business In accordance with the Companies Act 2006 we disclose below our subsidiary companies that have representative or scientific branches offices outside the UK AstraZeneca UK Limited Albania Algeria Angola Azerbaijan Belarus Bulgaria Chile Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Georgia Ghana scientific office Ireland Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya scientific office Macedonia Nigeria Romania Russia Serbia and Montenegro Slovenia and Ukraine.
AstraZeneca AB Egypt scientific office Saudi Arabia scientific office and Slovakia.
AstraZeneca Singapore Pte Limited Cambodia and Vietnam.
Distributions to shareholders and dividends for 2011 Our distribution policy comprises both a regular cash dividend and a share repurchase component further details of which are set out in the Financial Review on page 90 and Notes 20 and 21 to the Financial Statements on page 170.
The Companys dividends for 2011 of 2.80 175.5 pence SEK 18.54 per Ordinary Share amount to in aggregate a total dividend payment to shareholders of 3678 million.
Two of our employee share trusts AstraZeneca Share Trust Limited and AstraZeneca Quest Limited waive their right to a dividend on the Ordinary Shares that they hold and instead receive a nominal dividend.
A shareholders resolution was passed at the 2011 AGM authorising the Company to purchase its own shares.
Pursuant to this resolution the Company repurchased and subsequently cancelled 127.4 million Ordinary Shares with a nominal value of 0.25 each at an aggregate cost of 6015 million representing 9.9% of the total issued share capital of the Company.
The Company will seek a renewal of permission from shareholders to purchase its own shares at the AGM on 26 April 2012.
During our share repurchase programmes that operated between 1999 and 2011 a total of 557.4 million Ordinary Shares were repurchased and subsequently cancelled at an average price of 2767 pence per share for a consideration including expenses of 26717 million.
Going concern accounting basis Information on the business environment in which we operate including the factors underpinning the industrys future growth prospects are included in the section describing The pharmaceutical industry from page 15.
Details of our product portfolio our approach to product development and a summary of our development pipeline are included in the Business Review from page 30.
Additional information on our Therapy Areas is included in the Therapy Area Review from page 56.
The table showing our development pipeline can be found from page 199.
The financial position of the Group our cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the Financial Review from page 86.
In addition Notes 15 and 23 to the Financial Statements from pages 161 and 171 respectively include our objectives policies and processes for managing our capital our financial risk management objectives details of our financial instruments and hedging activities and our exposures to credit market and liquidity risk.
Further details of our cash balances and borrowings are included in Notes 13 and 14 to the Financial Statements from pages 160 to 161 respectively.
We have considerable financial resources available.
At 31 December 2011 we had 9.2 billion in financial resources cash balances of 7.6 billion and committed undrawn bank facilities of 3.6 billion with only 2.0 billion of debt due within one year.
Our revenues are largely derived from sales of products which are covered by patents and for which in the short term at least demand is relatively unaffected by changes in the global economy.
In addition we have a wide diversity of customers and suppliers across different geographic areas.
As a consequence the Directors believe that we are well placed to continue to manage our business risks successfully.
The Directors have a reasonable expectation that we have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing this Annual Report and the Financial Statements.
Changes in share capital Changes in the Companys Ordinary Share capital during 2011 including details of the allotment of new shares under the Companys share plans are given in Note 20 to the Financial Statements on page 170.
Directors shareholdings The Articles require each Director to be the beneficial owner of Ordinary Shares in the Company with an aggregate nominal value of 125 which currently represents at least 500 shares.
Such holding must be obtained within two months of the date of the Directors appointment.
At 31 December 2011 all of the Directors complied with this requirement and full details of each Directors interests in shares of the Company are set out in the Directors interests in shares section on page 125.
Information about the shareholding expectations of the Remuneration Committee in respect of Executive Directors and SET members and the Board in respect of NonExecutive Directors is also set out in the Directors Remuneration Report from page 113.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance Report 111 Corporate Governance Corporate Governance Report Political donations Neither the Company nor its subsidiaries made any EU political donations or incurred any EU political expenditure in 2011 and they do not intend to do so in the future in respect of which shareholder authority is required or for which disclosure in this Annual Report is required under the Companies Act 2006.
However to enable the Company and its subsidiaries to continue to support interest groups or lobbying organisations concerned with the review of government policy or law reform without inadvertently breaching the Companies Act 2006 which defines political donations and other political expenditure in broad terms a resolution will be put to shareholders at the 2012 AGM similar to that passed at the 2011 AGM to authorise the Company and its subsidiaries to make donations to political parties or independent election candidates make donations to political organisations other than political parties incur political expenditure up to an aggregate limit of 250000.
Corporate political contributions in the US are permitted in defined circumstances under the First Amendment of the US Constitution and are subject to both federal and state laws and regulations.
In 2011 the Groups US legal entities made contributions amounting in aggregate to 1099450 2010 1999150 to national political organisations statelevel political party committees and to campaign committees of various state candidates.
No corporate donations were made at the federal level and all contributions were made only where allowed by US federal and state law.
We publicly disclose details of our corporate US political contributionssite responsibilitytransparency.
The annual corporate contributions budget is reviewed and approved by the US General Counsel the US VicePresident Corporate Affairs and the President of our US business to ensure robust governance and oversight.
US citizens or individuals holding valid green cards exercised decision making over the contributions and the funds were not provided or reimbursed by any nonUS legal entity.
Such contributions do not constitute political donations or political expenditure for the purposes of the Companies Act 2006 and were made without any involvement of persons or entities outside the US.
Significant agreements There are no significant agreements to which the Company is a party that take effect alter or terminate on a change of control of the Company following a takeover bid.
There are no persons with whom we have contractual or other arrangements who are deemed by the Directors to be essential to our business.
Use of financial instruments Notes 15 and 23 to the Financial Statements from pages 161 and 171 respectively include further information on our use of financial instruments.
Creditor payment policy It is not our policy formally to comply with the Confederation of British Industrys code of practice on the prompt payment of suppliers.
It is however our policy to agree appropriate payment terms with all suppliers when agreeing to the terms of each transaction to ensure that those suppliers are made aware of the terms of payment and subject to their compliance to abide by the terms of payment.
The total amount of money owed by the Companys subsidiaries to trade creditors at the balance sheet date was equivalent to 50 days average purchases 2010 62 days.
A considerable part of the trade creditors balance continues to relate to the Merck account in the US which has particularly long contractual payment terms.
By removing this balance and other items not directly related to trade purchases in the US a more accurate average of 43 days is obtained 2010 57 days.
The Company has no external trade creditors.
Annual General Meeting The Companys AGM will be held on 26 April 2012.
The meeting place will be in London UK.
A Notice of AGM will be sent to all registered holders of Ordinary Shares and where requested to the beneficial holders of shares.
External auditor A resolution will be proposed at the AGM on 26 April 2012 for the reappointment of KPMG Audit Plc as auditor of the Company.
The external auditor has undertaken various nonaudit work for us during 2011.
More information about this work and the audit and nonaudit fees that we have paid are set out in Note 27 to the Financial Statements on page 190.
The external auditor is not engaged by us to carry out any nonaudit work in respect of which it might in the future be required to express an audit opinion.
As explained more fully in the Audit Committee section from page 107 the Audit Committee has established preapproval policies and procedures for audit and nonaudit work permitted to be carried out by the external auditor and has carefully monitored the objectivity and independence of the external auditor throughout 2011.
Bureau Veritas Bureau Veritas is an independent professional services company that specialises in quality health safety social and environmental management with a long history of providing independent assurance services.
Bureau Veritas has provided external assurance on corporate responsibility related information within this Annual Report and of the detailed content of the Responsibility section of our website.
Bureau
Veritas has found the information provided within this Annual Report to be accurate and reliable based on the evidence provided and subject to the scope objectives and limitations defined in the full assurance statement.
The full assurance statement which contains detailed scope methodology overall opinion and recommendations can be found on our websitesite The web page content assured by Bureau Veritas is marked at the bottom of each page.
Directors Report The Directors Report which has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 comprises the following sections Strategy and Performance
Business Review
Corporate Governance Development Pipeline Shareholder Information Corporate Information and has been signed on behalf of the Board.
A C N Kemp Company Secretary 2 February 2012 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 112 Corporate Governance Report Directors Remuneration Report I am pleased to introduce our Directors Remuneration Report the Report for 201 1 for which we seek approval at the Companys AGM in April.
The job of the Remuneration Committee the Committee is to promote longterm sustainable growth in shareholder value.
So its main focus is on developing policy and remuneration decisions that support the Groups strategy as a focused integrated innovation driven global prescriptionbased biopharmaceutical business.
This involves taking careful account of the interests of our stakeholders.
As your elected representatives our primary task is to invest shareholders money in the form of compensation resource wisely.
We are mindful of the UK Corporate Governance Codes main principle which guides us to award levels of remuneration that are sufficient to attract retain and motivate senior employees including Directors of the quality required to run the Group successfully while avoiding paying more than is necessary.
This means paying close attention to the design of incentive arrangements for Executive Directors SET members and other senior executives as well as to how our pay structures operate in practice.
To reinforce our objectivity and to complement the objective mindset that is brought to bear on remuneration decisions the Committee takes advice from Deloitte LLP directly appointed by the Committee independently of the Company.
Base salaries are benchmarked against relevant industry market data to ensure that they remain competitive but this is not done blindly continuously or in isolation the Committee takes care also to consider before making its decisions the overall performance of the business and the needs of the Company in terms of its strategic and operational targets.
We will not award increases that are not justified by individual performance.
For incentive arrangements the Committee aims to select performance criteria which are appropriate to the Companys circumstances and which will promote AstraZenecas success and competitiveness in the pharmaceutical industry.
Whether it is the combination of a balanced scorecard cash flow and EPS performance for the annual bonus or longerterm measures relating to shareholder value such as TSR used in the AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan PSP and the dividend hurdles in the AstraZeneca Investment Plan AZIP we seek to establish clear and fair links between individual and Group performance and appropriate levels of reward.
We try to keep in touch with what our shareholders are thinking.
There is an annual opportunity for our larger investors to meet me and Board colleagues to share their opinions and of course shareholders express their views by way of the shareholder vote on this Report at the AGM in April which is attended by many of our owners.
We are grateful for the support that shareholders have shown for our approach to executive remuneration last year 95% of the votes cast by shareholders supported the 2010 Directors Remuneration Report.
The Committee is also very aware of the position of employees throughout the Group how the remuneration principles established by the Committee translate into rewards for employees and the fairness of the rewards earned by Executive Directors SET members and other senior executives in the overall Group context especially in relation to annual salary increases.
We call for and analyse a significant amount of data relating to salaries bonus levels and incentive scheme awards across the Group.
We also consider the levels of share ownership among SET members and other senior executives.
We know that in making judgements about the pay of senior employees particularly the Executive Directors we must ensure that our decisions take account of the wider employee context.
How for example does any percentage increase in the base pay of the CEO sit alongside base pay increases of junior staff I hope that you can see in our decisions this year and in the behaviour of the CEO himself who has again declined an increase in base pay that we are sensitive to these important issues.
Before awarding an increase in base pay and longterm compensation opportunity to our CFO we consulted widely with our major shareholders.
The salary increase we have decided to award sits within the range of base pay increases awarded to the wider UK employees of the Group for 2012.
Going forward our intention is that any future increases for Executive Directors will be cost of living type increases made on an annual basis.
In the decisions that it makes the Committee seeks always to assess how these might affect AstraZenecas reputation.
We use our discretion to avoid mechanistic outcomes of remuneration arrangements that are not justified by the prevailing circumstances be it underlying financial performance or the way in which the Company does business.
We defer awards and have the ability to use clawback arrangements where appropriate to reinforce the importance of the Companys reputation and to deter inappropriate risk taking.
We have changed the format of the Report this year.
Without reducing disclosure we have sought in the first part to answer the question What was paid to the Executive Directors in 2011 and why We then set out extensive information of the sort that our shareholders are familiar with.
So the Report that follows is divided into three sections.
We start with What was paid to the Executive Directors in 2011 and why.
We follow this with a section headed How the Remuneration Committee approaches its work that describes how we aim to support business strategy link reward with performance and exercise judgement.
The third section describes the work of the Committee in 2011.
We conclude with an Additional information section containing the remainder of the information which shareholders habitually wish to see.
We would find it useful to receive feedback from shareholders on this new approach in due course.
We have noted the proposals on executive remuneration announced in January 2012 by the UK Secretary of State for Business Innovation and Skills.
This Report is likely to evolve further in response to developing legislation.
On behalf of the Committee I commend this Report to you.
John Varley Chairman of the Remuneration Committee John Varley NonExecutive Director and Chairman of the Remuneration Committee AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report 113 Directors Remuneration Report
In this section we have set ourselves the task of explaining as simply as we can what was paid to the Executive Directors during 2011 and why.
This Report has been prepared in accordance with the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 Regulations and meets the relevant requirements of the Financial Services Authoritys Listing Rules.
As required by the Regulations a resolution to approve this Report will be proposed at the AGM on 26 April 2012.
What was paid to the Executive Directors in 2011 and why The summaries below set out the quantitative data for each Executive Director including certain data for the preceding year to enable comparison.
We follow this with short qualitative comments relating to base pay annual bonus or Short Term Incentive STI Long Term Incentive LTI and benefits including pension.
David Brennan Base pay per annum and % changes over previous yeartel 997223 997223 972900 0% 2.5% 0% The Committee reviewed the CEOs base pay in December 2011 and decided to award an increase for 2012 of 2.5%.
This was within the range of salary increases for employees across the Group.
As in 2010 the CEO declined to accept any increase.
The CEO was awarded a bonus for performance during 2011 of 1325609 133% of base salary out of a maximum possible award of 180% of base salary the cash element of which will be paid in His bonus for performance during 2010 the cash element of which was paid in 2011 was 1583025 163% of base salary out of a maximum possible award of 180% of base salary The 2011 bonus was lower than the 2010 bonus by 16%.
The reasons for this are set out in the section below headed Variable elements of the CEOs and CFOs remuneration in 2011.
The CEO must defer onethird of any pretax bonus into Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
These are held for three years before being released.
The bonus is not pensionable.
The CEO received an LTI award in 2011 with an expected value of 250% of base salary Full details can be found on page 126.
Under the rules of the PSP and the AZIP in respect of any financial year of the Company the maximum market value of shares that may in theory be put under a PSP or an AZIP share award in respect of an employee is 500% of that employees base salary.
In respect of the LTI award made in 2011 the distribution between the PSP and the AZIP was in the ratio 75% to 25%.
During 2011 as a result of the vesting of the 2008 share award under the PSP the CEO received 201932 Ordinary Shares and a cash payment in respect of dividends accrued.
The CEO is entitled to standard noncash employment benefits such as healthcare benefits insurances and car purchase arrangements.
In relation to pension arrangements the CEOs pension entitlement is provided through a combination of the AstraZeneca US Defined Benefit Pension Plan and US defined contribution arrangements.
He has an accrued pension at 31 December 2011 of 978000 per annum 2010 972000 per annum from his defined benefit arrangements.
Full details can be found on page 118.
The Committee increased the CEOs shareholding requirement in January 2012 from 200% to 300% of base salary.
At 31 December 2011 the CEO had a beneficial shareholding of AstraZeneca shares which at that date had a value approximately equivalent to 815% of his 2011 base salary.
The factors considered by the Committee in assessing performance during 2011 and determining the bonus are summarised on page 116.
Each year in January the Committee determines bonuses for performance in the previous year and these are paid in February.
The Company estimates the expected value of LTI awards taking account of the likelihood of performance conditions and targets being achieved.
This figure includes an estimated 27089 shares posttax held in retention in the Deferred Bonus Plan.
Fixed
Base Salary
Bonus
PSP
AZIP
Fixed
Base Salary
Bonus
PSP
AZIP
Fixed
Base Salary
Bonus
PSP
SOP
David Brennan Components of remuneration  What was paid to the Chief Executive Officer % Bonus element is the actual bonus paid for the year in question.
PSP AZIP and SOP elements are on an expected value basis.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 114 Directors Remuneration Report Simon Lowth Base pay per annum and % changes over previous yeartel 660000 635500 620000 3.85% 2.5% 13% The Committee reviewed the CFOs base pay in December 2011 and decided to award an increase for 2012 of 3.85%.
This was within the range of salary increases for employees across the
The Committee consulted major shareholders and took their views into account before awarding this increase.
The CFO was awarded a bonus for performance during 2011 of 769902 121% of base salary out of a maximum possible award of 150% of base salary the cash element of which will be paid in His bonus for performance during 2010 the cash element of which was paid in 2011 was 918245 148% of base salary out of a maximum possible award of 150% of base salary The 2011 bonus was lower than the 2010 bonus by 16%.
The reasons for this are set out in the section below headed Variable elements of the CEOs and CFOs remuneration in 2011.
The CFO must defer one third of any pretax bonus into Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
These are held for three years before being released.
The bonus is not pensionable.
The CFO received an LTI award in 2011 with an expected value of 160% of base salary Full details can be found on page 126.
Under the rules of the PSP and the AZIP in respect of any financial year of the Company the maximum market value of shares that may in theory be put under a PSP or an AZIP share award in respect of an employee is 500% of that employees base salary.
After consulting major shareholders and taking their views into account starting in 2012 the Committee has decided to increase the target LTI award for the CFO from an expected value of 160% of base salary to 200%.
In respect of the LTI award made in 2011 the distribution between the PSP and the AZIP was in the ratio 75% to 25%.
During 2011 as a result of the vesting of the 2008 share award under the PSP the CFO received 73060 Ordinary Shares and a cash payment in respect of dividends accrued.
The CFO is entitled to standard noncash employment benefits such as healthcare benefits insurances and car purchase arrangements.
In relation to pension arrangements the CFO receives a payment equivalent to 24% of his base salary which amounted to 153000 in 2011 2010 149000 as a cash alternative to participation in a defined contribution pension scheme.
Full details can be found on page 118.
The Committee increased the CFOs shareholding requirement in January 2012 from 125% to 200% of base salary.
At 31 December 2011 the CFO had a beneficial shareholding of 68538 AstraZeneca shares which at that date had a value approximately equivalent to 321% of his 2011 base salary.
The factors considered by the Committee in assessing performance during 2011 and determining the bonus are summarised on page 116.
Each year in January the Committee determines bonuses for performance in the previous year and these are paid in February.
The Company estimates the expected value of LTI awards taking account of the likelihood of performance conditions and targets being achieved.
This figure includes an estimated 14312 shares posttax held in retention in the Deferred Bonus Plan.
Fixed
Base Salary
Bonus
PSP
AZIP
Fixed
Base Salary
Bonus
PSP
AZIP
Fixed
Base Salary
Bonus
PSP
SOP
Simon Lowth Components of remuneration  What was paid to the Chief Financial Officer % Bonus element is the actual bonus paid for the year in question.
PSP AZIP and SOP elements are on an expected value basis.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report 115 Directors Remuneration Report
Variable elements of the CEOs and CFOs remuneration in 2011 Bonus outcomes for 2011 For Executive Directors the principal drivers of annual bonus opportunity are EPS 27% weighting cash flow 9% weighting the Group scorecard 24% weighting and the relevant SET area scorecards 40% weighting.
In terms of the SET area scorecards an average of all SET area scorecards is used for the CEO and the Finance scorecard is used for the CFO.
The scorecards include categories relating to Values Pipeline and People.
At the beginning of 2011 the Committee set EPS cash flow and scorecard targets against which the performance of the Executive Directors has been measured.
At CER both revenue and Core operating profit for the year declined by 2% and 4% respectively.
This partly accounts for the reduction of 16% in the bonuses of the CEO and the CFO.
However
Core EPS increased by 7%.
There was strong doubledigit growth for Crestor Seroquel XR and Symbicort.
Emerging markets sales growth was 10% at CER.
Brilinta was approved and launched in the US and a number of other countries other products made good progress through regulatory approvals.
Both cash flow and EPS performance exceeded internal and external expectations.
Balanced against this were a number of pipeline disappointments including olaparib and TC5214 which both resulted in impairment charges.
The Company made net cash distributions to shareholders of 9370 million by way of dividends and the share buyback programme boosted by the successful disposal of Astra Tech.
In addition to a strong financial performance in a challenging environment significant work was undertaken in 2011 to continue promoting a culture of responsibility accountability and compliance.
The Company is ranked in the top 7% in the sector in the Dow Jones Sustainability World and European Indexes with its highest assessment score to date of 85%.
The annual bonus ranges for the CEO and the CFO in 2012 are unchanged from 2011.
For the CEO the range is 0180% of base salary and for the CFO it is 0150% of base salary.
Vesting of PSP awards in 2011 and 2012 The PSP share awards granted in 2008 in respect of the 20082010 performance period vested during 2011 at 125% for SET members including the CEO and the CFO whose awards were based on TSR alone following achievement of a relative TSR ranking of first in the comparator group over the performance period.
The Committee used its discretion to determine this vesting of the maximum PSP award because the Companys TSR performance was substantially better than that of the upper quartile of the comparator group in the 20082010 performance period a TSR of 55% for the Company versus 16% for the next best performing company in the comparator group.
The PSP share awards granted in 2009 in respect of the 20092011 performance period will vest during 2012 at 78% for SET members including the CEO and the CFO whose awards were based on TSR alone following achievement of a relative TSR ranking of fourth in the comparator group with a TSR of 35% over the performance period.
This is in accordance with the performance measures determined by the Committee.
Performance under the PSP in 2011 The TSR graphs on page 124 show for each PSP share award how the Companys TSR performance has compared with the TSR for the companies in the comparator group from the first day of the relevant performance period to 31 December 2011 and how the Company ranks against those other peer companies on this basis.
At the end of 2011 the Company is on track to meet the cash flow target.
We will continue to report on the performance of each PSP share award against the relevant performance target during the relevant vesting period.
Performance under the AZIP in 2011 Previously granted AZIP awards continued without lapsing as the fullyear dividend for 2011 was 2.80 per Ordinary Share which exceeded the 2009 and 2010 fullyear dividends of 2.30 and 2.55 per Ordinary Share respectively.
Dividend cover did not fall below the 1.5 times threshold.
How the Remuneration Committee approaches its work Remuneration Committee membership The Committee members are John Varley Chairman of the Committee Rudy Markham Louis Schweitzer and Nancy Rothwell.
Louis Schweitzer was considered by the Board to be independent upon his appointment as Chairman of the Board.
All other members of the Committee are independent NonExecutive Directors.
The
Company Secretary acts as the secretary to the Committee.
The Committee retains Deloitte LLP Deloitte represented by Carol Arrowsmith who provided independent advice on various matters it considered in 2011.
The cost of this service to the Company in 2011 was 118380 including VAT.
During the year Deloitte also provided taxation advice and other specific nonaudit services to the Group.
The Committee reviewed the potential for conflicts of interest and judged that there were no conflicts.
Committee terms of reference A copy of the Committees terms of reference is available on our websitesite The Committee conducted a review of its terms of reference during 2011.
A small number of changes were recommended to the Board principally to reflect updated guidance issued by the Association of British Insurers in September 2011.
The changes were approved by the Board in January 2012.
Supporting the business strategy The principal role of the Committee is to develop remuneration policies and practices that support the implementation of our business strategy and help create shareholder value over time.
The remuneration components for all employees including Executive Directors and SET members comprise fixed and variable performancerelated elements.
A summary of the main components of remuneration is set out on page 119.
Base pay and total compensation positioning against the relevant market is intended to be sufficient but no more than necessary to attract retain and develop highcalibre talent.
Variable pay forms a significant part of the overall remuneration opportunity for Executive Directors SET members and other senior executives.
It is linked to a range of measures designed to promote individual and team performance in a way that supports the Groups success.
Such measures are intended to stretch and challenge the relevant individuals while at the same time giving them an opportunity to participate as shareholders in the creation of longterm economic value.
This is made up of three elements The annual bonus drives and rewards shortterm performance against specific Group functional and individual business objectives.
The PSP rewards the generation of cash at levels to finance investment in the business debt repayment and the Companys shareholder distribution policy and outperformance of industry peers in terms of shareholder valuecreation measured by relative TSR.
The performance and holding periods of the AZIP are aligned to the Companys product development cycle reflecting the longterm investment horizons that are a feature of the industry.
Dividend based performance hurdles motivate the generation of returns for shareholders on a sustainable basis over an extended period of time.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 116 Directors Remuneration Report Linking reward with performance Executive Directors and other SET members are eligible to participate in different elements of variable performancerelated pay which are described in the Additional information section below.
The decision as to whether or not in any given year they receive any or all of their elements of variable pay is determined by the Committee which in making such a determination will typically have regard to the performance of the individual and the Group and will consider the elements of variable pay applicable to senior employees in other comparable organisations.
The Committee works with the Audit Committee to ensure that the Groups remuneration policies and practices achieve the right balance between appropriate incentives to reward good performance and managing risk in terms of employee behaviour and how the Company achieves its business objectives.
The AstraZeneca annual bonus plan in which all employees participate contains goals demonstrating a commitment to distinction through integrity to enhance reputation and avoid reputational damage.
All LTI plans operated by AstraZeneca contain clawback provisions.
Exercising judgement The Committee believes that an essential element of its approach is the exercise of its judgement and discretion in determining remuneration in order to reflect relevant circumstances and achieve the right balance between the interests of the business shareholders and employees.
The Committee always considers the overall performance of the Group when using its discretion under the terms of AstraZenecas remuneration arrangements.
This is to avoid mechanistic outcomes under the terms of any remuneration plan which would provide for rewards that are not justified either by underlying business performance or in circumstances where AstraZeneca has suffered reputational damage.
Aligning senior executives interests with those of shareholders Part of the annual bonus of Executive Directors and SET members is deferred into shares helping align senior executives interests with those of shareholders.
The proportion currently deferred into shares is onethird of the pretax annual bonus for Executive Directors and onesixth for other SET members.
The Committee reviews annually whether the proportion of bonus to be deferred should be changed in the light of market andor best practice developments.
The shares are acquired on the open market at the prevailing market price and held for a period of three years from the date of acquisition before being delivered to individual Executive Directors and other SET members.
In addition to partial bonus deferral there is a requirement for Executive Directors and other SET members to hold shares in the
The shareholding requirement for the CEO was increased in January 2012 from 200% to 300% of base salary and for the CFO from 125% to 200% of base salary.
The requirement for all other SET members is 125% of base salary.
In all aspects of its work the Committee considers both the external environment in which the Company operates and the guidance issued by organisations representing institutional shareholders.
It consults the Companys largest investors on general and specific remuneration and provides an annual opportunity for representatives of those investors to meet the Chairman of the Committee and other Committee and Board members.
Considering the wider employee context The Committee sets overall remuneration policy and makes decisions about specific remuneration arrangements in the broader context of employee remuneration throughout the Group.
The Committee annually reviews Group remuneration data including bonus data gender and geographical data in relation to base salaries and aggregate data about the shareholding levels of senior managers.
In particular in reviewing the base salaries of Executive Directors and SET members the Committee considers the overall level of any salary increases being awarded to employees across the Group in the relevant year.
Main work of the Remuneration Committee during the year The Committee met five times in 2011.
The individual attendance record of Committee members is set out on page 105.
At the invitation of the Committee except where their own remuneration was being discussed the CEO the Executive VicePresident Human Resources and Corporate Affairs the Global Head Reward and Employment and the VicePresident Global Compensation attended one or more Committee meetings in 2011 and provided advice and services that materially assisted the Committee.
The work of the Committee focused on the following principal matters during 2011 A review of the terms of senior executives remuneration packages on appointment promotion and termination including the remuneration packages on the appointment of a number of senior leaders in RandD.
The assessment of Group and individual performance against performance targets to determine the level of executive bonuses for 2010 and to set executive bonus performance targets for 2011.
The assessment of performance against targets to determine the level of vesting in 2011 under the PSP and to set PSP and AZIP performance thresholds for awards made in 2011.
The determination of awards made under the Groups main LTI plans the PSP the AZIP and the Global Restricted Stock Plan GRSP to SET members and other participants.
The determination of restricted share awards to a limited number of senior executives under the AstraZeneca Restricted Share Plan RSP.
The setting of the terms of appointment of Katarina Ageborg as Chief Compliance Officer and a SET member.
A review of performance metrics used by the RandD organisation.
The approval of rules of a new UK allemployee savingsrelated share option scheme which will be proposed to shareholders for approval at the 2012 AGM to replace the AstraZeneca Savings Related Share Option Plan which expires in 2013.
Jointly with the Audit Committee a review of compensation policy across the Commercial organisation.
The review and determination of incentive arrangements below SET level for a limited pool of eligible employees in the context of the Companys restructuring plans in Commercial and RandD.
A review of Group reward data including average salary data analysed by gender.
Consideration of the review of the Committees effectiveness carried out by the Board.
A benchmarking review of the Committees activities and policies against institutional investor guidelines.
A review of the levels of share ownership of Executive Directors other SET members and senior executives immediately below SET level.
A review of the pension entitlements of Executive Directors and other SET members.
A review of the proportion of Executive Directors and SET members annual cash bonuses that are deferred into shares with a threeyear vesting period.
A review of the performance of Deloitte the independent adviser to the Committee.
The submission by the Company of a response to the executive remuneration discussion paper published by the UK Department for Business Innovation and Skills in September 2011.
The preparation review and approval in January 2012 of this Report.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report 117 Directors Remuneration Report
Additional information
The Executive Directors pension arrangements disclosed in the Pension arrangements section on page 118 the Directors emoluments disclosed in the Directors emoluments in 2011 section from pages 123 to 124 and the details of the Directors interests in Ordinary Shares disclosed in the Directors interests in shares section excluding the Beneficial interests subsection from page 125 have been audited by KPMG Audit Plc.
Pension arrangements CEOs pension arrangements Defined benefit arrangements David Brennan is a member of the AstraZeneca US Defined Benefit Pension Plan US DBP by virtue of his membership of pension plans applicable to legacy Astra Merck employees.
On his appointment to the Board the rules of the US DBP were amended to remove bonus payments from the calculation of his pensionable pay.
Benefits for members of the US DBP are delivered on a taxqualified basis with accrued benefits that exceed specific limits under the plans formula and the US Tax Code being delivered through a supplementary nonqualified plan.
The normal pension age under the US DBP is 65.
However on leaving or retiring from employment David Brennan is eligible to take a pension or lump sum equivalent based on accrued service and final pensionable pay ie without actuarial reduction due to his satisfaction of a condition in the pension plan relating to the combined age and service exceeding 85 years.
David Brennans participation in the US DBP is subject to a service cap at 35 years service which has now been attained and therefore service beyond 35 years is not shown in the table below.
No further service accrual can be earned.
Members and in the event of death surviving spousesdependants can elect in relation to those benefits delivered on a taxqualified basis under the US DBP to take pensions in lump sum form based on actuarial valuation.
Members or spousesdependants may not make such an election in relation to any supplementary nonqualified benefits which must be taken in lump sum form.
Pension is payable to David Brennan in US dollars.
For ease of understanding the table below has been presented in both pounds sterling and US dollars using the exchange rates for 2011 set out on page 124.
Transfer values are calculated to be consistent with the value of the lump sum distribution equivalent to his deferred accrued pension annually.
Defined contribution arrangements In addition David Brennan as a US citizen is a contributing member of the US 401k savings plan.
He also participates in AstraZenecas Executive Deferred Compensation Plan EDCP which is operated as a supplemental nonqualified plan in respect of US employees should annual contributions exceed the limit applicable to contributions under the qualified 401k plan.
During 2011 total employer matching contributions of 96000 60000 2010 91000 59000 were made to his 401k plan and EDCP.
Member contributions of 719000 447000 were paid through salary sacrifice into the plans.
In the event of a US participant becoming incapacitated permanent health insurance cover will provide continuation of a proportion of salary subject to the satisfaction of certain medical criteria.
In the event of the death of a participant prior to retirement a life assurance policy will provide surviving spousesdependants with a lump sum equivalent to one times salary such salary being capped at the maximum pensionable salary under the plan.
CFOs pension arrangements Simon Lowth is eligible to join the AstraZeneca Group Self Invested Personal Pension UK Defined Contribution Plan UK DCP at a company contribution rate of 24% of annual base salary or alternatively to take the company contribution as a cash allowance.
Since joining AstraZeneca he has elected to take the cash allowance in lieu of a pension which during 2011 amounted to 153000 245000 2010 149000 230000.
In the event of a senior employee in the UK DCP including one who has taken an alternative cash allowance becoming incapacitated permanent health insurance cover provides continuation of a proportion of salary subject to the satisfaction of certain medical criteria.
In the event of death prior to retirement dependants are entitled to a lump sum secured from a multiple of 10 times salary capped at 4.3 million.
David Brennan Defined benefit arrangements Accrued pension at 1 January 2011 972 1555 Increase in accrued pension during year as a result of inflation Adjustment to accrued pension as a result of salary increase relative to inflation 6 10 Increase in accrued pension as a result of additional service Accrued pension at 31 December 2011 978 1565 Employee contributions during 2011 Transfer value of accrued pension at 31 December 2010 14211 22738 Transfer value of accrued pension at 31 December 2011 14055 22488 Change in transfer value during the period less employee contributions 156 250 Age at 31 December 2011 58 Pensionable service years at 31 December 2011 35 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 118 Directors Remuneration Report Components of remuneration for all employees Component of remuneration Role within the remuneration framework Summary of policy Applies to Base salary fixed Base fixed remuneration.
Based on conditions in the relevant market and recognising the value of an individuals sustained personal performance and contribution to the business taking account of the market rate for an individuals skills and experience.
Benchmarked against external comparators.
All employees Pension arrangements fixed Provision of retirement benefits.
Benchmarked against the relevant local employment market.
All employees Benefits fixed Provision of standard noncash employment benefits such as healthcare insurances and for certain employees facilitated car purchase arrangements.
Costeffective and compatible with relevant welfare arrangements and local market norms.
All employees Shortterm bonus variable An annual cash incentive opportunity determined by reference to Group functional and individual performance measured over a single financial year of the Company and taking into account external expectations of performance.
Differs by market but the Group performance measures ensure that all eligible employees receive an element of reward based on the Groups overall financial performance.
The functional goals are agreed by the Committee at the start of the year and are derived from the business scorecard the key elements of which are set out in the Our strategy section from page 19 and are monitored as part of the quarterly business review QBR process.
Embedded into these goals is a commitment to distinction through integrity to avoid any damage to reputation.
Individual goals are based on annual objectives which are linked to functional goals.
Performance measures for the annual bonus in respect of Executive Directors are set out in the Variable elements of the CEOs and CFOs remuneration in 2011 section on page 116.
All eligible employees Deferred bonus plan variable Aligns SET members interests with those of shareholders.
SET members must defer a proportion of their shortterm bonus onethird of pretax bonus for Executive Directors and onesixth for other SET members into Ordinary Shares or ADSs for a threeyear period.
SET members LTI plans variable Longterm equity incentive awards to provide individual executives and employees with total compensation opportunities that are competitive against local market practice for the achievement of operational excellence strong financial performance and actions that are closely aligned with the interests of shareholders.
The primary LTI plans in which SET members participate are the PSP and the AZIP.
AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan.
SET members and other senior executives AstraZeneca Investment Plan.
SET members Share Option Plan final awards made in 2009.
SET members and other senior executives Global Restricted Stock Plan.
Eligible employees globally Note Performance measures for the PSP and the AZIP are set out in the summary of those plans in the next section.
Other share plans All employee share participation arrangements including some that are taxapproved for example in the UK.
Examples include the Share Incentive Plan and the SavingsRelated Share Option Plan UK Eligible employees
Aligning SET members interests with those of shareholders.
The CEO is expected to hold shares equivalent to 300% of base salary the CFO 200% and other SET members 125%.
SET members Overall approach When assessing the overall value of a SET members remuneration the Committee considers both separately and in aggregate each component of the SET members total remuneration.
Further information on these plans is provided in Note 24 to the Financial Statements from page 176.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report 119 Directors Remuneration Report
Summary of the AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan PSP and the AstraZeneca Investment Plan AZIP
PSP
The PSP was approved by shareholders at the 2005 AGM and provides for the grant of performance share awards PSP Share Awards over Ordinary Shares or ADSs together Shares.
AZIP
The AZIP was approved by shareholders at the 2010 AGM and provides for the grant of share awards AZIP Share Awards over Shares.
Basis of participation
Participation in the PSP is highly selective and usually includes only senior employees on the basis of their performance.
Generally PSP Share Awards can be granted at any time although in practice they are awarded annually but not during a close or prohibited period of the Company.
In
2011 the main grant of PSP Share Awards was made on 28 March with a smaller grant of Share Awards approved by the Committee in relation to for example new appointments promotions and assignments being made on 26 August.
The number of Shares subject to a PSP Share Award is determined by reference to the market price of Shares over the threeday period immediately preceding the date of grant.
Details of PSP Share Awards granted to Executive Directors are shown in the Performance Share Plan table on page 126.
AZIP
Participation in the AZIP is highly selective and usually includes only senior employees on the basis of their performance.
In 2011 the main grant of AZIP Share Awards was made on 28 March with a further Share Award approved by the Committee in relation to Katarina Ageborgs appointment to the SET on 26 August.
The number of Shares subject to an AZIP Share Award is determined by reference to the market price of Shares over the threeday period immediately preceding the date of grant.
Details of AZIP Share Awards granted to Executive Directors are shown in the AstraZeneca Investment Plan table on page 126.
Individual limit
Under the PSP rules in respect of any financial year of the Company the maximum market value of Shares that may in theory be put under a PSP Share Award in respect of an employee is 500% of that employees base salary.
The actual individual limits that apply under the PSP subject to this maximum are set by the Committee from time to time.
AZIP
Under the AZIP rules in respect of any financial year of the Company the maximum market value of Shares that may in theory be put under an AZIP Share Award in respect of an employee is 500% of that employees base salary.
The actual individual limits that apply under the AZIP subject to this maximum are set by the Committee from time to time.
Performance conditions and performance targets
Other than in exceptional circumstances which are prescribed in the PSP rules the vesting of PSP Share Awards is contingent on the satisfaction of specified performance targets balanced equally between cash flow and TSR and continued employment with the Group.
In addition to the satisfaction of these performance targets PSP Share Awards will generally not vest until the third anniversary of the date of grant.
Fifty percent of the award is based on relative TSR against a selected peer group of global pharmaceutical companies of which 25% of the maximum award vests for performance at the median of the peer group 75% of the maximum award vests for upper quartile performance and 100% of the maximum award may vest at the Committees discretion if the Companys TSR performance is substantially better than that of the upper quartile of the comparator group.
For PSP Share Awards to vest at this level the Company would need to have sustained a level of performance significantly in excess of upper quartile over a period of years and the Committee would need to be satisfied that this was warranted.
The peer group for the TSR measure is Abbott BMS Eli Lilly and Company GSK Johnson and Johnson Merck Novartis Pfizer HoffmannLa Roche Ltd and SanofiAventis.
TSR measures share price growth and dividends reinvested in respect of a notional number of shares from the beginning of the relevant performance period to the end of it and ranks the companies in the selected comparator group by reference to their TSR achieved over that period.
The rank which the Companys TSR achieves over the performance period will determine how many Shares will vest under the relevant PSP Share Award.
Payouts against performance in relation to TSR for PSP Share Awards are expressed as a percentage of the maximum PSP Share Award currently payable shown within a range of 0% to 100%.
This presentation is shown in the table below.
TSR ranking of the Company Vesting % Below median 0 Median 25 Between median and upper quartile Pro rata Upper quartile 75 Significantly above upper quartile Up to 100 In addition to the above TSR performance target being met for each PSP Share Award the Committee has to satisfy itself that achievement of the TSR performance target is a genuine reflection of the Groups underlying financial performance.
It has the discretion to prevent PSP Share Awards from vesting or only to allow them to partially vest where this appears to the Committee to be warranted.
Fifty percent of the award vests subject to the achievement of the free cash flow target which operates as a cumulative cash flow target over the same threeyear performance period as the TSR measure.
The measure for the cash flow target is net cash flow before distributions and the level of vesting will be based on a sliding scale between a threshold cash flow target of 16 billion and an upper target of 23 billion.
Twenty five percent of the relevant portion of the award will vest for achievement of the threshold target rising on a sliding scale to full vesting for achievement of the upper target as shown in the table below.
Net cash flow is considered to be the most appropriate measure of cash flow performance because it relates to the residual cash available to finance additional investment in specific business needs debt repayments and our distribution policy.
The cash flow measure encompasses a number of important elements of operational and financial performance and helps to align executives rewards with shareholder value creation.
The level of vesting of this element is based on a sliding scale against a target that is intended to represent a significant challenge for the business.
It is intended that the Committee should have the discretion to adjust but on an exceptional basis only the free cash flow target during the performance period for material factors that might otherwise distort the performance measure in either direction.
This allows performance to be assessed against targets that have been set on a consistent basis.
For example adjustments may be required to reflect exchange rate movements significant acquisitions or divestments and major legal and taxation settlements.
Any major adjustments to the calculation are disclosed to shareholders.
There is no retesting of performance.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 120 Directors Remuneration Report Performance conditions and performance targets continued Adjusted cumulative cash flow Vesting % Less than 16 billion 0 16 billion 25 Between 16 billion and 23 billion Pro rata 23 billion and above 100
The AZIP is aligned to AstraZenecas targeted product development cycle reflecting the longterm investment horizons that are a feature of the industry.
The performance requirement attached to awards under the AZIP is a combination of dividend and dividend cover tests assessed over a period of up to four financial years beginning at the start of the first financial year of the Company in which the award is granted.
The AZIP is operated over a fouryear performance period Performance Period and a fouryear holding period Holding Period.
At the end of the Performance Period the extent to which the performance hurdle has been met will determine the number of Shares in respect of which the AZIP Share Award will vest at the end of the Holding Period.
The Committees intention in its choice of proposed performance tests has been to establish a performance requirement that motivates financial business performance that will generate returns for shareholders on a sustainable basis over an extended time period.
The performance hurdle for Share Awards made in 2011 is that The annual dividend per share paid to holders of Ordinary Shares is increased from 2.55 over the fouryear Performance Period 2.55 being the fullyear dividend for 2010 and Dividend cover based on reported earnings before restructuring costs does not fall below 1.5 times.
The performance hurdle for Share Awards made in 2010 is that The annual dividend per share paid to holders of Ordinary Shares is increased from 2.30 over the period 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2013 2.30 being the fullyear dividend for 2009 and Dividend cover over the same period based on reported earnings before restructuring costs does not fall below 1.5 times.
Performance PeriodHolding Period and vesting dates
In the case of all PSP Share Awards granted to date the performance target relates to the threeyear period commencing on 1 January of the year of grant.
Therefore for PSP Share Awards made in 2011 the performance period runs from 1 January 2011 to 31 December 2013.
The vesting date is the third anniversary of the date of grant.
AZIP
Under the rules of the AZIP the performance period is the period of up to eight years and not less than three years from 1 January of the financial year in which the AZIP Share Award is made.
The holding period starts at the end of the performance period and ends eight years from the first day of the performance period.
As described above the AZIP is currently operated over a fouryear performance period Performance Period and a fouryear holding period Holding Period.
Cessation of employment
If a participant ceases to be in relevant employment the award will be time prorated and vest at the end of the Performance Period subject to the achievement of the relevant performance targets measured over the entire Performance Period.
AZIP
During the Performance Period If a participant ceases to be in employment and also if relevant an Executive Director with the Group during the Performance Period hisher AZIP Share Award will generally lapse unless hisher cessation is because of death illhealth injury disability redundancy retirement with the agreement of hisher employing company or because of a sale or transfer out of the Group each a Good Leaver Reason.
In these circumstances the maximum number of Ordinary Shares comprised in an AZIP Share Award will unless the Committee determines otherwise be prorated to reflect the proportion of the period of employment between grant and cessation relative to the fouryear Performance Period.
In circumstances where the Good Leaver Reason is death illhealth injury or disability being compassionate circumstances the performance hurdle will be assessed and the AZIP Share Award may vest following cessation of employment unless the Committee determines otherwise.
On cessation of employment for any other Good Leaver Reason the prorated AZIP Share Award will remain subject to the performance hurdle which will be assessed at the end of the Performance Period unless the Committee determines that special circumstances apply and the AZIP Share Award may then vest on the later of i the end of the Performance Period or ii 24 months after cessation of employment unless the Committee determines otherwise.
During the Holding Period If a participant ceases to be in employment and also if relevant an Executive Director with the Group during the Holding Period hisher AZIP Share Award will generally lapse unless hisher cessation is because of a Good Leaver Reason.
In circumstances where the Good Leaver Reason is death illhealth injury or disability being compassionate circumstances the AZIP Share Award will vest in respect of all the Ordinary Shares subject to the AZIP Share Award as calculated at the end of the Performance Period as soon as possible following cessation of employment.
On cessation of employment for any other Good Leaver Reason the AZIP Share Award will vest in respect of all the Shares subject to the AZIP Share Award as calculated at the end of the Performance Period on the earlier of i the end of the period of 24 months from the date of cessation of employment and ii the end of the Holding Period.
The Committee does have discretion to determine otherwise if it believes the circumstances justify this.
2011 performance
The TSR graphs on page 124 compare for each PSP Share Award the Companys TSR performance against the TSR for companies in the comparator group from the first day of the relevant performance period to 31 December 2011.
At the end of 2011 the Company is on track to meet the cash flow target.
AZIP
The fullyear dividend was 2.80 for 2011 and dividend cover did not fall below the 1.5 times threshold.
Clawback of Shares
In the event that an employee leaves the Companys employment for anything other than a Good Leaver Reason any unvested award shall lapse unless the Committee decides otherwise.
AZIP
The Committee can claw back some or all of the Ordinary Shares that are the subject of a participants AZIP Share Award at any time during the Performance Period and the Holding Period if in the opinion of the Committee acting fairly and reasonably any of the underlying Company performance the occurrence of an event that causes or is very likely to cause reputational damage to the Company or serious misconduct by the participant warrants the clawback.
If this discretion is exercised the AZIP Share Award will be deemed to have been granted over the reduced number of Ordinary Shares.
No Ordinary Shares were subject to clawback in 2011.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report 121 Directors Remuneration Report
Summary of other plans AstraZeneca Share Option Plan The Share Option Plan SOP was approved by shareholders for a period of 10 years and expired in May 2010.
Details of outstanding grants of option awards Option Awards granted to Executive Directors are shown in the Share option plans table on page 127 .
The Committee imposed performance conditions in respect of the exercise of such Option Awards by SET members including the Executive Directors which in the view of the Committee were considered appropriately stretching.
In order for Option Awards to vest the EPS of the Group must increase at least in line with the UK Retail Prices Index plus 5% per annum on average over a threeyear period the base figure being the EPS for the financial year preceding the date of grant with no retesting.
In addition since the review of executive remuneration in 2004 the Committee has included a condition that if an event occurs which causes material reputational damage to the Company such that it is not appropriate for the Option Awards to vest and become exercisable the Committee can make a determination to reflect this.
No such determination was made in 2011.
Global Restricted Stock Plan The AstraZeneca Global Restricted Stock Plan GRSP was introduced in 2010 and provides for the grant of restricted stock awards Stock Awards over Shares.
The GRSP is operated for below SETlevel employees only.
In 2011 Stock Awards were made under the GRSP on 28 March with other Stock Awards approved by the Committee in relation to for example new appointments promotions and assignments being granted on 26 August.
Stock Awards granted under the GRSP do not involve the issue and allotment of new Ordinary Shares but rather rely on the market purchase of Ordinary Shares that have already been issued.
There is no increase in the overall quantum of awards applicable to target employees through the introduction of the GRSP.
Restricted Share Plan The AstraZeneca Restricted Share Plan RSP was introduced in 2008 and provides for the granting of restricted share awards RS Awards to key employees excluding Executive Directors.
RS Awards are made on an ad hoc basis with variable vesting dates and may not operate in respect of Ordinary Shares which are newly issued or transferred from treasury.
The RSP was used seven times in 2011 to make RS Awards to a limited number of key senior executives in specific situations considered by the Committee.
The Committee has responsibility for agreeing any RS Awards under the RSP and for setting the policy for the way in which the RSP should operate.
Other plans In addition to the plans described above the Company operates the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Plan and the AstraZeneca AllEmployee Share Plan in the UK both of which are HM Revenue and Customs approved plans.
Certain Executive Directors and other SET members are eligible to participate in these plans more detailed descriptions of which can be found in Note 24 to the Financial Statements from page 176.
Dilution under share plans Other than the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Plan and the AstraZeneca AllEmployee Share Plan which operate in the UK only and the SOP none of the Companys share plans has a dilutive effect because they do not involve the issue and allotment of new Ordinary Shares but rather rely on the market purchase of Ordinary Shares that have already been issued.
Terms of employment for Executive Directors Service contracts Details of the service contracts for each of the Executive Directors are set out below.
Either the Company or the Executive Director may terminate the service contract on 12 months notice.
It is the Committees intention that in the event of early termination of an Executive Directors employment any compensation payable under hisher service contract should not exceed the salary and benefits that would have been received had the contractual notice period been worked and this may be further reduced in line with the Executive Directors duty to mitigate losses.
None of the Executive Directors has any provision in their service contracts giving them a right to liquidated damages or an automatic entitlement to bonus for the duration of their notice period.
Compensation for any bonus entitlement will be assessed initially as on target but subject to adjustment by the Committee to take account of the particular circumstances of the termination.
Details of Executive Directors service contracts at 31 December 2011 are shown in the table below Executive Director Date of service contract Unexpired term at 31 December 2011
David Brennan 1 January 2006 12 months 12 months Simon Lowth 5 November 2007 12 months 12 months Policy on external appointments and retention of fees Subject to specific Board approval in each case Executive Directors and other SET members may accept external appointments as nonexecutive directors of other companies and retain any related fees paid to them provided always that such external appointments are not considered by the Board to prevent or reduce the ability of the executive to perform their role within the Group to the required standard.
Simon Lowth is a NonExecutive Director of Standard Chartered PLC.
In respect of such position he received fees of 105000 for his services in 2011.
NonExecutive Directors None of the NonExecutive Directors has a service contract but all have letters of appointment.
In accordance with the Companys Articles following their appointment Directors must retire at each AGM and may present themselves for election or reelection.
None of the NonExecutive Directors has any provision in their letter of appointment giving them a right to compensation payable upon early termination of their appointment.
They are not eligible for performancerelated bonuses or the grant of share awards or options.
No pension contributions are made on their behalf.
The annual Board fees applicable to NonExecutive Directors including the NonExecutive Chairman are set out in the NonExecutive Directors fees table on page 123.
In addition to the mandatory shareholding requirement imposed on all Directors under the Articles described in the Directors section on page 208 the Board encourages each NonExecutive Director to build up over time a shareholding in the Company with a value approximately equivalent to the basic annual fee for a NonExecutive Director 75000 or in the case of the Chairman approximately equivalent to his annual fee 500000.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 122 Directors Remuneration Report NonExecutive Directors fees Chairmans fee 500000 Basic fee 75000 Senior independent NonExecutive Director 30000 Membership of the Audit Committee 20000 Membership of the Remuneration Committee 15000 Chairman of the Audit Committee or the Remuneration Committee Membership of the Science Committee 10000 Chairman of the Science Committee This fee is in addition to the fee for membership of the relevant Committee.
Directors emoluments in 2011 The aggregate remuneration excluding pension contributions and the value of shares under option and shares subject to Share Awards paid to or accrued for all Directors for services in all capacities during the year ended 31 December 2011 was 6535000 10458000.
The remuneration of individual Directors is set out below in pounds sterling and US dollars.
All salaries fees bonuses and other benefits for Directors are established in pounds sterling.
Directors remuneration  pounds sterling
Salary and fees
Bonus
Shares
Taxable benefits
Total
Total
Total
Louis Schweitzer 500     500 456 325 David Brennan  1023 3370 3044 3186 Simon Lowth 785 1642 1426 Bruce Burlington 98     98 33 JeanPhilippe Courtois 95     95 80 75 Michele Hooper 145     145 120 100 Rudy Markham 110     110 90 75 Nancy Rothwell 107     107 96 92 Shriti Vadera 95     95 John Varley 110     110 99 95 Marcus Wallenberg 85     85 71 60 Former Directors Jane Henney 35 Others       59 659 Total 3013 1397 699 30 1396 6535 5880 6178 Directors remuneration  US dollars
Salary and fees
Bonus
Shares
Taxable benefits
Total
Total
Total
Louis Schweitzer 800     800 705 504 David Brennan 1596 1415 707 38 1637 5393 4705 4937 Simon Lowth 1857 2537 2209 Bruce Burlington 157     157 51 JeanPhilippe Courtois 152     152 124 116 Michele Hooper 232     232 185 155 Rudy Markham 176     176 139 116 Nancy Rothwell 171     171 148 143 Shriti Vadera 152     152 John Varley 176     176 153 147 Marcus Wallenberg 136     136 110 93 Former Directors Jane Henney 56 Others       92 1021 Total 4822 2236 1118 48 2234 10458 9088 9573 These figures represent that portion of the 2011 bonuses required to be deferred into Ordinary Shares to be held for a threeyear period under the Deferred Bonus Plan.
This figure includes a sum of 447000 719000 in respect of member contributions to the 401k plan and to the AstraZeneca Executive Deferred Compensation Plan which was paid into the plans by means of a salary sacrifice see the Defined contribution arrangements section on page 118 for further details.
Relates to relocation allowances a car allowance and cash of 880000 1408000 on the vesting of a PSP Share Award and 73000 117000 on the release of Ordinary Shares under the Deferred Bonus Plan in each case paid in respect of dividends accrued.
Relates to remaining cash following selection of benefits within AstraZenecas UK flexible benefits programme and cash of 318000 509000 on the vesting of a PSP Share Award and 6000 10000 on the release of shares under the Deferred Bonus Plan in each case paid in respect of dividends accrued.
Partyear only as ceased to be a Director on 28 April 2011.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report 123 Directors Remuneration Report
In the tables in the Directors emoluments in 2011 section on page 123 salaries have been converted between pounds sterling and US dollars at the average exchange rate for the year in question.
These rates were
2011 0.625 2010 0.647 2009 0.645 Details of share options exercised by Directors and the aggregate of gains realised on the exercise of options and of awards under the LTI plans in the year are given in the Directors interests in shares section from page 125.
No Director has a family relationship with any other Director.
Transactions with Directors There were no material recorded transactions between the Company and the Directors during 2011 or 2010.
Total shareholder return The Regulations require the inclusion of a graph showing TSR over a fiveyear period in respect of a holding of the Companys shares plotted against TSR in respect of a hypothetical holding of shares of a similar kind and number by reference to which a broad equity market index is calculated.
The Company is a member of the FTSE 100 Index and consequently for the purposes of this graph which is set out below we have selected the FTSE 100 Index as the appropriate index.
This graph is rebased to 100 at the start of the rolling fiveyear period.
We have also included a Pharmaceutical peers average which reflects the TSR of the same comparator group used for the PSP graphs below.
The PSP requires that the TSR in respect of a holding of the Companys shares over the relevant performance period be compared with the TSR of a peer group of pharmaceutical companies as described on page 120.
The graphs below show how the Companys TSR performance has compared with the TSR for the relevant companies in the comparator group from the first day in the relevant threeyear performance period in respect of each Share Award to 31 December 2011 and how the Company ranks against those other companies on this basis.
To alleviate any shortterm volatility the return index is averaged in the TSR calculations for each company over the three months prior to the start of the relevant performance period as stipulated in the PSP and for the purposes of the graphs below over the last three months of 2011.
TSR over a veyear period 16tel80
January
January
January
January
January
AstraZeneca
Pharmaceutical peers average FTSE 100 TSR  AstraZeneca compared with peer group 1 January 2011 to 31 December 2011 % BMS PFI GSK LLY AL RCH SA JandJ MRK AZ NOV TSR  AstraZeneca compared with peer group 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2011 % BMS GSK LLY PFI AZ JandJ AL MRK SA NOV RCH Key AZ AstraZeneca AL Abbott Laboratories BMS BristolMyers Squibb GSK GlaxoSmithKline JandJ Johnson and Johnson LLY Eli Lilly MRK Merck NOV Novartis PFI Pzer RCH HoffmannLa Roche Ltd SA SanoAventis TSR  AstraZeneca compared with peer group 1 January 2009 to 31 December 2011 % BMS MRK GSK AZ PFI SA LLY JandJ AL NOV RCH NOV AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 124 Directors Remuneration Report Directors interests in shares Beneficial interests The table below shows any change in the interests of the Directors including the interests of their Connected Persons as such term is defined in the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 in Ordinary Shares from 1 January 2011 to 31 December 2011 or on the date of resignation of such Director if earlier.
All such interests were beneficial except as otherwise stated.
However interests in Ordinary Shares or ADSs that are the subject of PSP Share Awards AZIP Share Awards andor the Deferred Bonus Plan discussed in this Report are not included in the table below but are shown in the Performance Share Plan AstraZeneca Investment Plan and Deferred Bonus Plan tables from page 126.
No Director or senior executive beneficially owns or has options over 1% or more of the issued share capital of the Company nor do they have different voting rights from other shareholders.
None of the Directors has a beneficial interest in the shares of any of the Companys subsidiaries.
Between
31 December 2011 and 2 February 2012 there was no change in the interests in Ordinary Shares shown in the table below.
Beneficial interest in Ordinary Shares at 1 January 2011 or if later appointment date Change to beneficial interest Beneficial interest in Ordinary Shares at 31 December 2011 or if earlier resignation date Louis Schweitzer 16615  16615 David Brennan 186982 59192 246174 Simon Lowth 9346 44880 54226 Bruce Burlington 553  553 JeanPhilippe Courtois 2635  2635 Jane Henney 1314  1314 Michele Hooper 2400  2400 Rudy Markham 1940 512 2452 Nancy Rothwell 1314 518 1832 Shriti Vadera 3000  3000 John Varley 1294 450 1744 Marcus Wallenberg 63646  63646 Ceased to be a Director on 28 April 2011.
Unitised stock plans David Brennan in common with other participating executives in the US has interests in the following plans which were awarded to him prior to him becoming CEO the AstraZeneca Executive Deferral Plan the AstraZeneca Executive Deferred Compensation Plan and the AstraZeneca Savings and Security Plan.
These are unitised stock plans into which the value of certain previous share incentive awards has been deferred and are not incentive awards in their own right.
Participants hold units in each plan which represent a longterm equity interest in the Company.
A unit comprises part cash and part ADSs.
The overall unit value can be determined daily by taking the market value of the underlying ADSs and adding the cash position.
The ADSs held within these units carry both voting and dividend rights.
David Brennan is deemed to have a notional beneficial interest in these ADSs calculated by reference to the fund value and the closing price of ADSs.
Therefore the number of ADSs in which a notional beneficial interest arises can vary daily as a consequence of stock price movements.
Unitised stock plan ADSs held at 1 January 2011 Net ADSs acquired during 2011 ADSs held at 31 December 2011 AstraZeneca Executive Deferral Plan 37741 2261 40002 AstraZeneca Savings and Security Plan 8523 499 9022 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report 125 Directors Remuneration Report
Performance Share Plan The interests of Directors at 31 December 2011 in Ordinary Shares that are the subject of Share Awards under the PSP are not included in the Beneficial interests in Ordinary Shares table on page 125 but are shown below Number of Ordinary Shares Award price pence Price on vesting date pence Grant date
Performance period David Brennan 2008 Share Award 161546 1882 28.03.08 28.03.11 01.01.08  31.12.10 2009 Share Award 133347 2280 27.03.09 27.03.12 01.01.09  31.12.11 2010 Share Award 127520 2861 07.05.10 07.05.13 01.01.10  31.12.12 Total at 1 January 2011 422413 Discretionary enhancement of 2008 Share Award Vesting of 2008 Share Award 2011 Share Award 131075 2853 28.03.11 28.03.14 01.01.11  31.12.13 Total at 31 December 2011 391942 Simon Lowth 2008 Share Award 58448 1882 28.03.08 28.03.11 01.01.08  31.12.10 2009 Share Award 54276 2280 27.03.09 27.03.12 01.01.09  31.12.11 2010 Share Award 52009 2861 07.05.10 07.05.13 01.01.10  31.12.12 Total at 1 January 2011 164733 Discretionary enhancement of 2008 Share Award Vesting of 2008 Share Award 2011 Share Award 53459 2853 28.03.11 28.03.14 01.01.11  31.12.13 Total at 31 December 2011 159744 UK date convention applies.
The Remuneration Committee used its discretion to determine that Share Awards granted in 2008 should vest in 2011 at 125% based on the outcome of the performance conditions and targets which are set out in the Vesting of PSP awards in 2011 and 2012 section on page 116.
201932 Ordinary Shares vested after the application of the 125% vesting percentage.
Following certain mandatory tax deductions David Brennan became beneficially interested in a net number of 98219 Ordinary Shares.
73060 Ordinary Shares vested after the application of the 125% vesting percentage.
Following certain mandatory tax deductions Simon Lowth became beneficially interested in a net number of 35799 Ordinary Shares.
Cash payments equivalent to dividends accruing over the vesting period are made at the date of vesting and are included in Other payments and allowances in the Directors remuneration tables from page 123.
AstraZeneca Investment Plan The interests of Directors at 31 December 2011 in Ordinary Shares that are the subject of Share Awards under the AZIP are not included in the Beneficial interests in Ordinary Shares table on page 125 but are shown below Number of Ordinary Shares Award price pence Grant date
Performance period David Brennan 2010 Share Award 21253 2861 07.05.10 01.01.18 01.01.10  31.12.13 Total at 1 January 2011 21253 2011 Share Award 21845 2853 28.03.11 01.01.19 01.01.11  31.12.14 Total at 31 December 2011 43098 Simon Lowth 2010 Share Award 8668 2861 07.05.10 01.01.18 01.01.10  31.12.13 Total at 1 January 2011 8668 2011 Share Award 8909 2853 28.03.11 01.01.19 01.01.11  31.12.14 Total at 31 December 2011 17577 UK date convention applies.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 126 Directors Remuneration Report Deferred Bonus Plan As described on page 117 there is a requirement for Executive Directors and SET members to defer a certain proportion of any shortterm bonus payments into Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
The interests of Directors at 31 December 2011 in Ordinary Shares or ADSs that are the subject of awards under these arrangements are not included in the Beneficial interests in Ordinary Shares table on page 125 but are shown below Number of Ordinary Shares Award price pence Price on vesting date pence
Vesting date David Brennan 2008 award 16810 1999 25.02.08 25.02.11 2009 award 17992 2400 25.02.09 25.02.12 2010 award 20718 2817.5 25.02.10 25.02.13 Total at 1 January 2011 55520 Vesting of 2008 award 16810 2011 award 17725 2977 25.02.11 25.02.14 Total at 31 December 2011 56435 Simon Lowth 2008 award 1340 1999 25.02.08 25.02.11 2009 award 9775 2400 25.02.09 25.02.12 2010 award 9760 2817.5 25.02.10 25.02.13 Total at 1 January 2011 20875 Vesting of 2008 award 1340 2011 award 10281 2977 25.02.11 25.02.14 Total at 31 December 2011 29816 UK date convention applies.
Following certain mandatory tax deductions David Brennan became beneficially interested in a net number of 8213 Ordinary Shares.
Following certain mandatory tax deductions Simon Lowth became beneficially interested in a net number of 656 Ordinary Shares.
Cash payments equivalent to dividends accruing over the vesting period are made at the date of vesting and are included in Other payments and allowances in the Directors remuneration tables from page 123.
Share option plans The interests of Directors who served during 2011 in options to subscribe for Ordinary Shares granted under the SOP are included in the following table.
None of the Directors in the table below holds options under the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Plan.
There were no grants of options made to Directors under any of the plans in 2011.
Number of
Shares under option
Ordinary
Share
Market price on date of exercise First day exercisable Last day exercisable David Brennan At 1 January 2011  options over Ordinary Shares 592975 2375p 24.03.09 26.03.19 market price above option price Ordinary Shares 505244 2271p 19.05.09 26.03.19 market price at or below option price Ordinary Shares 87731 2975p 24.03.09 23.03.16 At 31 December 2011  options over Ordinary Shares 592975 2375p 24.03.09 26.03.19 market price above option price Ordinary Shares 505244 2271p 19.05.09 26.03.19 market price at or below option price Ordinary Shares 87731 2975p 24.03.09 23.03.16 At 1 January 2011  options over ADSs 322519 45.35 29.03.04 23.03.15 market price above option price ADSs 110987 40.35 24.03.08 23.03.15 market price at or below option price ADSs 211532 47.97 29.03.04 25.03.14 Exercised 18 February 2011 29354 47.14 49.10 29.03.04 28.03.11 Exercised 18 February 2011 39942 47.73 49.10 29.06.04 28.06.11 At 31 December 2011  options over ADSs 253223 44.76 28.03.05 23.03.15 market price above option price ADSs 110987 40.35 24.03.08 23.03.15 market price at or below option price ADSs 142236 48.21 28.03.05 25.03.14 Simon Lowth At 1 January 2011 135269 2074p 28.03.11 26.03.19 market price above option price 135269 2074p 28.03.11 26.03.19 market price at or below option price  na na na Exercised 9 August 2011 70138 1882p 2568p 28.03.11 27.03.18 At 31 December 2011 65131 2280p 27.03.12 26.03.19 market price above option price 65131 2280p 27.03.12 26.03.19 market price at or below option price  na na na Vesting is subject to satisfying the relevant performance conditions set out in each of the relevant share option plans.
Further information on the performance conditions applicable to the SOP is set out in the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan section on page 122.
Exercise prices are weighted averages.
First and last exercise dates of groups of options within which period there may be shorter exercise periods.
UK date convention applies.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report 127 Directors Remuneration Report
Gains by Directors on exercise of share options The aggregate gains made by Directors on the exercise of share options during the year and the two previous years are set out below.
Year
Gains made by Directors on the exercise of share options Gains made by the highest paid Director 2011 882089 112254 2010 260182 11454 During 2011 the market price of Ordinary Shares or ADSs was as follows Stock Exchange Ordinary ShareADS market price at 31 December 2011 Range of the Ordinary ShareADS market price during 2011 London 2975p 2543.5p to 3194p Stockholm 316.0 SEK 269.3 SEK to 328.5 SEK New York 46.29 40.95 to 52.40 On behalf of the Board A C N Kemp Company Secretary 2 February 2012 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 128 Directors Remuneration Report In this section we describe our key risk management and assurance mechanisms and the principal risks and uncertainties which we consider to be material to our business as they may have a significant effect on our financial condition results of operations andor reputation.
Specific risks and uncertainties are also discussed in the Business Review from page 29 where relevant.
Managing risk As an innovationdriven global prescriptionbased biopharmaceutical business we face a diverse range of risks and uncertainties that may adversely affect our business.
Our approach to risk management is designed to encourage clear decision making as to which risks we take and how these are managed based on an understanding of the potential strategic commercial financial compliance legal and reputational implications of these risks.
We work continuously to ensure that we have effective risk management processes in place to support the delivery of our strategic objectives the material needs of our stakeholders and our core values.
We monitor our business activities and external and internal environments for new emerging and changing risks to ensure that these are managed appropriately as they arise.
The Board believes that the processes and accountabilities which are in place described below provide it with adequate information on the key risks and uncertainties we face.
Further information about these risks and uncertainties is set out in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 130.
Embedded in business processes We strive to ensure that sound risk management is embedded within our strategy planning budgeting and performance management processes.
The Board has defined the Groups risk appetite expressing the acceptable levels of risk for the Group using three key dimensions.
These are i earnings and cash flow ii return on investment and iii potential impact on our reputation.
This definition provides a clear statement by the Board of its position on risk which enables the Group in both quantitative and qualitative terms to judge the level of risk it is prepared to take so as to achieve its overall objectives.
Annually the Group develops a longterm business plan to support the delivery of its strategy which the Board reviews and confirms that it conforms to its risk appetite.
Line management are accountable for identifying and managing risks and for delivering business objectives in accordance with the Groups risk appetite.
Each area for which a SET member is responsible a SET function is required to provide a comprehensive assessment of its risks as part of the annual business planning process.
Identified risks are mapped to AstraZenecas risk taxonomy providing a structured disaggregation of the various potential risks facing the Group.
The CEO and the CFO undertake quarterly business reviews QBRs with each SET function where the key risks are reviewed.
Business managers within each SET function are required to provide quarterly updates on their key risks which are then consolidated to create a list of key risks for that SET function to review at QBRs.
The key risks for each SET function are then aggregated into a Group risk register.
The purpose of the risk review is to identify and measure risks and to define and review risk management and mitigation plans.
Risk management standards guidelines and supporting tools are in place to support the managers in this process.
We develop business resilience plans to provide for situations where specific risks have the potential to severely impact our business.
Global business resilience plans covering crisis management business continuity and emergency responses are in place.
These plans are supported by the provision of training and crisis simulation activities for business managers.
One of our strategic priorities is to ensure that a culture of ethics and integrity is embedded in all our business practices.
Our Code of Conduct the Code and our Global Policies and Standards set mandatory minimum standards of responsible behaviour for all employees.
In addition all employees receive annual training on the requirements of the Code as well as more specific targeted training on particular policies and standards if required for their role.
Employees are encouraged to raise questions on the practical application of these standards and to report suspected breaches and incidents of noncompliance through the reporting channels described in the Code.
For information about how we identify and manage the risks associated with responsible business see Accountabilities and responsibilities in the Responsible Business section on page 48.
Key responsibilities Management of risk Daytoday risk management is delegated from the Board to the CEO and through the SET to line managers.
SET management areas are accountable for establishing an appropriate line managementled process and for providing the resources for supporting effective risk management.
Line and project managers have primary responsibility within the context of their functional area for identifying and managing risk as well as for putting in place appropriate controls and procedures to monitor effectiveness.
Oversight and monitoring The SET is responsible for overseeing and monitoring the effectiveness of the risk management processes implemented by management.
Our Global Compliance and Group Internal Audit GIA business functions support the SET by advising on policy and standard setting monitoring and auditing communication and training as well as reporting on the adequacy of line management processes as they apply to managing our risk.
Our compliance organisation is comprised of the Global Compliance function together with a wide range of specialist compliance functions.
Further information about Global Compliance and the Code can be found in the Global Compliance section on page 43.
Risk
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance Risk 129 Risk Management reporting and assurance We provide regular quarterly risk reports to the SET and to the Board.
Among other things these summarise our current assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including environmental social and governance risks senior management accountability and our expected plans in order to address these risks to the extent possible.
The Audit Committee is comprised of five NonExecutive Directors and is accountable among other things for assessing the adequacy and effectiveness of the risk management systems and processes implemented by management.
The Audit Committee receives regular reports from our external auditor and the following business functions GIA  independent assurance reports on the Groups risk management and control framework.
Global Compliance  compliance programme reports on key compliance risks updates on key compliance initiatives performance against the Global Compliance scorecard compliance incidents and investigations including calls made by employees to the AZethics and our biologics capabilities helplines.
Financial Control and Compliance Group  reports on Sarbanes Oxley Act compliance and the financial control framework.
Management  the Group level risk summary from the annual business planning process and QBRs and reports on the performance management and monitoring processes.
The Audit Committee reviews and reports to the Board following each Audit Committee meeting on the overall framework of risk management and internal controls and is responsible for promptly bringing to the Boards attention any significant concerns about the conduct results or outcome of internal audits and other compliance matters.
For further information on the Audit Committee see the Audit Committee section from page 107.
GIA is an independent assurance and advisory function that reports to and is accountable to the Audit Committee.
GIAs budget resources and programme of audits are approved by the Audit Committee annually and the findings from its audit work are reported to and discussed at each Audit Committee meeting.
A core part of the audit work carried out by GIA includes assessing how we are managing risk and reviewing the effectiveness of selected aspects of our risk control framework including the effectiveness of other assurance and compliance functions within the business.
Principal risks and uncertainties The pharmaceutical sector is inherently risky and a variety of risks and uncertainties may affect our business.
Below we describe the principal risks and uncertainties which we consider to be material to our business in that they may have a significant effect on our financial condition results of operations andor reputation.
These risks are not listed in any particular order of priority.
Other risks unknown or not currently considered material could have a similar effect.
We believe that the forwardlooking statements about AstraZeneca in this Annual Report identified by words such as anticipates believes expects and intends are based on reasonable assumptions.
However forwardlooking statements involve inherent risks and uncertainties such as those summarised below.
They relate to events that may occur in the future that may be influenced by factors beyond our control and that may have actual outcomes materially different from our expectations.
Product pipeline risks Failure to meet development targets Impact The development of any pharmaceutical product candidate is a complex risky and lengthy process involving significant financial RandD and other resources which may fail at any stage of the process due to a number of factors.
These include failure to obtain the required regulatory or marketing approvals for the product candidate or its manufacturing facilities unfavourable clinical efficacy data safety concerns failure of RandD to develop new product candidates and failure to demonstrate adequate cost effective benefits to regulators and the emergence of competing products.
Production and release schedules for biologics may be more significantly impacted by regulatory processes than other products.
This is due to more complex and stringent regulation on the manufacturing of biologics and their supply chain.
A succession of negative drug project results and a failure to reduce development timelines effectively or produce new products that achieve commercial success could adversely affect the reputation of our RandD capabilities and is likely to materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Difficulties of obtaining and maintaining regulatory approvals for new products
We are subject to strict controls on the commercialisation processes for our pharmaceutical products including in their development manufacture distribution and marketing.
The requirements to obtain regulatory approval based on a products safety efficacy and quality before it can be marketed for an indication in a particular country as well as to maintain and comply with licences and other regulations relating to its manufacture and marketing are particularly important.
The submission of an application to regulatory authorities which vary with different requirements in each region or country may or may not lead to the grant of marketing approval.
Regulators can refuse to grant approval or may require additional data before approval is given even though the medicine may already be launched in other countries.
The approval of a product is required by the relevant regulatory authority in each country although a single panEU MAA can be obtained through a centralised procedure.
In recent years companies sponsoring new drug applications and regulatory authorities have been under increased public pressure to apply more conservative benefitrisk criteria.
In some instances regulatory authorities require a company to develop plans to ensure safe use of a marketed product before a pharmaceutical product is approved or after approval if a new and significant safety issue is established.
In addition third party interpretation of publicly available data on our marketed products has the potential to influence the approval status or labelling of a currently approved and marketed product.
The predictability of the outcome and timing of review processes remains challenging particularly in the US due to competing regulatory priorities and a continuing sentiment of risk aversion on the part of regulatory reviewers and management.
Delays in regulatory reviews and approvals could impact the timing of a new product launch.
In addition the drive for public transparency of the review processes through the more extensive use of public advisory committees increases the unpredictability of the process.
For example in the US the approval date for Brilinta was delayed in December 2010 by the issuance of a Complete Response Letter by the FDA requesting further data and analysis which led to the product ultimately receiving US approval in the third quarter of 2011.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 130 Risk Product pipeline risks continued Failure to obtain and enforce effective IP protection Impact Our ability to obtain and enforce patents and other IP rights in relation to our products is an important element of our ability to protect our investment in RandD and create longterm value for the business.
A number of the countries in which we operate are still developing their IP laws or may even be limiting the applicability of these laws to pharmaceutical inventions.
Adverse political perspectives on the desirability of strong IP protection for pharmaceuticals in certain emerging and even developed markets may limit the scope for us to obtain effective IP protection for our products.
As a result certain countries may seek to limit or deny effective IP protection for pharmaceuticals.
Limitations on the availability of patent protection or the use of compulsory licensing in certain countries in which we operate could have a material adverse effect on the pricing and sales of our products and consequently could materially adversely affect our revenues from those products.
More information about protecting our IP is contained in the Intellectual Property section from page 34.
Information about the risk of patent litigation and the early loss of IP rights is contained in the Expiry or loss of or limitations on IP rights section on page 132.
Delay to new product launches Impact Our continued success depends on the development and successful launch of innovative new drugs.
The anticipated launch dates of major new products have a significant impact on a number of areas of our business including investment in large clinical studies the manufacture of prelaunch product stocks investment in marketing materials prelaunch sales force training and the timing of anticipated future revenue streams from new product sales.
These launch dates are primarily driven by the development programmes that we run and the demands of the regulatory authorities in the approvals process as well as pricing negotiations.
Delays to anticipated launch dates can result from a number of factors including adverse findings in preclinical or clinical studies regulatory demands competitor activity and technology transfer.
Significant delays to anticipated launch dates of new products could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
For example for the launch of products that are seasonal in nature delays in regulatory approvals or manufacturing difficulties may delay launch to the next season which in turn may significantly reduce the return on costs incurred in preparing for the launch for that season.
In addition a delay in the launch may lead to increased costs if for example marketing and sales efforts need to be rescheduled or protracted for longer than expected.
Strategic alliances and acquisitions may be unsuccessful Impact We seek technology licensing arrangements and strategic collaborations to expand our product portfolio and geographical presence as part of our business strategy.
Such licensing arrangements and strategic collaborations are key enabling us to grow and strengthen the business.
The success of such arrangements is largely dependent on the technology and other IP we acquire and the resources efforts and skills of our partners.
Also under many of our strategic alliances we make milestone payments well in advance of the commercialisation of the products with no assurance that we will recoup these payments.
Furthermore we experience strong competition from other pharmaceutical companies in respect of licensing arrangements and strategic collaborations and therefore may be unsuccessful in establishing some of our intended projects.
We may also seek to acquire complementary businesses as part of our business strategy.
The integration of an acquired business could involve incurring significant debt and unknown or contingent liabilities as well as having a negative effect on our reported results of operations from acquisition related charges amortisation of expenses related to intangibles and charges for the implementation of longterm assets.
We may also experience difficulties in integrating geographically separated organisations systems and facilities and personnel with different organisational cultures.
If we fail to complete these types of collaborative projects in a timely manner on a cost effective basis or at all this may limit our ability to access a greater portfolio of products IP technology and shared expertise.
Additionally disputes or difficulties in our relationship with our collaborators or partners may arise often due to conflicting priorities or conflicts of interest between parties which may erode or eliminate the benefits of these alliances.
The incurrence of significant debt or liabilities as a result of integration of an acquired business could cause deterioration in our credit rating and result in increased borrowing costs and interest expense.
Further if following an acquisition liabilities are uncovered in the acquired business the Group may suffer losses and may not have remedies against the seller or third parties.
The integration process may also result in business disruption diversion of management resources the loss of key employees and other issues such as a failure to integrate IT and other systems.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance Risk 131 Risk Commercialisation and business execution risks Challenges to achieving commercial success of new products Impact The successful launch of a new pharmaceutical product involves substantial investment in sales and marketing activities launch stocks and other items.
The commercial success of our new medicines is of particular importance to us in order to replace lost sales following patent expiry.
We may ultimately be unable to achieve commercial success for any number of reasons.
These include difficulties in manufacturing sufficient quantities of the product candidate for development or commercialisation in a timely manner erosion of IP rights including infringement by third parties and failure to show a differentiated product profile.
As a result we cannot be certain that compounds currently under development will achieve success and our ability to accurately assess prior to launch the eventual efficacy or safety of a new product once in broader clinical use can only be based on data available at that time which is inherently limited due to relatively short periods of product testing and small clinical study patient samples.
Additionally the commercialisation of biologics is often more complex than for traditional pharmaceutical products primarily due to differences in the mode of administration technical aspects of the product and rapidly changing distribution and reimbursement environments.
If a new product does not succeed as anticipated or its rate of sales growth is slower than anticipated there is a risk that we are unable to fully recoup the costs incurred in launching it which could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Due to the complexity of the commercialisation process for biologics the methods of distributing and marketing biologics could materially adversely impact our revenues from the sales of products such as Synagis and FluMistFluenz.
Illegal trade in our products Impact Illegal trade covers the theft illegal diversion and counterfeiting of our products.
Illegal trade in pharmaceutical products is estimated to exceed 75 billion per year and is generally considered by the industry NGOs and governmental authorities to be increasing.
We suffer a commensurate financial exposure to illegal trade but in many cases due to the nature of our portfolio this exposure has a greater impact on public health.
Regulators and the public expect us to secure the integrity of our supply chain and to actively cooperate in the reduction of illegal trade in genuine AstraZeneca products whether illegally diverted or stolen and in counterfeited products.
Public loss of confidence in the integrity of pharmaceutical products as a result of counterfeiting could materially adversely affect our reputation and financial performance.
In addition undue or misplaced concern about the issue may induce some patients to stop taking their medicines with consequential risks to their health.
There is also a direct financial loss where counterfeit medicines replace sales of genuine products and where genuine products are recalled following discovery of counterfeit stolen andor illegally traded products in an effort to regain control of the integrity of the supply chain.
In many countries particularly developing markets a robust programme to tackle illegal trade is seen as part of the licence to operate.
Developing our business in Emerging Markets Impact The development of our business in Emerging Markets is a critical factor in determining our future ability to sustain or increase our global product revenues.
This poses various challenges including more volatile economic conditions competition from companies with existing market presence the need to identify correctly and to leverage appropriate opportunities for sales and marketing poor IP protection inadequate protection against crime including counterfeiting corruption and fraud the need to impose developed market compliance standards inadvertent breaches of local and international law not being able to recruit appropriately skilled and experienced personnel identification of the most effective sales channels and route to market and interventions by national governments or regulators restricting access to market andor introducing adverse price controls.
The failure to exploit potential opportunities appropriately in Emerging Markets may materially adversely affect our reputation financial condition and results of operations.
Expiry or loss of or limitations on IP rights Impact Pharmaceutical products are only protected from being copied during the limited period of protection under patent rights andor related IP rights such as Regulatory Data Protection or Orphan Drug status.
Expiry or loss of these rights typically leads to the immediate launch of generic copies of the product in the country where the rights have expired or been lost.
See the Intellectual Property section from page 34 which contains a table of certain patent expiry dates for our key marketed products.
Additionally the expiry or loss of patents covering other innovator companies products may also lead to increased competition for our own stillpatented products in the same product class due to the availability of generic products in that product class.
Products under patent protection or within the period of Regulatory Data Protection typically generate significantly higher revenues than those not protected by such rights.
Our revenues financial condition and results of operations may be materially adversely affected upon expiry or early loss of our IP rights due to generic entrants into the market for the applicable product.
Additionally the loss of patent rights covering major products of other pharmaceutical companies such as Lipitor in November may adversely affect the growth of our stillpatented products in the same product class ie Crestor in that market.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 132 Risk Commercialisation and business execution risks continued Pressures resulting from generic competition Impact Our products compete not only with other products approved for the same condition marketed by researchbased pharmaceutical companies but also with generic drugs marketed by generic pharmaceutical manufacturers.
These competitors may invest more of their resources into the marketing of their products than we do depending on the relative priority of these competitor products within their companys portfolio.
Generic versions of products are often sold at lower prices than branded products as the manufacturer does not have to recoup the significant cost of RandD investment and market development.
All our patented products including Nexium Crestor and Seroquel are subject to price pressures as a result of competition from generic copies of these products and from generic forms of other drugs in the same product class.
As well as facing generic competition upon expiry or loss of IP rights we also face the risk that generic drug manufacturers seek to market generic versions of our products prior to expiries of our patents andor the Regulatory Exclusivity periods.
For example we are currently facing challenges in the US from numerous generic drug manufacturers regarding our patents for Seroquel XR Nexium and Crestor three of our best selling products.
Generic manufacturers may also take advantage of the failure of certain countries to properly enforce Regulatory Data Protection and may launch generics during this protected period.
This is a particular risk in some Emerging Markets where appropriate patent protection may be difficult to obtain or enforce.
If challenges to our patents by generic drug manufacturers succeed and generic products are launched or generic products are launched at risk on the expectation that challenges to our IP will be successful this may materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
In 2011 US sales for Seroquel XR Nexium and Crestor were 779 million 2397 million and 3074 million respectively.
Furthermore if limitations on the availability scope or enforceability of patent protection are implemented in jurisdictions in which we operate generic manufacturers in these countries may be increasingly able to introduce competing products to the market earlier than they would have been able to had more robust patent or Regulatory Data Protection been available.
Effects of patent litigation in respect of IP rights Impact Any of the IP rights protecting our products may be asserted or challenged in IP litigation initiated against or by alleged infringers.
Such IP rights may be affected by validity challenges in patent offices.
Regardless we expect our most valuable products to receive the greater number of challenges.
Despite our efforts to establish and defend robust patent protection for our products we may not succeed in protecting our patents from such litigation or other challenges.
We also bear the risk that we may be found to infringe patents owned or licensed exclusively by third parties including researchbased and generic pharmaceutical companies and individuals.
Infringement accusations may implicate for example our manufacturing processes product intermediates or use of research tools.
Details of significant infringement claims against us by third parties enforcing IP rights can be found in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 181.
If we are not successful in maintaining exclusive rights to market one or more of our major products particularly in the US where we achieve our highest revenue our revenue and margins could be materially adversely affected.
Managing or litigating infringement disputes over socalled freedom to operate can be costly.
We may be subject to injunctions against our products or processes and be liable for damages or royalties.
We may need to obtain costly licences.
These risks may be greater in respect of biologics and vaccines where patent infringement claims may relate to research tools methods and biological materials.
While we seek to manage such risks by for example acquiring licences foregoing certain activities or uses or modifying processes to avoid infringement claims and permit commercialisation of our products such steps entail significant cost and there is no guarantee that they will be successful.
Price controls and reductions Impact Most of our key markets have experienced the implementation of various cost control or reimbursement mechanisms in respect of pharmaceutical products.
For example in the US realised prices are being depressed through costcontrol tools such as restricted lists and formularies which employ generic first strategies and require physicians to obtain prior approval for the use of a branded medicine where a generic version exists.
These mechanisms put pressure on manufacturers to reduce prices and to limit access to branded products.
Many of these mechanisms shift a greater proportion of the cost of medicines to the individual via outofpocket payments at the pharmacy counter.
The patient outofpocket spend is generally in the form of a copayment or in some cases a coinsurance which is designed principally to encourage patients to use generic medicines.
Concurrently many markets are adopting the use of Health Technology Assessment HTA to provide a rigorous evaluation of the clinical efficacy of a product at or post launch.
HTA evaluations are also increasingly being used to assess the clinical as well as the cost effectiveness of products in a particular health system.
This comes as payers and policy makers attempt to drive increased efficiencies in the use and choice of pharmaceutical products.
A summary of the principal aspects of price regulation and how price pressures are affecting our business in our most important markets is set out in the Geographical Review from page 77 and these economic pressures are also further discussed below in the following risk factor.
Due to these pressures on the pricing of our products there can be no certainty that we will be able to charge prices for a product that in a particular country or in the aggregate enable us to earn an adequate return on our product investment.
These pressures including the increasingly restrictive reimbursement policies to which we are subject and the potential adoption of new legislation expanding the scope of permitted commercial importation of medicines into the US could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
We expect that these pressures on pricing will continue and there can be no assurance that they will not increase.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance Risk 133 Risk Commercialisation and business execution risks continued Economic regulatory and political pressures Impact We face continued economic regulatory and political pressures to limit or reduce the cost of our products.
In 2010 the US passed the Affordable Care Act a comprehensive health reform package with provisions taking effect between 2010 and 2014.
The law expands insurance coverage establishes new national entities focused on health system reforms and calls on the pharmaceutical industry and other healthcare industries to offset spending increases through payfors.
In terms of specific provisions impacting our industry the law mandates higher rebates and discounts on branded drugs for certain Medicare and Medicaid patients as well as an industrywide excise tax.
The law also includes several health system delivery reforms that will be implemented over the next three years including the establishment of a new comparative effectiveness research organisation the PatientCentered Outcomes Research Institute and an Independent Payment Advisory Board with broad authority to propose to cut Medicare expenditures.
The health reform legislation expands the patient population eligible for Medicaid and provides new insurance coverage for individuals through stateoperated health insurance exchanges.
Large employers have typically offered generous health insurance benefits but many are struggling with increasing health insurance premiums and may therefore opt to shift employee coverage into the health insurance exchanges which will be operational by 2014.
The pharmaceutical industry could be adversely impacted by such shifts if the health insurance exchanges do not offer a prescription drug benefit that is as robust as benefits historically provided by large employers.
In the EU efforts by the European Commission to reduce inconsistencies and to improve standards in the disparate national regulatory systems have met with little immediate success.
The industry continues to be exposed in Europe to a range of disparate pricing systems ad hoc costcontainment measures and reference pricing mechanisms which impact prices.
Further information regarding these pressures is contained in the Regulatory requirements and Pricing pressure sections from page 17.
It is not possible to accurately estimate the financial impact of the potential consequences resulting from the Affordable Care Act or related legislative changes when taken together with the number of other market and industry related factors that can also result in similar impacts.
While the overall reduction in our profit before tax for the year due to higher minimum Medicaid rebates on prescription drugs discounts on branded pharmaceutical sales to Medicare Part D beneficiaries and an industry wide excise fee was 750 million this reflects only the limited number of known quantifiable and isolatable effects of these legislative developments.
Other potential indirect or associated consequences of these legislative developments which continue to evolve and which cannot be estimated could have similar impacts.
These include broader changes in access to or eligibility for coverage under Medicare Medicaid or similar governmental programmes such as the recent proposals to limit Medicare benefits which could indirectly impact our pricing or sales of prescription products within the private sector.
These continued disparities in pricing systems could lead to marked price differentials between markets which increase the pricing pressure affecting the industry.
The importation of pharmaceutical products from countries where prices are low due to government price controls or other market dynamics to countries where prices for those products are higher is already prevalent and may increase.
In particular as discussed in the Pricing pressure section on page 18 Germany Spain Portugal and Greece have all introduced a number of shortterm measures to lower healthcare spending including price cuts or increased mandatory rebates which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 134 Risk Commercialisation and business execution risks continued Biosimilars Impact Various regulatory authorities are implementing or considering abbreviated approval processes for biosimilars similar versions of existing biologics also referred to as similar biological medicinal products followon biologics and followon protein products that would compete with patented biologics.
For example in 2010 the US enacted the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act within the Affordable Care Act which contains general directives for biosimilar applications.
The FDA sought stakeholder input on specific issues and challenges in implementing an abbreviated biosimilar approval pathway and further guidance is expected to be issued in the first quarter of 2012.
In addition the FDA and the industry have reached agreement on biosimilar user fees.
In Europe the EMA published a draft guideline on similar biological medicinal products containing MAbs.
This draft guideline will likely be finalised in 2012 and is expected to include more clarification around the definition of biosimilars.
While it is uncertain when any such abbreviated approval processes may be fully adopted particularly for more complex protein molecules such as MAbs any such processes could materially adversely affect the future commercial prospects for patented biologics such as the ones that we produce.
Increasing implementation and enforcement of more stringent antibribery and anticorruption legislation
There is an increasing focus globally on the implementation and enforcement of antibribery and anticorruption legislation.
For example the UK Bribery Act came into force in July.
This act has extensive extraterritorial application implements significant changes to existing UK antibribery legislation and broadens the scope of statutory offences and the potential applicable penalties including organisational liability for any bribe paid by persons or entities associated with an organisation where the organisation failed to have adequate preventative procedures in place at the time of the offence.
There is also an increase in the maximum applicable penalties for bribery including up to 10 years imprisonment and unlimited fines.
There have also been increased enforcement efforts in the UK by the Serious Fraud Office and in the US there has been significant enforcement activity in respect of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act by the SEC and US Department of Justice against US companies and nonUS companies listed in the US.
We are the subject of current anticorruption investigations and there can be no assurance that we will not from time to time continue to be subject to informal inquiries and formal investigations from governmental agencies.
In the context of our business governmental officials interact with us in a variety of roles that are important to our operations such as in the capacity of a regulator partner or healthcare payer reimburser or prescriber among others.
We devote significant resources to the considerable challenge of compliance with this legislation including in emerging and developing markets at considerable cost.
Investigations from governmental agencies require additional resources.
Despite taking significant measures to prevent breaches of applicable antibribery and anticorruption laws by our personnel breaches may result in the imposition of significant penalties such as fines the requirement to comply with monitoring or selfreporting obligations or debarment or exclusion from government sales or reimbursement programmes any of which could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations and reputation.
Any expected gains from productivity initiatives are uncertain Impact We continue to implement various productivity initiatives and restructuring programmes with the aim of enhancing the longterm efficiency of the business.
However anticipated cost savings and other benefits from these programmes are based on estimates and the actual savings may vary significantly.
In particular these cost reduction measures are based on current conditions and do not take into account any future changes to the pharmaceutical industry or our operations including new business developments wage or price increases.
If inappropriately managed the expected value of these initiatives could be lost through low employee engagement and reduced productivity increased absence and attrition levels and industrial action.
Our failure to successfully implement these planned cost reduction measures either through the successful conclusion of employee relations processes including consultation engagement talent management recruitment and retention or the possibility that these efforts do not generate the level of cost savings we anticipate could materially adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition.
Failure of information technology Impact We are dependent on effective IT systems.
These systems support key business functions such as our RandD manufacturing and sales capabilities and are an important means of internal and external communication.
Any significant disruption of these IT systems or failure to integrate new and existing IT systems could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Failure of outsourcing Impact We have outsourced a number of business critical operations to third party providers.
This includes certain RandD processes ISIT systems human resources finance and accounting services.
In 2011 we terminated our existing outsource relationship for IT infrastructure services and transitioned to a new multisourced operating model.
This includes bringing critical strategic and control activities back into AstraZeneca.
Failure of the outsource provider to deliver timely services and to the required level of quality could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations and adversely impact our ability to meet business targets and maintain a good reputation within the industry and with stakeholders.
It may also result in noncompliance with applicable laws and regulations.
A failure to successfully manage and effect the transfer of the provision of the IT infrastructure services inhouse and to the new outsourcing providers could create disruption which could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance Risk 135 Risk Supply chain and delivery risks Manufacturing biologics Impact Manufacturing biologics especially in large quantities is complex and may require the use of innovative technologies to handle living microorganisms and facilities specifically designed and validated for this purpose with sophisticated quality assurance and control procedures.
Slight deviations in any part of the manufacturing process may result in lot failure product recalls or spoilage for example due to contamination.
Reliance on third parties for goods Impact We increasingly rely on third parties for the timely supply of goods such as specified raw materials for example the active pharmaceutical ingredient in some of our medicines equipment formulated drugs and packaging all of which are key to our operations.
Unexpected events andor events beyond our control could result in the failure of the supply of goods.
For example suppliers of key goods we rely on may cease to trade.
In addition we may have limited supply of biological materials such as cells animal products or byproducts.
Furthermore government regulations in multiple jurisdictions could result in restricted access to use or transport of such materials.
Third party supply failure could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
This may lead to significant delays and or difficulties in obtaining goods and services on commercially acceptable terms.
Loss of access to sufficient sources of such materials may interrupt or prevent our research activities as planned andor increase our costs.
Further information is contained in the Managing sourcing risk section on page 39.
Legal regulatory and compliance risks Adverse outcome of litigation andor governmental investigations Impact We may be subject to legal proceedings and governmental investigations.
Litigation particularly in the US is inherently unpredictable and unexpectedly high awards for damages can result from an adverse verdict.
In many cases plaintiffs may claim compensatory punitive and statutory damages in extremely high amounts.
In particular the marketing promotional clinical and pricing practices of pharmaceutical manufacturers as well as the manner in which manufacturers interact with purchasers prescribers and patients are subject to extensive regulation litigation and governmental investigation.
Many companies including AstraZeneca have been subject to claims related to these practices asserted by federal and state governmental authorities and private payers and consumers which have resulted in substantial expense and other significant consequences.
Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 181 describes the material legal proceedings in which we are currently involved.
Investigations or legal proceedings regardless of their outcome could be costly divert management attention or damage our reputation and demand for our products.
Unfavourable resolution of current and similar future proceedings against us could subject us to criminal liability fines penalties or other monetary or nonmonetary remedies require us to make significant provisions in our accounts relating to legal proceedings and could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Substantial product liability claims Impact Pharmaceutical companies have historically been subject to large product liability damages claims settlements and awards for injuries allegedly caused by the use of their products.
Adverse publicity relating to the safety of a product or of other competing products may increase the risk of product liability claims.
Substantial product liability claims that result in court decisions against us or in the settlement of proceedings could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations particularly where such circumstances are not covered by insurance.
Further details of our Seroquel product liability litigation are set out in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 181.
Failure to adhere to applicable laws rules and regulations Impact Any failure to comply with applicable laws rules and regulations may result in civil andor criminal legal proceedings being filed against us or in us becoming subject to regulatory sanctions.
Regulatory authorities have wideranging administrative powers to deal with any failure to comply with continuing regulatory oversight and this could affect us whether such failure is our own or that of our third party contractors.
This could materially adversely affect the conduct of our business.
For example once a product has been approved for marketing by regulatory authorities it is subject to continuing control and regulation such as the manner of its manufacture distribution marketing and safety surveillance.
In addition any amendments that are made to the manufacturing distribution marketing and safety surveillance processes of our products may require additional regulatory approvals which could result in significant additional costs andor disruption to these processes.
Such amendments may be imposed on us as a result of the continuing inspections to which we are subject or may be made at our discretion.
It is possible for example that regulatory issues concerning compliance with current Good Manufacturing Practice or safety monitoring regulations for pharmaceutical products often referred to as pharmacovigilance could arise and lead to loss of product licences product recalls and seizures interruption of production leading to product shortages and delays in new product approvals pending resolution of the issues.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 136 Risk Legal regulatory and compliance risks continued Environmentaloccupational health and safety liabilities Impact We have environmental andor occupational health and safety related liabilities at some currently or formerly owned leased and third party sites the most significant of which are detailed in Note 25 to the Financial Statements from page 181.
While we carefully manage these liabilities if a significant noncompliance issue environmental occupational health or safety incident for which we are responsible were to arise this could result in us being liable to pay compensation fines or remediation costs.
In some circumstances such liability could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
In addition our financial provisions for any obligations that we may have relating to environmental or occupational health and safety liabilities may be insufficient if the assumptions underlying the provisions including our assumptions regarding the portion of waste at a site for which we are responsible prove incorrect or if we are held responsible for additional contamination or occupational health and safety related claims.
Economic and financial risks Adverse impact of a sustained economic downturn Impact A variety of significant risks may arise from a sustained global economic downturn.
Additional pressure from governments and other healthcare payers on medicine prices and volumes of sales in response to recessionary pressures on budgets may cause a slowdown or a decline in growth in some markets.
In some cases those governments most severely impacted by the economic downturn may seek alternative ways to settle their debts through for example the issuance of government bonds which might trade at a discount to the value of the debt.
In addition our customers may cease to trade which may result in losses from writing off debts.
We are highly dependent on being able to access a sustainable flow of liquid funds due to the high fixed costs of operating our business and the long and uncertain development cycles of our products.
In a sustained economic downturn financial institutions with whom we deal may cease to trade and there can be no guarantee that we will be able to access monies owed to us without a protracted expensive and uncertain process if at all.
Our cash investments are managed centrally and more than 95% of deposits are invested directly in shortterm liquid US dollar funds and US Treasury Bills.
Therefore our major credit exposure is US sovereign default risk.
While we have adopted cash management and treasury policies to manage this risk see Financial risk management policies section on page 93 we cannot be certain that these will be completely effective in particular in the event of a global liquidity crisis.
In addition open positions where we are owed money and deposits with financial institutions cannot be guaranteed to be recoverable.
Additionally if we need access to external sources of financing to sustain andor grow our business such as the debt or equity capital financial markets this may not be available on commercially acceptable terms if at all in the event of a severe andor sustained economic downturn.
This may for instance be the case in the event of any default by the Group on its debt obligations which may materially adversely affect our ability to secure debt funding in the future or generally on our financial condition.
Further information on debtfunding arrangements is contained in the Financial risk management policies section on page 93.
Impact of fluctuations in exchange rates Impact As a global business currency fluctuations can significantly affect our results of operations which are reported in US dollars.
Approximately 40% of our global 2011 sales were in the US which is expected to remain our largest single market for the foreseeable future.
Sales in other countries are predominantly in currencies other than the US dollar including the euro Japanese yen Australian dollar and Canadian dollar.
We have a growing exposure to emerging market currencies where some have exchange controls in place but for others the exchange rates are also linked to the US dollar.
Major components of our cost base are located in the UK and Sweden where an aggregate of approximately 26.7% of our employees are based.
Movements in the exchange rates used to translate foreign currencies into US dollars may materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Additionally some of our subsidiaries import and export goods and services in currencies other than their own functional currency and so the results of such subsidiaries could be affected by currency fluctuations arising between the transaction dates and the settlement dates for these transactions.
See Note 23 to the Financial Statements from page 171.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Corporate Governance Risk 137 Risk Economic and financial risks continued Limited third party insurance coverage Impact Recent insurance loss experience in our industry including product liability exposures has increased the cost of and narrowed the coverage afforded by pharmaceutical companies product liability insurance.
To contain insurance costs in recent years we have continued to adjust our coverage profile accepting a greater degree of uninsured exposure.
The Group has not held product liability insurance since February 2006.
In addition where claims are made under insurance policies insurers may reserve the right to deny coverage on various grounds.
If such denial of coverage is ultimately upheld this could result in material additional charges to our earnings.
An example of a dispute with insurers relating to the availability of insurance coverage and in relation to which costs incurred by the Group may not ultimately be recovered through such coverage is included in Note 25 to the Financial Statements in the Seroquel product liability section on page 187.
Taxation Impact The integrated nature of our worldwide operations can produce conflicting claims from revenue authorities as to the profits to be taxed in individual territories.
The majority of the jurisdictions in which we operate have double tax treaties with other foreign jurisdictions which enable us to ensure that our revenues and capital gains do not incur a double tax charge.
The resolution of these disputes can result in a reallocation of profits between jurisdictions and an increase or decrease in related tax costs and has the potential to affect our cash flows and EPS.
Claims regardless of their merits or their outcome are costly divert management attention and may adversely affect our reputation.
If any of these double tax treaties should be withdrawn or amended especially in a territory where a member of the Group is involved in a taxation dispute with a tax authority in relation to crossborder transactions such withdrawal or amendment could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations as could a negative outcome of a tax dispute or a failure by the tax authorities to agree through competent authority proceedings.
See the Financial risk management policies section on page 93 for tax risk management policies and Note 25 to the Financial Statements on page 189 for details of current tax disputes.
Pensions Impact Our pension obligations are backed by assets invested across the broad investment market.
Our most significant obligations relate to the UK pension fund.
Sustained falls in these asset values will put a strain on funding which may result in requirements for additional cash restricting cash available for strategic business growth.
Similarly if the liabilities rise as a result of a sustained low interest rate environment there will be a strain on funding from the business.
The likely increase in the IAS 19 accounting deficit generated by any of these factors may cause the ratings agencies to review our credit rating with the potential to negatively affect our ability to raise debt.
See Note 18 to the Financial Statements from page 165 for further details of the Groups pension obligations.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 138 Risk Financial Statements Preparation of the Financial Statements and Directors Responsibilities Directors Responsibilities for and Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting Auditors Reports on the Financial Statements and on Internal Control over Financial Reporting SarbanesOxley Act Section 404 Independent Auditors Report to the Members of AstraZeneca PLC Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 146 Group Accounting Policies 150 Notes to the Group Financial Statements 150 1 Product revenue information 151 2 Operating profit 152 3 Finance income and expense 152 4 Taxation 154 5 Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share 154 6 Segment information 156 7 Property plant and equipment 157 8 Goodwill 158 9 Intangible assets 160 10 Other investments 160 11 Inventories 160 12 Trade and other receivables 160 13 Cash and cash equivalents 161 14 Interestbearing loans and borrowings 161 15 Financial instruments 16 Trade and other payables 164 17 Provisions for liabilities and charges 165 18 Postretirement benefits 169 19 Reserves 170 20 Share capital of the Company 170 21 Dividends to shareholders 22 Acquisitions and disposals of business operations Financial risk management objectives and policies Employee costs and share plans for employees 181 25 Commitments and contingent liabilities 190 26 Leases 190 27 Statutory and other information 191 Principal Subsidiaries Independent Auditors Report to the Members of AstraZeneca PLC 193 Company Balance Sheet 194 Company Accounting Policies 195 Notes to the Company Financial Statements 195 1 Fixed asset investments 195 2 Nontrade creditors 195 3 Loans 196 4 Reserves Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds 196 6 Share capital 197 7 Litigation and environmental liabilities 197 8 Statutory and other information 198 Group Financial Record AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements Financial Statements 139 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 140 Financial Statements The Directors assessed the effectiveness of AstraZenecas internal control over financial reporting as at 31 December 2011 based on the criteria set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission in Internal ControlIntegrated Framework.
Based on this assessment the Directors believe that as at 31 December 2011 the internal control over financial reporting is effective based on those criteria.
KPMG Audit Plc an independent registered public accounting firm has audited the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as at 31 December 2011 and as explained on page 141 has issued an unqualified report thereon.
The Directors are responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting.
AstraZenecas internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance over the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
Due to its inherent limitations internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risks that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Directors Responsibilities for and Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Parent Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Parent Company and enable them to ensure that its financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the Directors are also responsible for preparing a Directors Report Directors Remuneration Report and Corporate Governance Statement that complies with that law and those regulations.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Directors responsibility statement pursuant to DTR 4 The Directors confirm that to the best of our knowledge The Financial Statements prepared in accordance with the applicable set of accounting standards give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole.
The Directors Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the issuer and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
On behalf of the Board of Directors on 2 February 2012 David R Brennan
The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and Form 20F Information and the Group and Parent Company Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and Parent Company Financial Statements for each financial year.
Under that law they are required to prepare the Group Financial Statements in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the Parent Company Financial Statements in accordance with UK Accounting Standards and applicable law UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Parent Company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and Parent Company Financial Statements the Directors are required to Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently.
Make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent.
For the Group Financial Statements state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
For the Parent Company Financial Statements state whether applicable UK Accounting Standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the Parent Company Financial Statements.
Prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the Parent Company will continue in business.
Preparation of the Financial Statements and Directors Responsibilities Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 141 Financial Statements SarbanesOxley Act Section 404.
The Directors statement on internal control over financial reporting is set out on page 140.
KPMG Audit Plc has also reported separately on the Company Financial Statements of AstraZeneca PLC and on the information in the Directors Remuneration Report that is described as having been audited.
This audit report is set out on page 192.
The report set out below is provided in compliance with International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
KPMG Audit Plc has also issued reports in accordance with auditing standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board in the US which will be included in the Annual Report on Form 20F to be filed with the US Securities and Exchange Commission.
Those reports are unqualified and include opinions on the Group Financial Statements and on the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as at 31 December 2011 Auditors Reports on the Financial Statements and on Internal Control over Financial Reporting SarbanesOxley Act Section 404 Separate opinion in relation to IFRSs as issued by the IASB As explained in the Group Accounting Policies section to the Group Financial Statements set out on pages 146 to 149 the Group in addition to complying with its legal obligation to apply IFRSs as adopted by the EU has also applied IFRSs as issued by the IASB.
In our opinion the Group Financial Statements comply with IFRSs as issued by the IASB.
Opinion on other matter prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the information given in the Directors Report for the financial year for which the Group Financial Statements are prepared is consistent with the Group Financial Statements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception We have nothing to report in respect of the following Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion Certain disclosures of Directors Remuneration specified by law are not made.
We have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review The Directors Statement set out on page 146 in relation to going concern.
The part of the corporate governance statement on pages 103 to 112 relating to the Companys compliance with the nine provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code specified for our review.
Certain elements of the report to shareholders by the Board on directors remuneration.
Other matters We have reported separately on the Parent Company Financial Statements of AstraZeneca PLC for the year ended 31 December 2011 and on the information in the Directors Remuneration Report that is described as having been audited.
Jimmy Daboo Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of KPMG Audit Plc Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square London E14 5GL 2 February 2012 We have audited the Group Financial Statements of AstraZeneca PLC for the year ended 31 December 2011 set out on pages 142 to 191.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and in respect of the separate opinion in relation to IFRSs as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB on terms that have been agreed with the Company.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and in respect of the separate opinion in relation to IFRSs as issued by the IASB those matters that we have agreed to state to them in our report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditor As explained more fully in the Preparation of the Financial Statements and Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 140 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the Group Financial Statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the Group Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards APBs Ethical Standards for Auditors.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements A description of the scope of an audit of financial statements is provided on the APBs website frc. iteapbscopeprivate. fm.
Opinion on financial statements In our opinion the Group Financial Statements Give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups affairs as at 31 December 2011 and of its profit for the year then ended.
Have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
Have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
Independent Auditors Report to the Members of AstraZeneca PLC Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 142 Financial Statements
Revenue 1 33591 33269 32804 Cost of sales 6026 6389 5775 Gross profit 27565 26880 27029 Distribution costs 346 335 298 Research and development 2 5523 5318 4409 Selling general and administrative costs 2 11161 10445 11332 Profit on disposal of subsidiary 2 22 1483 Other operating income and expense telOperating profit 2 12795 11494 11543 Finance income telFinance expense 3 980 1033 1198 Profit before tax 12367 10977 10807 Taxation 4 2351 2896 3263 Profit for the period 10016 8081 7544 Other comprehensive income Foreign exchange arising on consolidation 60 26 388 Foreign exchange differences on borrowings forming net investment hedges 24 101 68 Amortisation of loss on cash flow hedge 2 1 1 Net available for sale gains taken to equity 31 4 2 Actuarial loss for the period 18 741 46 569 Income tax relating to components of other comprehensive income 4 198 61 192 Other comprehensive income for the period net of tax 546 25 54 Total comprehensive income for the period 9470 8106 7490 Profit attributable to Owners of the Parent 9983 8053 7521 Noncontrolling interests 33 28 23 Total comprehensive income attributable to Owners of the Parent 9428 8058 7467 Noncontrolling interests 42 48 23 Basic earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share 5 7.33 5.60 5.19 Diluted earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share 5 7.30 5.57 5.19 Weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue millions 5 1361 1438 1448 Diluted weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue millions 5 1367 1446 1450 Dividends declared and paid in the period 21 3752 3494 3026 All activities were in respect of continuing operations. m means millions of US dollars.
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year ended 31 December AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 143 Financial Statements
Assets
Non current assets Property plant and equipment 7 6425 6957 7307 Goodwill 8 9862 9871 9889 Intangible assets 9 10980 12158 12226 Derivative financial instruments 1telOther investments 1telDeferred tax assets 4 1514 1475 1292 29324 30996 31160 Current assets Inventories 11 1852 1682 1750 Trade and other receivables 12 8754 7847 7709 Other investments 10 4248 1482 1484 Derivative financial instruments Income tax receivable 1056 3043 2875 Cash and cash equivalents 13 7571 11068 9918 23506 25131 23760 Total assets 52830 56127 54920
Current liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings 14 1990 125 1926 Trade and other payables 16 8975 8661 8687 Derivative financial instruments 15 9 8 90 Provisions 17 1388 1095 1209 Income tax payable 3390 6898 5728 15752 16787 17640 Non current liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings 14 7338 9097 9137 Deferred tax liabilities 4 2735 3145 3247 Retirement benefit obligations 18 2674 2472 3354 Provisions 17 474 843 477 Other payables 16 385 373 244 13606 15930 16459 Total liabilities 29358 32717 34099 Net assets 23472 23410 20821
Capital and reserves attributable to equity holders of the Company Share capital 2telShare premium account 3078 2672 2180 Capital redemption reserve 139 107 94 Merger reserve 433 433 433 Other reserves 19 1379 1377 1392 Retained earnings 19 17894 18272 16198 23246 23213 20660 Non controlling interests 226 197 161 Total equity 23472 23410 20821 The Financial Statements from page 142 to 191 were approved by the Board on 2 February 2012 and were signed on its behalf by David R Brennan Simon Lowth Director Director Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at 31 December Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 144 Financial Statements
Share premium account
Merger reserve
Retained earnings
Non controlling interests
At 1 January 2009 362 2046 94 433 1405 11572 15912 148 16060 Profit for the period      7521 7521 23 7544 Other comprehensive income      54 54  54 Transfer to other reserves Transactions with owners Dividends      3026 3026  3026 Issue of Ordinary Shares 1 134     135  135 Sharebased payments      172 172  172 Transfer from noncontrolling interests to payables        9 9 Dividend paid by subsidiary to noncontrolling interests        1 1 Net movement 1 134   13 4626 4748 13 4761 At 31 December 2009 363 2180 94 433 1392 16198 20660 161 20821 Profit for the period      8053 8053 28 8081 Other comprehensive income      Transfer to other reserves Transactions with owners Dividends      3494 3494  3494 Issue of Ordinary Shares 2 492     494  494 Repurchase of Ordinary Shares 13  13   2604 2604  2604 Sharebased payments      99 99  99 Transfer from noncontrolling interests to payables        11 11 Dividend paid by subsidiary to noncontrolling interests        1 1 Net movement 11 492 13  15 2074 2553 36 2589 At 31 December 2010 352 2672 107 433 1377 18272 23213 197 23410 Profit for the period      9983 9983 33 10016 Other comprehensive income      555 555 9 546 Transfer to other reserves Transactions with owners Dividends      3752 3752  3752 Issue of Ordinary Shares 3 406     409  409 Repurchase of Ordinary Shares 32  32   6015 6015  6015 Sharebased payments      37 37  37 Transfer from noncontrolling interests to payables        9 9 Dividend paid by subsidiary to noncontrolling interests        4 4 At 31 December 2011 323 3078 139 433 1379 17894 23246 226 23472 Amounts charged or credited to other reserves relate to exchange adjustments arising on goodwill.
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 145 Financial Statements
Restated
Restated
Cash flows from operating activities Profit before tax 12367 10977 10807 Finance income and expense telDepreciation amortisation and impairment 2550 2741 2087 Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables 1108 10 256 Increasedecrease in inventories 256 88 6 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables and provisions 467 16 1579 Profit on disposal of subsidiary 22 1483 Other noncash movements 597 463 200 Cash generated from operations 12368 13854 14759 Interest paid 548 641 639 Tax paid 3999 2533 2381 Net cash inflow from operating activities 7821 10680 11739 Cash flows from investing activities Acquisitions of business operations 22  348 Movement in shortterm investments and fixed deposits 2743 125 1339 Purchase of property plant and equipment 839 791 962 Disposal of property plant and equipment 102 83 138 Purchase of intangible assets 458 1390 624 Disposal of intangible assets  210 269 Purchase of noncurrent asset investments 11 34 31 Disposal of noncurrent asset investments  5 3 Net cash received on disposal of subsidiary 22 1772 Interest received 171 174 113 Payments made by subsidiaries to noncontrolling interests 16 10 11 Net cash outflow from investing activities 2022 2226 2444 Net cash inflow before financing activities 5799 8454 9295 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from issue of share capital 409 494 135 Repurchase of shares 6015 2604 Repayment of loans  1741 650 Dividends paid 3764 3361 2977 Hedge contracts relating to dividend payments Movement in shortterm borrowings 46 8 137 Net cash outflow from financing activities 9321 7334 3661 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents in the period 3522 1120 5634 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the period 10981 9828 4123 Exchange rate effects 25 33 71 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the period 13 7434 10981 9828 2010 restated to reclassify 114m cash paid in hedge contracts relating to dividend payments to cash flows from financing activities 2009 32m.
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended 31 December Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 146 Financial Statements After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Annual Report and Financial Statements.
Estimates and judgements The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and judgements that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Judgements include classification of transactions between profit and the consolidated statement of financial position and the determination of operating segments while estimates focus on areas such as carrying values and estimated lives.
AstraZenecas management considers the following to be the most important accounting policies in the context of the Groups operations.
The accounting policy descriptions set out the areas where judgements and estimates need exercising the most significant of which are revenue recognition research and development including impairment reviews of associated intangible assets business combinations and goodwill litigation and environmental liabilities employee benefits and taxation.
Further information on estimates and critical judgements made in applying accounting policies including details of significant methods and assumptions used is included in Notes 4 6 8 9 15 18 22 and 25 in the Financial Statements.
Financial risk management policies are detailed in Note 23.
Revenue
Revenues comprise sales and income under copromotion and codevelopment agreements.
Income under copromotion and codevelopment agreements is recognised when it is earned as defined in the contract and can be reliably estimated.
In general this is upon the sale of the copromoted developed product or upon the delivery of a promotional or developmental service.
Revenues exclude intercompany revenues and valueadded taxes and represent net invoice value less estimated rebates returns and settlement discounts.
Revenues are recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to a third party.
In general this is upon delivery of the products to wholesalers.
In markets where returns are significant currently only in the US estimates of returns are accounted for at the point revenue is recognised.
In markets where returns are not significant they are recorded when returned.
When a product faces generic competition particular attention is given to the possible levels of returns and in cases where the circumstances are such that the level of returns and hence revenue cannot be measured reliably revenues are only recognised when the right of return expires which is generally on ultimate prescription of the product to patients.
Basis of accounting and preparation of financial information The Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention modified to include revaluation to fair value of certain financial instruments as described below in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU adopted IFRSs in response to the IAS regulation EC 16062002.
The Consolidated Financial Statements also comply fully with IFRSs as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board.
During the year the Group adopted the revised IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures the amendments to IAS 32 Classification of Rights Issues IFRIC 14 Prepayments of a Minimum Funding Requirement and IFRIC 19 Extinguishing Financial Liabilities with Equity Instruments.
The Group also applied the amendments contained in Improvements to IFRSs issued in May 2010.
The adoption of the revisions new interpretations and amendments did not have a significant effect on the Groups profit for the period net assets or cash flows.
The Company has elected to prepare the Company Financial Statements in accordance with UK Accounting Standards.
These are presented on pages 193 to 197 and the accounting policies in respect of Company information are set out on page 194.
The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented in US dollars which is the Companys functional currency.
In preparing their individual financial statements the accounting policies of some overseas subsidiaries do not conform with adopted IFRSs.
Therefore where appropriate adjustments are made in order to present the Consolidated Financial Statements on a consistent basis.
Basis for preparation of financial statements on a going concern basis Information on the business environment AstraZeneca operates in including the factors underpinning the industrys future growth prospects are included in the Directors Report.
Details of the product portfolio of the Group our approach to product development and our development pipeline are covered in detail with additional information by Therapy Area in the Directors Report.
The financial position of the Group its cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the Financial Review from page 82.
In addition Note 23 to the Financial Statements includes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and hedging activities and its exposures to credit market and liquidity risk.
Further details of the Groups cash balances and borrowings are included in Notes 13 and 14 of the Financial Statements.
The Group has considerable financial resources available.
As at 31 December 2011 the Group has 9.2bn in financial resources cash balances of 7.6bn and committed bank facilities of 3.6bn with only 2.0bn of debt due within one year.
The Groups revenues are largely derived from sales of products which are covered by patents and for which historically at least demand has been relatively unaffected by changes in the general economy.
In addition the Group has a wide diversity of customers and suppliers across different geographic areas.
As a consequence the Directors believe that the Group is well placed to manage its business risks successfully despite the current uncertain economic outlook.
Group Accounting Policies AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 147 Financial Statements The Groups policy up to and including 1997 was to eliminate goodwill arising upon acquisitions against reserves.
Under IFRS 1 Firsttime Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards and IFRS 3 Business Combinations such goodwill will remain eliminated against reserves.
Employee benefits The Group accounts for pensions and other employee benefits principally healthcare under IAS 19 Employee Benefits.
In respect of defined benefit plans obligations are measured at discounted present value while plan assets are measured at fair value.
The operating and financing costs of such plans are recognised separately in profit current service costs are spread systematically over the lives of employees and financing costs are recognised in full in the periods in which they arise.
Actuarial gains and losses are recognised immediately in other comprehensive income.
Where the calculation results in a benefit to the Group the recognised asset is limited to the present value of any available future refunds from the plan or reductions in future contributions to the plan.
Payments to defined contribution plans are recognised in profit as they fall due.
Taxation
The current tax payable is based on taxable profit for the year.
Taxable profit differs from reported profit because taxable profit excludes items that are never taxable or tax deductible.
The Groups current tax assets and liabilities are calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Deferred tax is provided using the balance sheet liability method providing for temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation purposes.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the asset can be utilised.
This requires judgements to be made in respect of the availability of future taxable income.
No deferred tax asset or liability is recognised in respect of temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries branches and joint ventures where the Group is able to control the timing of reversal of the temporary differences and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The Groups deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated using tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset realised based on tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Accruals for tax contingencies require management to make judgements and estimates of ultimate exposures in relation to tax audit issues.
Tax benefits are not recognised unless the tax positions will probably be sustained.
Once considered to be probable management reviews each material tax benefit to assess whether a provision should be taken against full recognition of that benefit on the basis of potential settlement through negotiation andor litigation.
All provisions are included in current liabilities.
Any recorded exposure to interest on tax liabilities is provided for in the tax charge.
See Note 25 for further details.
Share based payments All plans are assessed and have been classified as equity settled.
The grant date fair value of employee share option awards is generally calculated using the BlackScholes model.
In accordance with IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment the resulting cost is recognised in profit over the vesting period of the options being the period in which the services are received.
The value of the charge is adjusted to reflect expected and actual levels of awards vesting except where the failure to vest is as a result of not meeting a market condition.
Cancellations of equity instruments are treated as an acceleration of the vesting period and any outstanding charge is recognised in profit immediately.
For the US market we estimate the quantity and value of goods which may ultimately be returned at the point of sale.
Our returns accruals are based on actual experience over the preceding 12 months for established products together with marketrelated information such as estimated stock levels at wholesalers and competitor activity which we receive via third party information services.
For newly launched products we use rates based on our experience with similar products or a predetermined percentage.
Research and development Research expenditure is recognised in profit in the year in which it is incurred.
Internal development expenditure is capitalised only if it meets the recognition criteria of IAS 38 Intangible Assets.
Where regulatory and other uncertainties are such that the criteria are not met the expenditure is recognised in profit and this is almost invariably the case prior to approval of the drug by the relevant regulatory authority.
Where however recognition criteria are met intangible assets are capitalised and amortised on a straightline basis over their useful economic lives from product launch.
At 31 December 2011 no amounts have met recognition criteria.
Payments to inlicence products and compounds from external third parties for new research and development projects inprocess research and development generally taking the form of upfront payments and milestones are capitalised.
Where payments made to third parties represent future research and development activities an evaluation is made as to the nature of the payments.
Such payments are expensed if they represent compensation for subcontracted research and development services not resulting in a transfer of intellectual property.
By contrast payments are capitalised if they represent compensation for the transfer of intellectual property developed at the risk of the third party.
Since acquired products and compounds will only generate sales and cash inflows following launch our policy is to minimise the period between final approval and launch if it is within AstraZenecas control to do so.
Assets capitalised are amortised generally on a straightline basis over their useful economic lives from product launch.
Under this policy it is not possible to determine precise economic lives for individual classes of intangible assets.
However lives range from three years to 20 years.
These assets are not used in the research and development activities of other products.
Intangible assets relating to products in development both internally generated and externally acquired are subject to impairment testing annually.
All intangible assets are tested for impairment when there are indications that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Any impairment losses are recognised immediately in profit.
Intangible
Business combinations and goodwill On the acquisition of a business fair values are attributed to the identifiable assets and liabilities and contingent liabilities unless the fair value cannot be measured reliably in which case the value is subsumed into goodwill.
Where fair values of acquired contingent liabilities cannot be measured reliably the assumed contingent liability is not recognised but is disclosed in the same manner as other contingent liabilities.
Goodwill is the difference between the fair value of the consideration and the fair value of net assets acquired.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions is capitalised and subject to an impairment review both annually and when there is an indication that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Between 1 January 1998 and 31 December 2002 goodwill was amortised over its estimated useful life such amortisation ceased on 31 December 2002.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 148 Financial Statements The Groups other financial instruments include Cash and cash equivalents Fixed deposits Other investments Bank and other borrowings
Trade receivables and trade payables.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand current balances with banks and similar institutions and highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less when acquired.
They are readily convertible into known amounts of cash and are held at amortised cost.
Fixed deposits Fixed deposits comprising principally funds held with banks and other financial institutions are initially measured at fair value plus direct transaction costs and are subsequently remeasured to amortised cost using the effective interest rate method at each reporting date.
Changes in carrying value are recognised in profit.
Other investments Where investments have been classified as held for trading they are measured initially at fair value and subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date.
Changes in fair value are recognised in profit.
In all other circumstances the investments are classified as available for sale are initially measured at fair value including direct transaction costs and are subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date.
Changes in carrying value due to changes in exchange rates on monetary available for sale investments or impairments are recognised in profit.
All other changes in fair value are recognised in other comprehensive income.
Impairments are recorded in profit when there is a decline in the value of an investment that is deemed to be other than temporary.
On disposal of the investment the cumulative amount recognised in other comprehensive income is recognised in profit as part of the gain or loss on disposal.
Bank and other borrowings The Group uses derivatives principally interest rate swaps to hedge the interest rate exposure inherent in a portion of its fixed interest rate debt.
In such cases the Group will either designate the debt as fair value through profit or loss when certain criteria are met or as the hedged item under a fair value hedge.
If the debt instrument is designated as fair value through profit or loss the debt is initially measured at fair value with direct transaction costs being included in profit as an expense and is remeasured to fair value at each reporting date with changes in carrying value being recognised in profit along with changes in the fair value of the related derivative.
Such a designation has been made where this significantly reduces an accounting mismatch which would result from recognising gains and losses on different bases.
If the debt is designated as the hedged item under a fair value hedge the debt is initially measured at fair value with direct transaction costs being amortised over the life of the bonds and is remeasured for fair value changes in respect of the hedged risk at each reporting date with changes in carrying value being recognised in profit along with changes in the fair value of the related derivative.
If certain criteria are met nonUS dollar denominated loans are designated as net investment hedges of foreign operations.
Exchange differences arising on retranslation of net investments and of foreign currency loans which are designated in an effective net investment hedge relationship are recognised in other comprehensive income.
All other exchange differences giving rise to changes in the carrying value of foreign currency loans and overdrafts are recognised in profit.
Property plant and equipment The Groups policy is to write off the difference between the cost of each item of property plant and equipment and its residual value systematically over its estimated useful life.
Assets under construction are not depreciated.
Reviews are made annually of the estimated remaining lives and residual values of individual productive assets taking account of commercial and technological obsolescence as well as normal wear and tear.
Under this policy it becomes impractical to calculate average asset lives exactly.
However the total lives range from approximately 10 to 50 years for buildings and three to 13 years for plant and equipment.
All items of property plant and equipment are tested for impairment when there are indications that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Any impairment losses are recognised immediately in profit.
Borrowing costs The Group has no borrowing costs with respect to the acquisition or construction of qualifying assets.
All other borrowing costs are recognised in profit as incurred and in accordance with the effective interest rate method.
Leases
Rentals under operating leases are charged to profit on a straight line basis.
Subsidiaries
A subsidiary is an entity controlled directly or indirectly by AstraZeneca PLC.
Control is regarded as the power to govern the financial and operating policies of the entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities.
The financial results of subsidiaries are consolidated from the date control is obtained until the date that control ceases.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
The first in first out or an average method of valuation is used.
For finished goods and work in progress cost includes directly attributable costs and certain overhead expenses including depreciation.
Selling expenses and certain other overhead expenses principally central administration costs are excluded.
Net realisable value is determined as estimated selling price less all estimated costs of completion and costs to be incurred in selling and distribution.
Writedowns of inventory occur in the general course of business and are recognised in cost of sales.
Trade and other receivables Financial assets included in trade and other receivables are recognised initially at fair value.
Subsequent to initial recognition they are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method less any impairment losses.
Trade and other payables Financial liabilities included in trade and other payables are recognised initially at fair value.
Subsequent to initial recognition they are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Financial instruments The Groups financial instruments include interests in leases and rights and obligations under employee benefit plans which are dealt with in specific accounting policies.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 149 Financial Statements
The carrying values of nonfinancial assets other than inventories and deferred tax assets are reviewed at least annually to determine whether there is any indication of impairment.
For goodwill intangible assets under development and for any other assets where such indication exists the assets recoverable amount is estimated based on the greater of its value in use and its fair value less cost to sell.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows adjusted for the risks specific to each asset are discounted to their present value using a discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the general risks affecting the pharmaceutical industry.
For the purpose of impairment testing assets are grouped together into the smallest group of assets that generates cash inflows from continuing use that are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets.
Impairment losses are recognised in profit.
International accounting transition On transition to using adopted IFRSs in the year ended 31 December 2005 the Company took advantage of several optional exemptions available in IFRS 1 Firsttime Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards.
The major impacts which are of continuing importance are detailed below Business combinations  IFRS 3 Business Combinations has been applied from 1 January 2003 the date of transition rather than being applied fully retrospectively.
As a result the combination of Astra and Zeneca is still accounted for as a merger rather than through purchase accounting.
If purchase accounting had been adopted Zeneca would have been deemed to have acquired Astra.
Cumulative exchange differences  the Group chose to set the cumulative exchange difference reserve at 1 January 2003 to zero.
Applicable accounting standards and interpretations issued but not yet adopted IFRS 9 Financial Instruments was reissued in October 2010.
It is applicable to financial assets and financial liabilities.
For financial assets it requires classification and measurement in either the amortised cost or the fair value category.
For a companys own debt held at fair value the standard requires the movement in the fair value as a result of changes in the companys own credit risk to be included in other comprehensive income.
It is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2015.
The standard has not yet been endorsed by the EU.
The adoption of IFRS 9 is not expected to have a significant impact upon the Groups net results or net assets.
IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statements IFRS 11 Joint Arrangements IFRS 12 Disclosures of Interests in Other Entities and IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement were issued in May 2011 along with consequential amendments to IAS 27 Separate Financial Statements and IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures.
They are all effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2013.
The new and revised standards have yet to be endorsed by the EU and are not expected to have a significant impact upon the Groups net results net assets or disclosures.
The amendments to IFRS 7 Disclosures  Transfer of Financial Assets IAS 12 Deferred Tax Recovery of Underlying Assets IAS 1 Presentation of Items in Other Comprehensive Income IAS 19 Employee Benefits and amendments to IAS 32 and IFRS 7 on offsetting financial assets and liabilities are effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 July 2011 1 January 2012 1 July 2012 1 January 2013 and 1 January 2014 IAS 32 and 1 January 2013 IFRS 7 respectively.
They are not expected to have a significant impact upon the Groups net results net assets or disclosures.
With the exception of IFRS 7 Disclosures  Transfer of Financial Assets these amendments have yet to be endorsed by the EU.
Other interestbearing loans are initially measured at fair value including direct transaction costs and are subsequently remeasured to amortised cost using the effective interest rate method at each reporting date.
Changes in carrying value are recognised in profit.
Derivatives
Derivatives are initially measured at fair value with direct transaction costs being included in profit as an expense and are subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date.
Changes in carrying value are recognised in profit.
Foreign currencies Foreign currency transactions being transactions denominated in a currency other than an individual Group entitys functional currency are translated into the relevant functional currencies of individual Group entities at average rates for the relevant monthly accounting periods which approximate to actual rates.
Monetary assets arising from foreign currency transactions are retranslated at exchange rates prevailing at the reporting date.
Exchange gains and losses on loans and on shortterm foreign currency borrowings and deposits are included within finance expense.
Exchange differences on all other foreign currency transactions are taken to operating profit in the individual Group entitys accounting records.
Nonmonetary items arising from foreign currency transactions are not retranslated in the individual Group entitys accounting records.
In the Consolidated Financial Statements income and expense items for Group entities with a functional currency other than US dollars are translated into US dollars at average exchange rates which approximate to actual rates for the relevant accounting periods.
Assets and liabilities are translated at the US exchange rates prevailing at the reporting date.
Exchange differences arising on consolidation are taken in other comprehensive income.
Exchange differences arising on retranslation of net investments in subsidiaries and of foreign currency loans which are designated in an effective hedge relationship are taken in other comprehensive income in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Gains and losses accumulated in the translation reserve will be recycled to profit when the foreign operation is sold.
Litigation and environmental liabilities Through the normal course of business AstraZeneca is involved in legal disputes the settlement of which may involve cost to the Group.
Provision is made where an adverse outcome is probable and associated costs including related legal costs can be estimated reliably.
In other cases appropriate disclosures are included.
Where it is considered that the Group is more likely than not to prevail or in the rare circumstances where the amount of the legal liability cannot be estimated reliably legal costs involved in defending the claim are charged to profit as they are incurred.
Where it is considered that the Group has a valid contract which provides the right to reimbursement from insurance or otherwise of legal costs andor all or part of any loss incurred or for which a provision has been established the best estimate of the amount expected to be received is recognised as an asset only when it is virtually certain.
AstraZeneca is exposed to environmental liabilities relating to its past operations principally in respect of soil and groundwater remediation costs.
Provisions for these costs are made when there is a present obligation and where it is probable that expenditure on remedial work will be required and a reliable estimate can be made of the cost.
Provisions are discounted where the effect is material.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 150 Financial Statements Notes to the Group Financial Statements 1 Product revenue information
Nexium 4429 4969 4959 LosecPrilosec 946 986 946 Others 161 133 106 Total Gastrointestinal 5536 6088 6011
Crestor 6622 5691 4502 Atacand 1450 1483 1436 SelokenToprolXL 986 1210 1443 Plendil 256 255 241
Zestril 144 157 184 Others 543 538 559 Total Cardiovascular 10212 9403 8376 Respiratory and Inflammation Symbicort 3148 2746 2294 Pulmicort 892 872 1310 Rhinocort 212 227 264 Oxis 56 63 63 Others 160 191 201 Total Respiratory and Inflammation 4468 4099 4132
Zoladex 1179 1115 1086 Arimidex 756 1512 1921 Iressa 554 393 297 Casodex 550 579 844 Faslodex 546 345 262 Nolvadex 99 89 88 Others 21 12 20 Total Oncology 3705 4045 4518
Seroquel 5828 5302 4866 Local anaesthetics 602 605 599 Diprivan 294 322 290 Others 67 47 48 Total Neuroscience 7204 6704 6237 Infection and Other Synagis 975 1038 1082 Merrem 583 817 872 FluMist 161 174 145 Non Seasonal Flu 7 39 389 Other Products 130 108 143 Total Infection and Other 1856 2176 2631 Astra Tech 386 535 506 Aptium Oncology 224 219 393 Total 33591 33269 32804 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 151 Financial Statements 2 Operating profit Operating profit includes the following items Research and development In 2011 research and development includes a 285m impairment charge related to the termination of development of the investigational compound olaparib and 150m impairment charge related to the intangible assets held in relation to TC5214 see Note 9.
In 2010 research and development included a 445m impairment of intangible assets related specifically to motavizumab.
Selling general and administrative costs In 2011 selling general and administrative costs includes 135m of legal provision charges in respect of the ongoing Seroquel product liability litigation Average Wholesale Price litigation in the US and the ToprolXL antitrust litigation.
In 2010 selling general and administrative costs included legal provision of 612m of which 592m was in respect to Seroquel legal matters.
The current status of these matters is described in Note 25.
These provisions constituted our best estimate at that time of losses expected for these matters.
Also included within selling general and administrative costs in 2010 were gains of 791m arising from changes made to benefits under certain of the Groups postretirement benefit plans chiefly the Groups UK pension plan.
Further details of this gain are included in Note 18.
In 2009 AstraZeneca was defending its interests in various federal and state investigations and civil litigation matters relating to drug marketing and pricing practices and in respect of which the Group made provisions in aggregate of 636m during 2009.
524m of this was made in respect of the US Attorneys Office investigation into sales and marketing practices involving Seroquel and 112m related to average wholesale price litigation.
Profit on disposal of subsidiary The profit on disposal of subsidiary in 2011 of 1483m relates to the sale of the Astra Tech business to DENTSPLY International Inc.
Further details are included in Note 22.
Other operating income and expense
Income 610 522 255 Amortisation 51 59 79 Impairment  123 150 Net gain on disposal of property plant and equipment 33 66 8 Gains on disposal of product rights   170 Net lossgain on disposal of other intangible assets  1 1 Gains on divestments of noncore products   216 Impairment of intangible assets relating to future licensing and contractual income   115 Other income 226 307 265 Other expense 41  18 Other operating income and expense 777 712 553 Royalty amortisation and impairment relates to income streams acquired with MedImmune.
Restructuring costs During 2011 the Group continued the restructuring programmes approved by the SET and announced in previous years.
In addition the Group announced further programmes during the year.
The tables below show the costs that have been charged in respect of these programmes by cost category and type.
Severance provisions are detailed in Note 17.
Cost of sales 54 144 188 Research and development 468 654 68 Selling general and administrative costs 639 404 403 Total charge 1161 1tel Severance costs 403 505 262 Accelerated depreciation and impairment 290 299 148 Total charge 1161 1202 659 Other costs are those incurred in designing and implementing the Groups various restructuring initiatives including internal project costs external consultancy fees and staff relocation costs.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 152 Financial Statements 3 Finance income and expense Finance income Returns on fixed deposits and equity securities 9 9 20 Returns on shortterm deposits 37 33 22 Expected return on postemployment defined benefit plan assets 502 451 388 Fair value gains on debt interest rate swaps and investments 4 23 1 Net exchange gains   31 Finance expense Interest on debt and commercial paper 404 450 542 Interest on overdrafts and other financing costs 29 29 18 Interest on postemployment defined benefit plan liabilities 539 543 493 Fair value charges on debt interest rate swaps and investments   145 Net exchange losses 8 11 Total 980 1033 1198 Net finance expense 428 517 736 The amount of exchange gains and losses recognised in profit other than those arising on financial instruments measured at fair value through profit or loss in accordance with IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement see Note 15 is a loss of 8m 2010 loss of 11m 2009 gain of 31m.
4 Taxation Taxation recognised in the profit for the period in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income is as follows Current tax expense Current year 2680 3065 2854 Adjustment for prior years 102 370 251 2578 3435 3105 Deferred tax expense Origination and reversal of temporary differences 141 369 98 Adjustment to prior years 86 170 60 Taxation recognised in the profit for the period 2351 2896 3263 Taxation relating to components of other comprehensive income is as follows Current and deferred tax Foreign exchange arising on consolidation 12 29 16 Actuarial loss for the period 214 18 158 Sharebased payments 21 9 17 Deferred tax impact of reduction in UK tax rate 53 23 Other 4  1 Taxation relating to components of other comprehensive income 198 61 192 Taxation has been provided at current rates on the profits earned for the periods covered by the Group Financial Statements.
The 2011 prior period current tax adjustment relates to a benefit of 520m arising from a number of tax settlements including the transfer pricing and related matters described in Note 25 partially offset by an increase in provisions for other tax contingencies and tax accrual to tax return adjustments.
The 2010 prior period current tax adjustment relates mainly to an increase in provisions for tax contingencies and double tax relief partially offset by a benefit of 342m arising from a number of tax settlements and tax accrual to tax return adjustments.
The 2009 prior period current tax adjustment relates mainly to tax accrual to tax return adjustments an increase in provisions in respect of a number of transfer pricing audits and double tax relief.
The 2011 and 2010 prior period deferred tax adjustments relate mainly to tax accrual to tax return adjustments and a reclassification from deferred tax to current tax of amounts provided in relation to tax contingencies for prior periods.
The 2009 prior year deferred tax adjustment relates to tax accrual to tax return adjustments and the recognition of previously unrecognised deferred tax assets.
To the extent that dividends remitted from overseas subsidiaries joint ventures and associates are expected to result in additional taxes appropriate amounts have been provided for.
No deferred tax has been provided for unremitted earnings of Group companies overseas as these are considered permanently employed in the business of these companies.
Unremitted earnings may be liable to overseas taxes and or UK taxation after allowing for double tax relief if distributed as dividends.
The aggregate amount of temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries and branches for which deferred tax liabilities have not been recognised totalled approximately 9155m at 31 December 2011 2010 16768m 2009 14846m.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 153 Financial Statements 4 Taxation continued Factors affecting future tax charges As a group involved in worldwide operations AstraZeneca is subject to several factors that may affect future tax charges principally the levels and mix of profitability in different jurisdictions transfer pricing regulations tax rates imposed and tax regime reforms.
It is the UK Governments intention to enact legislation which will reduce the main rate of UK corporation tax to 23% by 2014.
In December 2011 the UK Government also released draft legislation providing details on a proposed programme of corporate tax reforms including the introduction of a patent box regime.
Details of material tax exposures and items currently under audit and negotiation are set out in Note 25.
Tax reconciliation to UK statutory rate The table shown below reconciles the UK statutory tax charge to the Groups total tax charge.
Profit before tax 12367 10977 10807 Notional taxation charge at UK corporation tax rate of 26.5% 28% for 2010 28% for 2009 3277 3074 3026 Differences in effective overseas tax rates 340 333 212 Deferred tax credit relating to reduction in UK and other tax rates Unrecognised deferred tax asset 5  2 Items not deductible for tax purposes 71 12 156 Items not chargeable for tax purposes 32 36 20 Nontaxable gain arising from the Astra Tech disposal 389 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 188 200 311 Total tax charge for the year 2351 2896 3263 The 2011 item relates to the reduction in the UK statutory corporation tax rate from 27% the tax rate which was substantively enacted as effective from 1 April 2011 as at 31 December 2010 to the tax rate of 25% effective from 1 April 2012.
The 2010 item relates to the reduction in the UK statutory corporation tax rate from 28% to 27% effective from 1 April 2011.
The tax rate of 19% for the year ended 31 December 2011 is lower than the UK corporation tax rate of 26.5% mainly as a result of the nontaxable gain on the Astra Tech disposal the release of a tax provision following the settlement of a transfer pricing and related valuation matter described in Note 25 and the difference in effective overseas tax rates as discussed below.
AstraZeneca is domiciled in the UK but operates in other countries where the tax rates and tax laws are different to those in the UK.
The impact of differences in effective overseas tax rates on the Groups overall tax charge is shown above.
Profits arising from our manufacturing operation in Puerto Rico are granted special status and are taxed at a reduced rate compared with the normal rate of tax in that territory under a tax incentive grant that expires in 2016.
Deferred tax The movements in the net deferred tax balance during the year are as follows
Intangible
Pension and post retirement benefits
Untaxed reserves
Share schemes
Losses and tax credits carried forward
Total
Net deferred tax balance at 1 January 2009 337 3089 779 906 1091 598 100 64 335 27 1890 Other comprehensive income   140    17    157 Net deferred tax balance at 31 December 2009 208 2893 912 952 1474 470 129 71 231 3 1955 Other comprehensive income   46    4   1 41 Acquisition of subsidiary undertaking Net deferred tax balance at 31 December 2010 83 2566 679 970 1531 548 127 66 271 19 1670 Other comprehensive income   159    9   4 154 Disposal of subsidiary undertaking Exchange 3 1 6 8 34 21   4 2 31 Net deferred tax balance at 31 December 2011 220 2384 691 999 1533 625 102 61 133 13 1221 Untaxed reserves relate to taxable profits where the tax liability is deferred to later periods.
The deferred tax liability of 143m relates to the acquisition of Novexel.
The deferred tax adjustment of 37m relates to the Astra Tech disposal.
Includes losses and tax credits carried forward which will expire within 15 to 20 years.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 154 Financial Statements 4 Taxation continued The net deferred tax balance before the offset of balances within countries consists of
Intangible
Pension and post retirement benefits
Untaxed reserves
Share schemes
Losses and tax credits carried forward
Total
Deferred tax assets at 31 December   553 129  231 34 3146 Deferred tax liabilities at 31 December 2009 474 2940 6 16 1474 83  71  37 5101 Net deferred tax balance at 31 December 2009 208 2893 912 952 1474 470 129 71 231 3 1955 Deferred tax assets at 31 December   558 127  271 25 3066 Deferred tax liabilities at 31 December 2010 440 2620 7 18 1531 10  66  44 4736 Net deferred tax balance at 31 December 2010 83 2566 679 970 1531 548 127 66 271 19 1670 Deferred tax assets at 31 December 027  647 102  133 32 3122 Deferred tax liabilities at 31 December 2011 209 2437 8 28 1533 22  61  45 4343 Net deferred tax balance at 31 December 2011 220 2384 691 999 1533 625 102 61 133 13 1221 Analysed in the statement of financial position after offset of balances within countries as Deferred tax assets 1514 1475 1292 Deferred tax liabilities 2735 3145 3247 Net deferred tax balance 1221 1670 1955 Unrecognised deferred tax assets Deferred tax assets of 169m have not been recognised in respect of deductible temporary differences 2010 128m 2009 104m because it is not probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the Group can utilise the benefits therefrom.
5 Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Sharetel Profit for the financial year attributable to equity holders m 9983 8053 7521 Basic earnings per Ordinary Share 7.33 5.60 5.19 Diluted earnings per Ordinary Share 7.30 5.57 5.19 Weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue for basic earnings millions 1361 1438 1448 Dilutive impact of share options outstanding millions 6 8 2 Diluted weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue millions 1367 1446 1450 There are no options warrants or rights outstanding in respect of unissued shares except for employee share option schemes.
The number of options outstanding and the weighted average exercise price of these options is shown in Note 24.
The earnings figures used in the calculations above are posttax.
6 Segment information AstraZeneca is engaged in a single business activity of pharmaceuticals and the Group does not have multiple operating segments.
Our
All of these functional activities take place and are managed globally on a highly integrated basis.
We do not manage these individual functional areas separately.
We consider that the SET is AstraZenecas chief operating decisionmaking body as defined by IFRS 8.
The operation of the SET is principally driven by the management of the commercial operations RandD and manufacturing and supply.
The SET also includes Finance HR and Corporate Affairs Compliance IS and General Counsel representation.
All significant operating decisions are taken by the SET.
While members of the SET have responsibility for implementation of decisions in their respective areas operating decision making is at SET level as a whole.
Where necessary these are implemented through crossfunctional subcommittees that consider the Groupwide impact of a new decision.
For example product launch decisions would be initially considered by the SET and on approval passed to an appropriate subteam for implementation.
The impacts of being able to develop produce deliver and commercialise a wide range of pharmaceutical products drive the SET decision making process.
In assessing performance the SET reviews financial information on an integrated basis for the Group as a whole substantially in the form of and on the same basis as the Groups IFRS Financial Statements.
The high upfront cost of discovering and developing new products coupled with the relatively insignificant and stable unit cost of production means that there is not the clear link that exists in many manufacturing businesses between the revenue generated on an individual product sale and the associated cost and hence margin generated on a product.
Consequently the profitability of individual drugs or classes of drugs is not considered a key measure of performance for the business and is not monitored by the SET.
Resources are allocated on a Groupwide basis according to need.
In particular capital expenditure inlicensing and RandD resources are allocated between activities on merit based on overall therapeutic considerations and strategy under the aegis of the Groups Portfolio Investment Board to facilitate a Groupwide single combined discovery and development strategy.
The Groups acquisitions in the biologics area MedImmune and Cambridge Antibody Technology Group plc CAT have been integrated into the existing management structure of AstraZeneca both for allocation of resources and for assessment and monitoring of performance purposes.
As such although biologics is a relatively new technological area for the Group it does not operate as a separate operating segment.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 155 Financial Statements 6 Segment information continued Geographic areas The tables below show information by geographic area and for revenue and property plant and equipment material countries.
The figures show the revenue operating profit and profit before tax made by companies located in that areacountry together with segment assets segment assets acquired net operating assets and property plant and equipment owned by the same companies export sales and the related profit are included in the areacountry from which those sales were made.
Revenue
UK
External 1980 1952 1809 IntraGroup 9901 9957 9056 11881 11909 10865 Continental Europe Belgium 343 331 353 France 1799 1929 1880 Germany 1121 1151 1197 Italy 951 1000 1012 Sweden 964 1157 1070 Others 2363 2440 2622 IntraGroup 5101 5144 4944 13330 13914 13820 The Americas Canada 1589 1492 1188 US 13745 14010 14994 Others 1452 1387 1113 IntraGroup 2819 2341 1962 19605 19230 19257 Asia Africa and Australasia Australia 1166 981 790 Japan 2905 2458 2214 China 1261 1047 811 Others 1264 1172 1009 IntraGroup 70 67 80 6666 5725 4904 Continuing operations 51482 50778 48846 IntraGroup eliminations 17891 17509 16042 33591 33269 32804 Export sales from the UK totalled 11056m for the year ended 31 December 2011 2010 10944m 2009 9864m.
IntraGroup pricing is determined on an arms length basis.
Operating profit Profit before tax Profit from UK 2221 3258 3124 1803 3098 2813 Continental Europe 5210 4591 4809 5202 4581 4821 The Americas 4813 3278 3265 4828 2932 2832 Asia Africa and Australasia 55tel366 341 Continuing operations 12795 11494 11543 12367 10977 10807 Noncurrent assets Total assets UK 2941 3397 3810 15752 17171 17092 Continental Europe 3785 4470 3966 6811 7596 6706 The Americas 20090 20808 21354 26673 28175 28397 Asia Africa and Australasia 652 522 476 3594 3185 2725 Continuing operations 27468 29197 29606 52830 56127 54920 Assets acquired Net operating assets UK 414 314 537 3361 3273 4473 Continental Europe 344 1053 643 4113 4827 4094 The Americas 314 1125 711 18395 18795 19186 Asia Africa and Australasia 177 107 79 2380 2021 1707 Continuing operations 1249 2599 1970 28249 28916 29460 2011 includes profit on disposal of Astra Tech see Note 22.
Noncurrent assets exclude deferred tax assets and derivative financial instruments.
Included in Assets acquired are those assets that are expected to be used during more than one period property plant and equipment goodwill and intangible assets.
Net operating assets exclude shortterm investments cash shortterm borrowings loans retirement benefit obligations and nonoperating receivables and payables.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 156 Financial Statements 6 Segment information continued Property plant and equipment UK 1387 1628 1901 Sweden 1408 1647 1700 US 2309 2381 2386 Rest of the world 1321 1301 1320 Continuing operations 6425 6957 7307 Geographic markets The table below shows revenue in each geographic market in which customers are located.
UK 866 1033 1057 Continental Europe 8896 9315 9286 The Americas 16484 16629 17096 Asia Africa and Australasia 7345 6292 5365 Continuing operations 33591 33269 32804 Revenue is recognised at the point of delivery which is usually when title passes to the wholesaler.
Transactions with two wholesalers 2010 two 2009 two individually represented greater than 10% of total revenue.
The values of these transactions recorded as revenue were 4298m and 4170m 2010 4164m and 4129m 2009 4319m and 4228m.
7 Property plant and equipment Land and buildings Plant and equipment Assets in course of construction Total property plant and equipment
At 1 January 2009 5217 8534 863 14614 Capital expenditure telTransfer of assets into use 218 388 606 Disposals and other movements 400 937 20 1357 Exchange adjustments At 31 December 2009 5336 8803 1029 15168 Capital expenditure 1telTransfer of assets into use 342 668 1010 Disposals and other movements 40 449 4 493 Exchange adjustments At 31 December 2010 5699 9293 591 15583 Capital expenditure 1telTransfer of assets into use 261 294 555 Disposals and other movements 62 738 10 686 Reduction on disposal of subsidiaries 87 170 15 272 Exchange adjustments 42 68 12 122 At 31 December 2011 5911 8779 620 15310
At 1 January 2009 1930 5644 3 7571 Charge for year 219 674  893 Impairment 44 6  50 Disposals and other movements 343 859 4 1206 Exchange adjustments At 31 December 2009 1967 5899 5 7861 Charge for year 302 774  1076 Impairment 2 20  22 Disposals and other movements 29 396 5 420 Exchange adjustments 32 55  87 At 31 December 2010 2274 6352  8626 Charge for year 271 815  1086 Disposals and other movements 62 542  604 Reduction on disposal of subsidiaries 22 99  121 Exchange adjustments 26 76  102 At 31 December 2011 2435 6450  8885 Net book value At 31 December 2009 3369 2904 1034 7307 At 31 December 2010 3425 2941 591 6957 At 31 December 2011 3476 2329 620 6425 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 157 Financial Statements 7 Property plant and equipment continued There were no impairment charges in 2011.
Impairment charges in 2010 were due to the termination of the Certriad copromotion with Abbott and various productivity initiatives.
These costs were recognised in cost of sales and research and development respectively.
Impairment charges in 2009 were due to the productivity initiatives in the global supply chain in Italy and research and development in Canada.
These costs were recognised in cost of sales and research and development respectively.
The net book value of land and buildings comprised Freeholds 3476 3425 3369 8 Goodwill
At 1 January 10206 10228 10211 Exchange and other adjustments 20 22 17 At 31 December 10186 10206 10228 Amortisation and impairment losses At 1 January 335 339 337 Exchange and other adjustments 11 4 2 At 31 December 324 335 339 Net book value at 31 December 9862 9871 9889 For the purpose of impairment testing of goodwill the Group is regarded as a single cashgenerating unit.
The recoverable amount is based on value in use using discounted riskadjusted projections of the Groups pretax cash flows over 10 years.
The projections include assumptions about product launches competition from rival products and pricing policy as well as the possibility of generics entering the market.
In setting these assumptions we consider our past experience external sources of information including information on expected increases and ageing of the populations in our established markets and the expanding patient population in newer markets our knowledge of competitor activity and our assessment of future changes in the pharmaceutical industry.
The 10 year period is covered by internal budgets and forecasts.
Given that internal budgets and forecasts are prepared for all projections no general growth rates are used to extrapolate internal budgets and forecasts for the purposes of determining value in use.
No terminal value is included as these cash flows are more than sufficient to establish that an impairment does not exist.
The methods used to determine recoverable amounts have remained consistent with the prior year.
In arriving at value in use we disaggregate our projected pretax cash flows into groups reflecting similar risks and tax effects.
For each group of cash flows we use an appropriate discount rate reflecting those risks and tax effects.
In arriving at the appropriate discount rate for each group of cash flows we adjust AstraZenecas posttax weighted average cost of capital 7.0% for 2011 7.0% for 2010 7.6% for 2009 to reflect the impact of relevant industry risks the time value of money and tax effects.
The weighted average pretax discount rate we used was approximately 10% 10% for 2010 11% for 2009.
As a further check we compare our market capitalisation to the book value of our net assets and this indicates significant surplus at 31 December 2011 and 31 December 2010 and 31 December 2009.
No goodwill impairment was identified.
The Group has also performed sensitivity analysis calculations on the projections used and discount rate applied.
The Directors have concluded that given the significant headroom that exists and the results of the sensitivity analysis performed there is no significant risk that reasonable changes in any key assumptions would cause the carrying value of goodwill to exceed its value in use.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 158 Financial Statements 9 Intangible assets
Other
Software development costs
Cost
At 1 January 2009 13522 2175 991 16688 Additions  separately acquired 764 46 193 1003 Disposals 200 1  201 Exchange and other adjustments At 31 December 2009 14353 2304 1212 17869 Additions through business combinations 548   548 Additions  separately acquired 1017 20 206 1243 Disposals 239 2  241 Exchange and other adjustments 125 13 19 119 At 31 December 2010 15804 2335 1399 19538 Additions  separately acquired Reduction on disposal of subsidiaries  152  152 Exchange and other adjustments 94 9 4 107 At 31 December 2011 15899 2188 1634 19721 Amortisation and impairment losses At 1 January 2009 3061 688 616 4365 Amortisation for year Impairment Disposals 67   67 Exchange and other adjustments At 31 December 2009 3727 1148 768 5643 Amortisation for year 57telImpairment Disposals  1  1 Exchange and other adjustments 89 26 20 95 At 31 December 2010 5088 1425 867 7380 Amortisation for year 65telImpairment 552 1  553 Reduction on disposal of subsidiaries  39  39 Exchange and other adjustments 46 32 14 64 At 31 December 2011 6246 1474 1021 8741 Net book value At 31 December 2009 10626 1156 444 12226 At 31 December 2010 10716 910 532 12158 At 31 December 2011 9653 714 613 10980 Other intangibles consist mainly of licensing and rights to contractual income streams.
Amortisation charges are recognised in profit as follows
Other
Software development costs
Year ended 31 December 2009 Cost of sales 48   48 Selling general and administrative costs Other operating income and expense  135 Year ended 31 December 2010 Cost of sales 60   60 Selling general and administrative costs Other operating income and expense  99  9tel810 Year ended 31 December 2011 Cost of sales 102   102 Selling general and administrative costs Other operating income and expense  95  9tel911 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 159 Financial Statements 9 Intangible assets continued Impairment charges are recognised in profit as follows
Other
Software development costs
Year ended 31 December 2009 Research and development 93 7  100 Selling general and administrative costs  1 49 50 Other operating income and expense  265 Year ended 31 December 2010 Cost of sales 128   128 Research and development 571   571 Selling general and administrative costs  3 3 6 Other operating income and expense  128 Year ended 31 December 2011 Research and development 548 1  549 Selling general and administrative costs 4   4 Amortisation and impairment charges The 2011 impairment of product marketing and distribution rights includes a charge of 285m following the termination of development of the investigational compound olaparib for the maintenance treatment of serous ovarian cancer.
The 2011 impairment charge of product marketing and distribution rights also includes an impairment of 150m reflecting a lower probability of success assessment for TC5214 based on the results of the first two of four Phase III efficacy and tolerability studies of the compound as an adjunct therapy to an antidepressant in patients with major depressive disorder who do not respond adequately to initial antidepressant treatment.
The value of the remaining intangible assets held in relation to TC5214 determined using value in use calculations as detailed below is 50m.
We are expecting results of further clinical trials in 2012 which will affect our assessment of the probability of success of TC5214 which will result in either a reversal of all or part of the impairment recognised in 2011 or a further impairment charge.
The remaining 117m charge relates to the termination of other development projects during the year.
The 2010 impairment of product marketing and distribution rights results from the withdrawal of the biological license application pending at the FDA for motavizumab 445m and the termination of the lesogaberan development 128m and other development projects in the year.
The 2010 impairment of other intangibles chiefly results from a reassessment of the future royalties expected to be received relating to the HPV cervical cancer vaccine.
The 2009 impairment of product marketing and distribution rights results from the termination of development projects during the year.
The
2009 impairment of other intangibles results from a reassessment of the future royalties expected to be received relating to the HPV cervical cancer vaccine and a reassessment of other future licensing and contractual income expected to be earned within our biologics business.
The write downs in value of intangible assets other than those arising from termination of research and development activities were determined based on value in use calculations using discounted riskadjusted projections of the products expected cash flows over a period reflecting the patentprotected lives of the individual products.
The full period of projections is covered by internal budgets and forecasts.
In arriving at the appropriate discount rate to use for each product we adjust AstraZenecas posttax weighted average cost of capital 7.0% for 2011 7.0% for 2010 7.6% for 2009 to reflect the impact of risks and tax effects specific to the individual products.
The weighted average pretax discount rate we used was approximately 14% 2010 14% 2009 14%.
Significant assets
Carrying value Remaining amortisation period Intangible assets arising from joint venture with Merck Product marketing and distribution rights 149 2 and 6 years Advance payment Product marketing and distribution rights 420 7 years Partial retirement Product marketing and distribution rights 673 316 years First Option Product marketing and distribution rights 1546 112 years Nonrefundable deposit related to Merck and Co.
Second Option Product marketing and distribution rights 474 Not amortised Intangible assets arising from the acquisition of CAT Product marketing and distribution rights 304 4 and 9 years RSV franchise assets arising from the acquisition of MedImmune Product marketing and distribution rights 3895 14 years Intangible assets arising from the acquisition of MedImmune Licensing and contractual income 455 78 years Intangible assets arising from the acquisition of MedImmune Product marketing and distribution rights 580 20 years Intangible assets arising from the collaboration with BMS Product marketing and distribution rights 471 1112 years Intangible assets arising from the acquisition of Novexel Product marketing and distribution rights 294 Not amortised Intangible assets arising from the collaboration with Pozen Product marketing and distribution rights 189 12 years These assets are associated with the restructuring of the joint venture with Merck and Co.
Inc.
Further information can be found in Note 25.
Assets in development are not amortised but are tested annually for impairment.
These assets arise from the collaboration agreement with BMS for Onglyza and dapagliflozin.
These assets arise from the collaboration agreement with Pozen for Vimovo.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 160 Financial Statements 10 Other investments Noncurrent investments Equity securities available for sale 20tel211 184 Current investments Equity securities and bonds available for sale 296 355 Equity securities held for trading 25 20 18 Fixed deposits 3927 1107 1466 4248 1482 1484 The equity securities and bonds available for sale in current investments of 296m 2010 355m 2009 nil are held in an escrow account.
Further details of this escrow account are included in Note 18.
Fixed deposits relate to investments in US Treasury bills and commercial paper with a maturity of greater than 90 days at inception.
Impairment charges of 3m in respect of available for sale securities are included in other operating income and expense in profit 2010 2m 2009 18m.
11 Inventories Raw materials and consumables 588 539 445 Inventories in process 645 665 726 Finished goods and goods for resale 619 478 579 1852 1682 1750 Inventory writeoffs in the year amounted to 51m 2010 69m 2009 83m.
12 Trade and other receivables Amounts due within one year Trade receivables 6696 6328 5863 Less Amounts provided for doubtful debts Note 23 66 81 81 6630 6247 5782 Other receivables 1172 607 1170 Prepayments and accrued income 725 733 580 8527 7587 7532 Amounts due after more than one year Other receivables 65 64 27 Prepayments and accrued income 16tel260 177 Trade and other receivables 8754 7847 7709 13 Cash and cash equivalents Cash at bank and in hand 1488 1750 1077 Shortterm deposits 6083 9318 8841 Cash and cash equivalents 7571 11068 9918 Unsecured bank overdrafts 137 87 90 Cash and cash equivalents in the cash flow statement 7434 10981 9828 The Groups insurance subsidiaries hold cash and cash equivalents totalling 776m 2010 415m 2009 173m of which 543m 2010 370m 2009 49m is required to meet insurance solvency requirements and which as a result is not readily available for the general purposes of the Group.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 161 Financial Statements 14 Interestbearing loans and borrowings
Current liabilities Bank overdrafts On demand 137 87 90 4.625% Noncallable bond Euros 2010   1073 5.625% Noncallable bond Euros 2010   717 5.4% Callable bond US dollars 2012 1769 Other loans Within one year 84 38 46 1990 125 1926 Noncurrent liabilities 5.4% Callable bond US dollars 2012  1800 1805 5.4% Callable bond US dollars tel821 5.125% Noncallable bond Euros tel1072 5.9% Callable bond US dollars 2017 1896 1855 1818 7% Guaranteed debentures US dollars tel346 5.75% Noncallable bond Pounds sterling tel558 6.45% Callable bond US dollars 2037 2716 2718 2717 7338 9097 9137 All loans and borrowings above are unsecured.
15 Financial instruments Derivative financial instruments Set out below is a summary of the derivative financial instruments included in the consolidated statement of financial position at 31 December 2011 31 December 2010 and 31 December 2009.
Noncurrent assets
Current liabilities
Designated in a fair value hedge 153 20  173 Related to instruments designated at fair value through profit or loss 189   189 Other derivatives  5 9 4 31 December 2011 342 25 9 358
Current assets
Total
Designated in a fair value hedge 164   164 Related to instruments designated at fair value through profit or loss 160   160 Other derivatives  9 8 1 31 December 2010 324 9 8 325
Current assets
Total
Designated in a fair value hedge 135   135 Related to instruments designated at fair value through profit or loss 127   127 Other derivatives 31 December 2009 262 24 90 196 Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 162 Financial Statements 15 Financial instruments continued Fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities Set out below is a comparison by category of carrying values and fair values of all the Groups financial assets and financial liabilities at 31 December 2011 31 December 2010 and 31 December 2009.
None of the financial assets or financial liabilities have been reclassified during the year.
Instruments in a fair value hedge relationship
Other financial instruments at fair value
Held for trading
Total carrying value
Cash and cash equivalents      7571 7571 7571 Overdrafts      137 137 137 Loans due within one year 770     1083 1853 1891 Loans due after more than one year 899 1221    5218 7338 8765 Derivative financial instruments 173 189 4    358 358 Other investments    497 25 3927 4449 4449 Other financial assets      7867 7867 7867 Other financial liabilities      9360 9360 9360 Cash and cash equivalents      11068 11068 11068 Overdrafts      87 87 87 Loans due within one year      38 38 38 Loans due after more than one year 1659 1196    6242 9097 10022 Derivative financial instruments 164 160 1    325 325 Other investments    566 20 1107 1693 1693 Other financial assets   25   6893 6918 6918 Other financial liabilities   50   8963 9013 9013 Cash and cash equivalents      9918 9918 9918 Overdrafts      90 90 90 Loans due within one year      1836 1836 1867 Loans due after more than one year 1629 1167    6341 9137 9832 Derivative financial instruments 135 127 66    196 196 Other investments    184 18 1466 1668 1668 Other financial assets      6979 6979 6979 Other financial liabilities      8872 8872 8872 Includes borrowings and derivatives designated as hedged items in fair value hedge relationships with respect to interest rate risk.
Includes borrowings designated at fair value through profit or loss and related derivatives.
Includes derivatives not designated in hedge relationships or related to financial instruments designated at fair value through profit or loss and contingent consideration arising on business combinations Note 22.
Includes borrowings designated as hedges of net investments in foreign operations of 1505m 2010 1528m 2009 1630m held at amortised cost.
The fair value of these borrowings was 1752m at 31 December 2011 2010 1687m 2009 1747m.
Other financial assets represent trade and other receivables Note 12 excluding prepayments and accrued income.
Other financial liabilities represent trade and other payables Note 16 excluding deferred income.
A gain of 4m was made during the year on the fair value of bonds designated at fair value through profit and loss due to increased credit risk.
A gain of 44m has been made on these bonds since designation due to increased credit risk.
Changes in credit risk had no material effect on any other financial assets and liabilities recognised at fair value in the Groups Financial Statements.
The change in fair value attributable to changes in credit risk is calculated as the change in fair value not attributable to market risk.
The amount payable at maturity on bonds designated at fair value through profit or loss is 1037m.
The methods and assumptions used to estimate the fair values of financial instruments together with their carrying values are as follows Cash and overdrafts  held on the consolidated statement of financial position at amortised costs.
Fair value approximates to carrying value.
Loans due within one year and after more than one year  the fair value of fixedrate publicly traded debt is based on year end quoted market prices the fair value of floating rate debt is nominal value as mark to market differences would be minimal given the frequency of resets.
The carrying value of loans designated at fair value through profit or loss is the fair value.
For loans designated in a fair value hedge relationship carrying value is initially measured at fair value and remeasured for fair value changes in respect of the hedged risk at each reporting date.
All other loans are held at amortised cost.
Derivative financial instruments  consists of interest rate swaps included in instruments designated at fair value if related to debt designated at fair value or instruments in a fair value hedge relationship if formally designated as in a fair value hedge relationship and forward foreign exchange contracts included in other financial instruments at fair value.
All derivatives are held at fair value.
Interest rate swaps  the fair value is estimated using appropriate zero coupon curve valuation techniques to discount future contractual cash flows based on rates current at year end.
Forward foreign exchange contracts  the majority of contracts for existing transactions had maturities of less than one month from year end.
The fair value of forward foreign exchange contracts is estimated by discounting the future contractual cash flows using appropriate yield curves based on market forward foreign exchange rates at the year end.
Other investments  held on the consolidated statement of financial position at fair value.
These include equity securities held on the consolidated statement of financial position as other investments Note 10.
The fair value of listed investments is based on year end quoted market prices.
Unlisted investments are held at cost which approximates to fair value.
Other financial assets and other financial liabilities  with the exception of contingent consideration which is held at fair value see Note 22 other financial assets and liabilities are held on the consolidated statement of financial position at amortised costs with carrying value being a reasonable approximation of fair value.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 163 Financial Statements 15 Financial instruments continued The interest rates used to discount future cash flows for fair value adjustments where applicable are based on market swap curves at the reporting date and were as followstel Derivatives 0.9% to 2.3% 0.7% to 4.0% 2.0% to 4.6% Loans and borrowings 0.9% to 2.3% 0.7% to 4.0% 2.0% to 4.6% Fair value hierarchy The table below analyses financial instruments carried at fair value by valuation method.
The different levels have been defined as follows Level 1 quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly ie as prices or indirectly ie derived from prices.
Level 3 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data unobservable inputs.
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
31 December 2011 Equity securities and bonds available for sale 338  159 497 Equity securities held for trading 25   25 Derivative assets  367  367 Assets 36telBorrowing designated at fair value through profit or loss 1221   1221 Derivative liabilities  9  9 Liabilities 1221 9  1230 31 December 2010 Equity securities and bonds available for sale 399  167 566 Equity securities held for trading 20   20 Derivative assets  333  333 Other financial assets   25 25 Assets 41telBorrowing designated at fair value through profit or loss 1196   1196 Derivative liabilities  8  8 Other financial liabilities   50 50 Liabilities 1196 8 50 1254 31 December 2009 Equity securities available for sale 41  143 184 Equity securities held for trading 18   18 Derivative assets  286  286 Assets 5telBorrowing designated at fair value through profit or loss 1167   1167 Derivative liabilities  90  90 Liabilities 1167 90  1257 Equity securities available for sale which are analysed at Level 3 represent investments in private biotech companies.
In the absence of specific market data these unlisted investments are held at cost adjusted as necessary for impairments which approximates to fair value.
Hence carrying value is adjusted only for additions sales and permanent impairment and for no other movement.
Consequently in the current year no change has been made to the fair value of individual investments.
Level 3 other financial assets and liabilities arose on the acquisition of Novexel and the subsequent transaction with Forest as detailed in Note 22.
The table above does not include bonds designated in a fair value hedge relationship.
The carrying value of these bonds is initially measured at fair value and remeasured only for fair value changes in respect of the hedged risk.
Therefore the bonds are not carried at full fair value at 31 December 2011 and have not been classified within the hierarchy.
Net gains and losses on financial assets and financial liabilities Included in operating profit Lossesgains on forward foreign exchange contracts 75 29 114 Gainslosses on receivables and payables 68 80 141 Losses on available for sale current investments 22 2 18 Included in finance income and expense Interest and fair value adjustments in respect of debt designated at fair value through profit or loss net of derivatives 6 5 169 Interest and changes in carrying values of debt designated as hedged items net of derivatives 17 18 35 Interest and fair value changes on fixed and shortterm deposits and equity securities 45 61 43 Interest on debt overdrafts and commercial paper held at amortised cost 405 452 501 Exchange lossesgains on financial assets and liabilities 8 11 31 Included in other comprehensive income Foreign exchange differences on borrowings forming net investment hedges 24 101 68 Amortisation of loss on cash flow hedge through profit 2 1 1 Available for sale gains taken to equity  65 Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 164 Financial Statements 15 Financial instruments continued 10m fair value gains 2010 29m fair value gains 2009 95m fair value losses on interest rate fair value hedging instruments and 9m fair value losses 2010 29m fair value losses 2009 97m fair value gains on the related hedged items have been included within interest and changes in carrying values of debt designated as hedged items net of derivatives.
All fair value hedge relationships were effective during the year.
The accounting treatment for fair value hedges is disclosed in the Group Accounting Policies.
29m fair value gains 2010 33m fair value gains 2009 94m fair value losses on derivatives related to debt instruments designated at fair value through profit or loss and 26m fair value losses 2010 28m fair value losses 2009 53m fair value losses on debt instruments designated at fair value through profit or loss have been included within interest and fair value adjustments in respect of debt designated at fair value through profit or loss net of derivatives.
The accounting treatment for debt designated at fair value through profit or loss is disclosed in the Group Accounting Policies section from page 146.
The amortisation of loss on cash flow hedge through profit included in other comprehensive income relates to a loss on a cash flow hedge of a prospective debt issue which was taken directly to reserves in 2007 and is being amortised through profit over the remaining life of the underlying debt instrument.
Ineffectiveness on the net investment hedge taken to profit was nil 2010 nil 2009 nil.
The accounting treatment for net investment hedges is disclosed in the Group Accounting Policies section from page 146.
16 Trade and other payables Current liabilities Trade payables 2155 2257 2316 Value added and payroll taxes and social security 343 323 342 Rebates and chargebacks 3285 2839 2618 Other payables 718 945 1038 Accruals 2474 2297 2373 8975 8661 8687 Noncurrent liabilities Other payables Provisions for liabilities and charges
Environmental
Employee benefits
Other
Total
At 1 January tel84 25 284 1142 Charge for year  1064 Cash paid 341 23  13 34 411 Reversals 89    28 117 Exchange and other movements 13 1 1  3 8 At 31 December tel95 648 320 1686 Charge for year  1361 Cash paid 335 43  709 22 1109 Reversals 26   1 22 49 Exchange and other movements At 31 December tel127 562 471 1938 Charge for year 450 5 1telCash paid 377 32 17 153 78 657 Reversals 55    85 140 Exchange and other movements 13  16 4 6 5 At 31 December 2011 664 9tel1862 Due within one year 1388 1095 1209 Due after more than one year 474 843 477 1862 1938 1686 AstraZeneca is undergoing a global restructuring initiative which involves rationalisation of the Global Supply Chain the Sales and Marketing Organisation IS and business support infrastructure and RandD.
Employee costs in connection with the initiatives are recognised in severance provisions.
Details of the environmental and legal provisions are provided in Note 25.
Employee benefit provisions include the executive deferred bonus plan.
Further details are included in Note 24.
Other provisions comprise amounts relating to specific legal or constructive obligations and disputes.
No provision has been released or applied for any purpose other than that for which it was established.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 165 Financial Statements 18 Postretirement benefits
Background
The Company and most of its subsidiaries offer retirement plans which cover the majority of employees in the Group.
Many of these plans are defined contribution where AstraZenecas contribution and resulting charge is fixed at a set level or is a set percentage of employees pay.
However several plans mainly in the UK the US and Sweden are defined benefit where benefits are based on employees length of service and average final salary typically averaged over one three or five years.
The major defined benefit plans apart from the collectively bargained Swedish plan which is still open to employees born before 1979 have been closed to new entrants since 2000.
The major defined benefit plans are funded through legally separate fiduciaryadministered funds.
The cash funding of the plans which may from time to time involve special payments is designed in consultation with independent qualified actuaries to ensure that the assets together with future contributions should be sufficient to meet future obligations.
The funding is monitored rigorously by AstraZeneca and appropriate fiduciaries specifically with reference to AstraZenecas credit rating market capitalisation cash flows and the solvency of the relevant pension scheme.
Financing Principles 96.7% of the Groups defined benefit obligations at 31 December 2011 are in schemes within the UK the US Sweden or Germany.
In these countries the pension obligations are funded with reference to the following financing principles The Group has a fundamental belief in funding the benefits it promises to employees.
The Group considers its pension arrangements in the context of its broader capital structure.
In general it does not believe in committing excessive capital for funding while it has better uses of capital within the business nor does it wish to generate surpluses.
The pension funds are not part of the Groups core business.
The Group believes in taking some rewarded risks with the investments underlying the funding subject to a medium to longterm plan to reduce those risks if opportunities arise.
The Group recognises that deciding to hold certain investments may cause volatility in the funding position.
The Group would not wish to amend its contribution level for relatively small deviations from its preferred funding level because it is expected that there will be shortterm volatility but it is prepared to react appropriately to more significant deviations.
In the event that local regulations require an additional level of financing the Group would consider the use of alternative methods of providing this that do not require immediate cash funding but help mitigate exposure of the pension arrangement to the credit risk of the Group.
These principles are appropriate to AstraZenecas business at the present date should circumstances change they may require review.
AstraZeneca has developed a funding framework to implement these principles.
This determines the cash contributions payable to the pension funds but does not affect the IAS 19 liabilities.
To reduce the risk of committing excess capital to pension funds liability valuations are based on the expected return on the actual pension assets rather than a corporate bond yield.
At present this puts a different value on the liabilities than IAS 19.
UK
With regard to the Groups UK defined benefit fund the above principles are modified in light of the UK regulatory requirements and resulting discussions with the Pension Fund Trustee.
The most recent full actuarial valuation was carried out at 31 March 2010.
Under the agreed funding principles for the UK cash contributions will be paid to the UK Pension Fund to target a level of assets in excess of the current expected cost of providing benefits.
In addition AstraZeneca will make contributions to an escrow account which will be held outside of the UK Pension Fund.
The escrow account assets will be payable to the fund in agreed circumstances for example in the event of AstraZeneca and the Pension Fund Trustee agreeing on a change to the current longterm investment strategy.
The market value of the funds assets at the valuation date was 3129m 4832m equivalent representing 79% of the funds actuarially assessed liabilities Technical Provisions.
The Company has agreed to fund the shortfall by making payments of 72.5m 112m a year until 31 December 2011 and then lump sum payments totalling 715m 1103m before 30 June 2013.
The first of these lump sum payments of 180m 278m was paid into the UK Pension Fund in December 2011 from existing investments held in escrow for the Pension Fund.
A further 300m 463m was paid into the UK Pension Fund during January 2012 with the balance payable by 30 June 2013.
This is in addition to the contributions required to meet the ongoing benefits accruing in the region of 24m 37m per annum.
In 2011 132m 213m was paid into the escrow account and a further 230m 355m was paid in during January 2012.
At 31 December 2011 192m 296m of escrow fund assets are included within other investments see Note 10.
Under the agreed funding principles used to set the Technical Provisions the key assumptions as at 31 March 2010 are as follows longterm UK price inflation set at 3.8% per annum salary increases at 0% per annum as a result of pensionable pay levels being frozen in 2010 pension increases at 3.55% per annum and investment returns at 5.9% per annum.
During the first half of 2010 following consultation with its UK employees representatives AstraZeneca introduced a freeze on pensionable pay at 30 June 2010 levels for defined benefit members of the UK Pension Fund.
The defined benefit fund remains open to existing members and employees who choose to leave the defined benefit fund will retain a deferred pension in addition to being offered membership in a new Group Self Invested Personal Pension Plan.
The amendment to the UK defined benefit fund to freeze pensionable pay at 30 June 2010 levels represents an accounting curtailment of certain pension obligations.
The majority of members opted to remain in the defined benefit fund and continue benefit accrual with frozen pensionable pay.
In accordance with IAS 19 the scheme obligations were revalued by the scheme actuaries immediately prior to the change and assumptions reviewed at that date.
The resulting credit of 693m was recognised in comprehensive income in 2010.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 166 Financial Statements 18 Postretirement benefits continued Rest of Group The IAS 19 positions as at 31 December 2011 are shown below for each of the other countries with significant defined benefit plans.
These plans account for 91% of the Groups defined benefit obligations outside of the UK.
These plans are funded in line with the financing principles and contributions paid as prescribed by the funding framework.
The US defined benefits programme was actuarially revalued at 31 December 2011 when plan obligations were 1987m and plan assets were 1593m.
This includes obligations in respect of the nonqualified plan which is largely unfunded.
The Swedish defined benefits programme was actuarially revalued at 31 December 2011 when plan obligations were estimated to amount to 1545m and plan assets were 902m.
The German defined benefits programme was actuarially revalued at 31 December 2011 when plan obligations amounted to 258m and plan assets were 23m.
On current bases it is expected that contributions excluding those in respect of past service cost during the year ended 31 December 2012 to the four main countries will be 664m.
Postretirement benefits other than pensions In the US and to a lesser extent in certain other countries AstraZenecas employment practices include the provision of healthcare and life assurance benefits for retired employees.
As at 31 December 2011 some 3431 retired employees and covered dependants currently benefit from these provisions and some 10694 current employees will be eligible on their retirement.
AstraZeneca accrues for the present value of such retiree obligations over the working life of the employee.
In practice these benefits will be funded with reference to the financing principles.
The cost of postretirement benefits other than pensions for the Group in 2011 was 12m 2010 18m 2009 19m.
Plan assets were 290m and plan obligations were 330m at 31 December 2011.
These benefit plans have been included in the disclosure of postretirement benefits under IAS 19.
Financial assumptions Qualified independent actuaries have updated the actuarial valuations under IAS 19 of the major defined benefit schemes operated by the Group to 31 December 2011.
The assumptions used by the actuaries are chosen from a range of possible actuarial assumptions which due to the longterm nature of the schemes may not necessarily be borne out in practice.
These assumptions were as follows 2011 2010 UK Rest of Group UK Rest of Group Inflation assumption 3.2% 2.3% 3.6% 2.3% Rate of increase in salaries 3.4% 3.4% Rate of increase in pensions in payment 3.1% 0.9% 3.5% 0.9% Discount rate 4.8% 4.1% 5.5% 4.9% Longterm rate of return expected at 31 December Equities 7.5% 7.4% 8.0% 7.9% Bonds 4.5% 3.8% 5.1% 5.0% Others 2.8% 3.8% 6.1% 4.7% Rate of increase in medical costs initial rate 10.0% 9.0% 10.0% 10.0% Pensionable pay frozen at 30 June 2010 levels following UK fund changes.
The expected return on assets is determined with reference to the expected longterm level of dividends interest and other returns derived from the plan assets together with realised and unrealised gains or losses on the plan assets less any costs of administering the plan less any tax payable by the plan.
The expected returns are based on longterm market expectations and analysed on a regular basis to ensure that any sustained movements in underlying markets are reflected.
Demographic assumptions The mortality assumptions are based on countryspecific mortality tables.
These are compared to actual AstraZeneca experience and adjusted where sufficient data is available.
Additional allowance for future improvements in life expectancy is included for all major schemes where there is credible data to support this continuing trend.
The table below illustrates life expectancy assumptions at age 65 for male members retiring in 2011 and members expected to retire in 2031 2010 2010 and 2030 respectively.
Life expectancy assumption for a male member retiring at age 65 Countrytel 2030 Germany 18.3 21.0 17.9 20.7 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 167 Financial Statements 18 Postretirement benefits continued Postretirement scheme deficit The assets and obligations of the defined benefit schemes operated by the Group at 31 December 2011 as calculated in accordance with IAS 19 Employee Benefits are shown below.
The fair values of the schemes assets are not intended to be realised in the short term and may be subject to significant change before they are realised.
The present value of the schemes obligations is derived from cash flow projections over long periods and is therefore inherently uncertain.
2011 2010
Rest of Group
UK
Rest of Group
Scheme assets Equities 2221 1084 3305 2437 1153 3590 Bonds 2961 1382 4343 2660 1124 3784 Others Total fair value of scheme assets 5688 2831 8519 5149 2618 7767 Present value of scheme obligations 7042 4157 11199 6554 3691 10245 Past service cost not yet recognised  6 6  6 6 Deficit in the scheme as recognised in the statement of financial position 1354 1320 2674 1405 1067 2472 Fair value of scheme assets 2011 2010
Rest of Group
UK
Rest of Group
At beginning of year 5149 2618 7767 4853 2402 7255 Expected return on scheme assets 34tel146 451 Expenses 7  7 7  7 Actuarial lossesgains 4 35 31 244 4 240 Exchange  38 38 204 4 208 Employer contributions 48tel245 469 Participant contributions Benefits paid 286 195 481 294 170 464 Scheme assets fair value at end of year 5688 2831 8519 5149 2618 7767 The actual return on the plan assets was a gain of 533m 2010 gain of 691m.
Movement in postretirement scheme obligations 2011 2010
Rest of Group
UK
Rest of Group
Present value of obligation in scheme at beginning of year 6554 3691 10245 7055 3591 10646 Current service cost 49 110 159 97 114 211 Past service costcredit 32 37 69 39 106 67 Participant contributions 9 3 12 28 3 31 Benefits paid 28tel170 464 Other finance expense 364 175 539 371 172 543 Expenses 7  7 7  7 Actuarial lossgain 328 444 772 221 65 286 Settlements and curtailments Exchange 28 235 Present value of obligations in scheme at end of year 7042 4157 11199 6554 3691 10245 The obligation arises from the following plans 2011 2010
Rest of Group
UK
Rest of Group
Funded 7016 3689 10705 6526 3232 9758 Total 7042 4157 11199 6554 3691 10245 Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 168 Financial Statements 18 Postretirement benefits continued Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income disclosures The amounts that have been charged to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income in respect of defined benefit schemes for the year ended 31 December 2011 are set out below 2011 2010
Rest of Group
UK
Rest of Group
Operating profit Current service cost 49 110 159 97 114 211 Past service costcredit 32 37 69 39 75 36 Settlements and curtailments Total charge to operating profit 81 94 175 557 33 524 Finance expense Expected return on postretirement scheme assets 34tel146 451 Interest on postretirement scheme obligations 364 175 539 371 172 543 Net return 24 13 37 66 26 92 Charge before taxation 105 107 212 491 59 432 Other comprehensive income Difference between the actual return and the expected return on the postretirement scheme assets 4 35 31 244 4 240 Experience lossesgains arising on the postretirement scheme obligations 11 10 21 81 5 76 Changes in assumptions underlying the present value of the postretirement scheme obligations 317 434 751 140 70 210 Actuarial lossesgains recognised 332 409 741 23 69 46 Included in total assets and obligations for the UK is 388m in respect of members defined contribution sections of the scheme.
Group costs in respect of defined contribution schemes during the year were 262m 2010 228m.
During 2011 the Group disposed of Astra Tech see Note 22 resulting in a curtailment gain of 44m.
Actuarial gains and lossestel 2008 2007
Present value of obligations m 7042 6554 7055 5029 7644 Fair value of scheme assets m 5688 5149 4853 3835 6310 Deficit in the scheme m 1354 1405 2202 1194 1334 Experience adjustments on Scheme assets Amount m 4 244 293 1185 185 Percentage of scheme assets 0.1% 4.7% 6.0% 30.9% 2.9% Scheme obligations Amount m 328 221 1218 972 114 Percentage of scheme obligations 4.7% 3.4% 17.3% 19.3% 1.5% Rest of Group Present value of obligations m 4157 3691 3591 3591 3348 Fair value of scheme assets m 2831 2618 2402 2013 2644 Deficit in the scheme m 1326 1073 1189 1578 704 Experience adjustments on Scheme assets Percentage of scheme assets 1.2% 0.2% 7.5% 34.8% 0.9% Scheme obligations Percentage of scheme obligations 10.7% 1.8% 4.9% 8.9% 0.5%
Present value of obligations m 11199 10245 10646 8620 10992 Fair value of scheme assets m 8519 7767 7255 5848 8954 Deficit in the scheme m 2680 2478 3391 2772 2038 Experience adjustments on Scheme assets Amount m 31 240 473 1885 209 Percentage of scheme assets 0.4% 3.1% 6.5% 32.2% 2.3% Scheme obligations Amount m 772 286 1042 653 96 Percentage of scheme obligations 6.9% 2.8% 9.8% 7 .6% 0.9% AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 169 Financial Statements 18 Postretirement benefits continued Transactions with pension schemes During the year the Group made loans to the UK and Swedish pension schemes to enable these schemes to manage their shortterm liquidity requirements.
The maximum balance outstanding in the year was 10m and the amount outstanding at 31 December 2011 was 1m.
Reserves
Included within the retained earnings reserve are accumulated actuarial gains and losses and related deferred tax balances.
Movements on this balance are as follows At 1 January 1865 1800 1371 Actuarial losses 741 46 569 Deferred tax 159 19 140 At 31 December 2447 1865 1800 The cumulative amount of actuarial losses before deferred tax recognised in other comprehensive income is 3223m 2010 2482m 2009 2436m.
Discount rate sensitivity The following table shows the US dollar effect of a 1% change in the discount rate on the retirement benefits obligations in our four main defined pension obligation benefit countries.
2011 2010 1% 1% 1% 1% UK m 934 1088 937 1093 Germany m 41 49 37 44 Total m 1503 1773 1399 1662 Sensitivity of medical cost assumptions Effect of change in medical cost assumption increasedecrease 2011 2010 1% 1% 1% 1% Current service and interest cost of net periodic postemployment medical costs m 1 1 4 3 Accumulated postemployment benefit obligation for medical costs m 10 10 10 11 19 Reserves Retained earnings The cumulative amount of goodwill written off directly to reserves resulting from acquisitions net of disposals amounted to 680m 2010 682m 2009 667m using year end rates of exchange.
At 31 December 2011 36177 shares at a cost of 2m have been deducted from retained earnings 2010 57717 shares at a cost of 3m 2009 24178 shares at a cost of 1m.
There are no significant statutory or contractual restrictions on the distribution of current profits of subsidiaries joint ventures or associates undistributed profits of prior years are in the main permanently employed in the businesses of these companies.
The undistributed income of AstraZeneca companies overseas might be liable to overseas taxes andor UK taxation after allowing for double taxation relief if they were to be distributed as dividends see Note 4.
Cumulative translation differences included within retained earnings Balance at beginning of year 1798 1656 1323 Foreign exchange arising on consolidation 60 26 388 Exchange adjustments on goodwill recorded against other reserves 2 15 13 Foreign exchange differences on borrowings forming net investment hedges 24 101 68 Net exchange movement in retained earnings 38 142 333 Balance at end of year 1760 1798 1656 Other reserves The other reserves arose from the cancellation of 1255m of share premium account by the Company in 1993 and the redenomination of share capital 157m in 1999.
The reserves are available for writing off goodwill arising on consolidation and subject to guarantees given to preserve creditors at the date of the court order are available for distribution.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 170 Financial Statements 20 Share capital of the Company Allotted calledup and fully paid Issued Ordinary Shares 0.25 each 323 352 363 Redeemable Preference Shares 1 each  50000 At 31 December 2011 1292355052 Ordinary Shares were in issue.
The Redeemable Preference Shares carry limited class voting rights and no dividend rights.
This class of shares is capable of redemption at par at the option of the Company on the giving of seven days written notice to the registered holder of the shares.
The movements in the number of Ordinary Shares during the year can be summarised as follows
2011 2010 At 1 January 1409 1451 Issues of shares 11 12 Repurchase of shares 128 54 At 31 December 1292 1409 Share repurchases During the year the Company repurchased 128m Ordinary Shares at an average price of 2932 pence per share 2010 54m Ordinary Shares at an average price of 3111 pence per share 2009 nil.
These shares were subsequently cancelled.
Share schemes A total of 11m Ordinary Shares were issued during the year in respect of share schemes 2010 12m Ordinary Shares 2009 3m Ordinary Shares.
Details of movements in the number of Ordinary Shares under option are shown in Note 24 details of options granted to Directors are shown in the Directors Remuneration Report from page 113.
Shares held by subsidiaries No shares in the Company were held by subsidiaries in any year.
21 Dividends to shareholders Per share Per share Per share Final 1.85 1.71 1.50 2594 2484 2171 Interim 0.85 0.70 0.59 1158 1010 855 2.70 2.41 2.09 3752 3494 3026 The second interim dividend to be confirmed as final is 1.95 per Ordinary Share and 2520m in total.
This will be payable on 19 March 2012.
On payment of the dividends exchange gains of 3m 2010 gains of 19m 2009 gains of 17m arose.
These exchange gains are included in Note 3.
22 Acquisitions and disposals of business operations 2011 disposals Astra Tech On 31 August 2011 the Group completed the sale of the Astra Tech business to DENTSPLY International Inc.
On the loss of control the Group derecognised the assets and liabilities of the subsidiary.
The surplus arising on the loss of control is recognised in profit.
Astra Techs results were consolidated for the period until disposal and contributed 386m 2010 535m 2009 506m in revenue and 16m 2010 55m 2009 50m in profit after tax.
Noncurrent assets 281 Current assets 193 Current liabilities 104 Noncurrent liabilities 91 Net book value of assets disposed 279 Fees and other disposal costs 59 Exchange recycled on disposal 26 Profit on disposal 1483 Less Cash held in disposed undertaking 23 Net cash consideration 1772 The gain on disposal of Astra Tech is nontaxable.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 171 Financial Statements 22 Acquisitions and disposals of business operations continued 2010 acquisitions
On 3 March 2010 AstraZeneca completed the acquisition of Novexel.
Novexel is a research company focused on the infection therapy area and is based in France.
This acquisition strengthens our research capabilities in the infection therapy area.
AstraZeneca acquired 100% of Novexels shares for an upfront consideration of 427m with additional consideration of up to 75m becoming payable to Novexel shareholders on the completion of certain development milestones.
At both the date of acquisition and at 31 December 2010 the fair value of this contingent consideration was 50m.
For the tenmonth period postacquisition to the end of 2010 and the full year Novexel had no revenues and its loss was immaterial.
Book value Fair value adjustment Fair value Noncurrent assets 1 548 549 Current assets 89  89 Current liabilities 18  18 Noncurrent liabilities 85 58 143 Total assets acquired 13 490 477
Fair value of total consideration 477 Less fair value of contingent consideration 50 Total upfront consideration 427 Subsequent to the completion of the acquisition of Novexel AstraZeneca entered into a collaboration with Forest on the future codevelopment and commercialisation of two latestage antibiotic development programmes acquired with Novexel ceftazidimeNXL 104 CAZ104 and ceftarolineNXL 104 CEF104.
These antibiotic combinations utilise Novexels novel investigational betalactamase inhibitor NXL 104 to overcome antibiotic resistance and treat the increasing number of infections resistant to existing therapies.
In addition Forest acquired rights to CAZ104 in North America and bought down payment obligations to Novexel in relation to CEF104 from previous existing licence arrangements.
In consideration for these rights Forest paid Novexel then an AstraZeneca group company a sum of 210m on 3 March 2010 and will also pay additional sums equivalent to half of any future specified development milestone payments that become payable by AstraZeneca.
This consideration is equivalent to the fair value attributed on acquisition to those assets and hence there is no profit impact from this divestment.
Cash flows on acquisition Total upfront consideration 427 Cash and cash equivalents included in undertaking acquired 79 Net cash consideration 348 In 2011 the contingent consideration of 50m became fully payable.
The fair value of the remaining contingent consideration arising on the Novexel acquisition is nil.
2009 acquisitions There were no acquisitions or disposals made during the year ended 31 December 2009.
23 Financial risk management objectives and policies The Groups principal financial instruments other than derivatives comprise bank overdrafts loans current and noncurrent investments cash and shortterm deposits.
The main purpose of these financial instruments is to manage the Groups funding and liquidity requirements.
The Group has other financial assets and liabilities such as trade receivables and trade payables which arise directly from its operations.
The principal financial risks to which the Group is exposed are those of liquidity interest rate foreign currency and credit.
Each of these is managed in accordance with Boardapproved policies.
These policies are set out below.
The Group uses foreign currency borrowings foreign currency forwards and options interest rate swaps and forward rate agreements for the purpose of hedging its foreign currency and interest rate risks.
The Group may designate certain financial instruments as either fair value hedges or net investment hedges in accordance with IAS 39.
Key controls applied to transactions in derivative financial instruments are to use only instruments where good market liquidity exists to revalue all financial instruments regularly using current market rates and to sell options only to offset previously purchased options.
The Group does not use derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
Capital management The capital structure of the Group consists of shareholders equity Note 20 debt Note 14 and cash Note 13.
For the foreseeable future the Board will maintain a capital structure that supports the Groups strategic objectives through managing funding and liquidity risk optimising shareholder return maintaining a strong investmentgrade credit rating.
Funding and liquidity risk are reviewed regularly by the Board and managed in accordance with policies described below.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 172 Financial Statements 23 Financial risk management objectives and policies continued The Boards distribution policy comprises both a regular cash dividend and subject to business needs a share repurchase component.
The Board regularly reviews its shareholders return strategy and in 2010 adopted a progressive dividend policy whereby the Board intends to maintain or grow the dividend each year targeting an average dividend cover of two times ie a payout ratio of 50% based on reported earnings before restructuring costs and profit on disposal of Astra Tech.
In addition after providing for business investment funding the progressive dividend policy and meeting debt service obligations the Board will regularly assess the opportunity to return cash in excess of these requirements to shareholders through share repurchases.
The Groups net funds position loans and borrowings net of cash and cash equivalents current investments and derivative financial instruments has decreased from 3653m at the beginning of the year to a net funds position of 2849m at 31 December 2011 as a result of our substantial share repurchases in 2011 tax and pension payments made offset by strong net operating cash inflows and cash received on the disposal of Astra Tech.
Liquidity risk The Board reviews the Groups ongoing liquidity risks annually as part of the planning process and on an ad hoc basis.
The Board considers shortterm requirements against available sources of funding taking into account forecast cash flows.
The Group manages liquidity risk by maintaining access to a number of sources of funding which are sufficient to meet anticipated funding requirements.
Specifically the Group uses US commercial paper committed bank facilities and cash resources to manage shortterm liquidity and manages longterm liquidity by raising funds through the capital markets.
The Groups current longterm credit rating is A1 by Moodys and AA by Standard and Poors both with a stable outlook.
In addition to cash and cash equivalents of 7571m fixed deposits of 3927m less overdrafts of 137m at 31 December 2011 the Group has committed bank facilities of 3.6bn available to manage liquidity.
At 31 December 2011 the Group has issued 1505m under a Euro Medium Term Note programme and 7 602m under a SECregistered programme.
The Group regularly monitors the credit standing of the banking group and currently does not anticipate any issue with drawing on the committed facilities should this be necessary.
The committed facilities of 3.6bn mature in October 2012 and were undrawn at 31 December 2011.
The maturity profile of the anticipated future contractual cash flows including interest in relation to the Groups financial liabilities on an undiscounted basis and which therefore differs from both the carrying value and fair value is as follows
Bonds
Trade and other payables
Interest
Currency swaps
Total
Within one year 226 2267 8975 11468 117  117 11351 In one to two years  422 385 807 84  84 723 In two to three years  1152  1152 67  67 1085 In three to four years  1352  1352 49  49 1303 In four to five years  332  332 49  49 283 In more than five years  9764  9764 137  137 9627 226 15289 9360 24875 503  503 24372 Effect of interest 5 6490  6495 503  503 5992 Effect of discounting fair values and issue costs  308  308 362  362 54 31 December 2011 221 9107 9360 18688 362  362 18326
Bonds
Trade and other payables
Interest
Currency swaps
Total
Within one year 128 518 8640 9286 120  120 9166 In one to two years  2268 373 2641 121  121 2520 In two to three years  423  423 87  87 336 In three to four years  1153  1153 69  69 1084 In four to five years  1379  1379 50  50 1329 In more than five years  10095  10095 192  192 9903 128 15836 9013 24977 639  639 24338 Effect of interest 3 7012  7015 639  639 6376 Effect of discounting fair values and issue costs  273  273 324  324 51 31 December 2010 125 9097 9013 18235 324  324 17911
Bonds
Trade and other payables
Interest
Currency swaps
Total
Within one year 139 2373 8687 11199 117 89 28 11171 In one to two years  523 185 708 117  117 591 In two to three years  2246  2246 116  116 2130 In three to four years  429  429 86  86 343 In four to five years  405  405 64  64 341 In more than five years  12209  12209 239  239 11970 139 18185 8872 27196 739 89 650 26546 Effect of interest 3 7467  7470 739  739 6731 Effect of discounting fair values and issue costs  209  209 262 1 261 52 31 December 2009 136 10927 8872 19935 262 90 172 19763 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 173 Financial Statements 23 Financial risk management objectives and policies continued Where interest payments are on a floating rate basis it is assumed that rates will remain unchanged from the last business day of each year ended 31 December.
It is not expected that the cash flows in the maturity profile could occur significantly earlier or at significantly different amounts.
Market risk Interest rate risk The Group maintains a mix of fixed and floating rate debt.
The portion of fixed rate debt was approved by the Board and any variation requires Board approval.
A significant portion of the longterm debt entered into in 2007 in order to finance the acquisition of MedImmune has been held at fixed rates of interest.
The Group uses interest rate swaps and forward rate agreements to manage this mix.
At 31 December 2011 the Group held interest rate swaps with a notional value of 2.5bn converting the 5.4% callable bond maturing in 2014 and the 7% guaranteed debentures payable in 2023 to floating rates and partially converting the 5.4% callable bond maturing in 2012 and the 5.9% callable bond maturing in 2017 to floating rates.
No new interest rate swaps were entered into during 2011 or 2010.
At 31 December 2011 swaps with a notional value of 1.5bn were designated as fair value hedges and swaps with a notional value of 1.0bn related to debt designated as fair value through profit or loss.
Designated hedges are expected to be effective and therefore the impact of ineffectiveness on profit is not expected to be material.
The accounting treatment for fair value hedges and debt designated as fair value through profit or loss is disclosed in the Group Accounting Policies section from page 146.
The majority of surplus cash is currently invested in US Treasury liquidity funds and direct purchases of US Treasury bills earning floating rates of interest.
A portion of US Treasury bills have a maturity of greater than 3 months at inception for improved yield.
The interest rate profile of the Groups interestbearing financial instruments as at 31 December 2011 31 December 2010 and 31 December 2009 is set out below.
In the case of current and noncurrent financial liabilities the classification includes the impact of interest rate swaps which convert the debt to floating rate.
Total
Fixed rate Floating rate
Fixed rate Floating rate
Fixed rate Floating rate Financial liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings Current 199tel 125 1926 1790 136 Noncurrent 7338 5215 2123 9097 6242 2855 9137 6340 2797 9328 6214 3114 9222 6242 2980 11063 8130 2933 Financial assets Fixed deposits 3927  3927 1107  1107 1466  1466 Cash and cash equivalents 7571  7571 11068  11068 9918  9918 11498  11498 12175  12175 11384  11384 In addition to the financial assets above there are 8747m 2010 7 829m 2009 7 376m of other current and noncurrent asset investments and other financial assets on which no interest is received.
Foreign currency risk The US dollar is the Groups most significant currency.
As a consequence the Group results are presented in US dollars and exposures are managed against US dollars accordingly.
Translational
Approximately 60% of Group external sales in 2011 were denominated in currencies other than the US dollar while a significant proportion of manufacturing and research and development costs were denominated in pounds sterling and Swedish krona.
Surplus cash generated by business units is substantially converted to and held centrally in US dollars.
As a result operating profit and total cash flow in US dollars will be affected by movements in exchange rates.
This currency exposure is managed centrally based on forecast cash flows including the principal currencies of Swedish krona SEK pounds sterling GBP euro EUR Australian dollar AUD Canadian dollar CAD Japanese yen JPY Romanian leu RON and Russian ruble RUB.
The impact of movements in exchange rates is mitigated significantly by the correlations which exist between the major currencies to which the Group is exposed and the US dollar.
Monitoring of currency exposures and correlations is undertaken on a regular basis and hedging is subject to preexecution approval.
Where there is nonUS dollar debt and an underlying net investment of that amount in the same currency the Group applies net investment hedging.
As at 31 December 2011 5.7% of interestbearing loans and borrowings were denominated in pounds sterling and 10.4% of interest bearing loans and borrowings were denominated in euros.
Exchange differences on the retranslation of debt designated as net investment hedges are recognised in other comprehensive income to the extent that the hedge is effective.
Any ineffectiveness is taken to profit.
Exchange differences on foreign currency borrowings not designated in a hedge relationship are taken to profit.
Transactional
One hundred percent of the Groups major transactional currency exposures on working capital balances which typically extend for up to three months are hedged where practicable using forward foreign exchange contracts against individual Group companies reporting currency.
In addition the Groups external dividend which is paid principally in pounds sterling and Swedish krona is fully hedged from announcement to payment date.
Foreign exchange gains and losses on forward contracts transacted for transactional hedging are taken to profit.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 174 Financial Statements 23 Financial risk management objectives and policies continued The table below sets out the principal foreign exchange contracts outstanding at 31 December 2011 31 December 2010 and 31 December 2009 along with the underlying gross exposure as defined above.
GBP
SEK
EUR
AUD
JPY
CAD
RON
RUB
Gross exposure 1097 785 58tel112 230 Forward exchange contracts 1097 785 588 109 212 102 112 230 Net exposure Gross exposure 732 806 Forward exchange contracts 38 806 478 117 133 33 83 129 Net exposure 694 Gross exposure 124 811 Forward exchange contracts 124 811 556 75 197 43 53 91 Net exposure The sterling hedge position as at 31 December 2010 was updated in early January 2011.
Sensitivity analysis The sensitivity analysis set out below summarises the sensitivity of the market value of our financial instruments to hypothetical changes in market rates and prices.
The range of variables chosen for the sensitivity analysis reflects our view of changes which are reasonably possible over a oneyear period.
Market values are the present value of future cash flows based on market rates and prices at the valuation date.
For longterm debt an increase in interest rates results in a decline in the fair value of debt.
The sensitivity analysis assumes an instantaneous 100 basis point change in interest rates in all currencies from their levels at 31 December 2011 with all other variables held constant.
Based on the composition of our longterm debt portfolio as at 31 December 2011 a 1% increase in interest rates would result in an additional 31m in interest expense being incurred per year.
The exchange rate sensitivity analysis assumes an instantaneous 10% change in foreign currency exchange rates from their levels at 31 December 2011 with all other variables held constant.
The 10% case assumes a 10% strengthening of the US dollar against all other currencies and the 10% case assumes a 10% weakening of the US dollar.
Each incremental 10% movement in foreign currency exchange rates would have approximately the same effect as the initial 10% detailed in the table below and each 1% change in interest rates would have approximately the same effect as the 1% detailed in the table below.
31 December 2011 Interest rates Exchange rates 1% 1% 10% 10% Increasedecrease in fair value of financial instruments m 654 777 15 15 Impact on profit gainloss m   190 190 Impact on equity gainloss m   175 175 31 December 2010 Interest rates Exchange rates 1% 1% 10% 10% Increasedecrease in fair value of financial instruments m 595 684 36 36 Impact on profit gainloss m   133 133 Impact on equity gainloss m   169 169 31 December 2009 Interest rates Exchange rates 1% 1% 10% 10% Increasedecrease in fair value of financial instruments m 602 709 137 137 Impact on profit gainloss m   134 134 Impact on equity gainloss m   271 271 There has been no change in the methods and assumptions used in preparing the above sensitivity analysis over the threeyear period.
Credit risk The Group is exposed to credit risk on financial assets such as cash balances including fixed deposits and cash and cash equivalents derivative instruments trade and other receivables.
The Group is also exposed in its net asset position to its own credit risk in respect of the 2023 debentures and 2014 bonds which are accounted for at fair value through profit and loss.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 175 Financial Statements 23 Financial risk management objectives and policies continued Trade and other receivables Trade receivable exposures are managed locally in the operating units where they arise and credit limits are set as deemed appropriate for the customer.
The Group is exposed to customers ranging from governmentbacked agencies and large private wholesalers to privately owned pharmacies and the underlying local economic and sovereign risks vary throughout the world.
Where appropriate the Group endeavours to minimise risks by the use of trade finance instruments such as letters of credit and insurance.
The Group establishes an allowance for impairment that represents its estimate of incurred losses in respect of specific trade and other receivables where it is deemed that a receivable may not be recoverable.
When the debt is deemed irrecoverable the allowance account is written off against the underlying receivable.
In the US sales to three wholesalers accounted for approximately 75% of US sales 2010 three wholesalers accounted for approximately 73% 2009 three wholesalers accounted for approximately 81%.
The ageing of trade receivables at the reporting date was Not past due 6249 5953 5542 Overdue but renegotiated Past due 090 days 177 104 65 Past due 90180 days 82 67 75 Past due  180 days 122 123 100 6630 6247 5782 Movements in provisions for trade receivables Balance at beginning of year 81 81 99 Income statement credit 10 1 20 Amounts utilised exchange and other movements 5 1 2 Balance at end of year 66 81 81 The allowance for impairment has been calculated based on past experience and is in relation to specific customers.
Given the profile of our customers including large wholesalers and governmentbacked agencies no further credit risk has been identified with the trade receivables not past due other than those balances for which an allowance has been made.
Other financial assets The Group may hold significant cash balances as part of its normal operations with the amount of cash held at any point reflecting the level of cash flow generated by the business and the timing of the use of that cash.
The majority of excess cash is centralised within the Group treasury entity and is subject to counterparty risk on the principal invested.
This risk is mitigated through a policy of prioritising security and liquidity over return and as such cash is only invested in high credit quality investments.
Counterparty limits are set according to the assessed risk of each counterparty and exposures are monitored against these limits on a regular basis.
The majority of the Groups cash is invested in AAArated treasury liquidity funds US Treasury bills and shortterm bank deposits.
The most significant concentration of financial credit risk at 31 December 2011 was 5844m invested in three US AAArated Treasury funds and 4015m invested in US Treasury bills.
The liquidity fund portfolios are managed by the related external third party fund managers to maintain the AAA rating.
No more than 15% of fund value is invested within each individual fund.
US Treasury bills bear credit exposure to the US government.
There were no other significant concentrations of financial credit risk at the reporting date.
All financial derivatives are transacted with commercial banks in line with standard market practice.
The Group has agreements with some bank counterparties whereby the parties agree to post cash collateral for the benefit of the other equivalent to the market valuation of the derivative positions above a predetermined threshold.
The carrying value of such cash collateral held by the Group at 31 December 2011 was 21m.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 176 Financial Statements 24 Employee costs and share plans for employees Employee costs The average number of people to the nearest hundred employed by the Group is set out in the table below.
In accordance with the Companies Act 2006 this includes parttime employees.
Employees
UK 8700 10100 10600 Continental Europe 19200 20100 21200 The Americas 18000 18300 19800 Asia Africa and Australasia 13900 13200 12300 Continuing operations 59800 61700 63900 Geographical distribution described in the table above is by location of legal entity employing staff.
Certain staff will spend some or all of their activity in a different location.
The number of people employed by the Group at the end of 2011 was 57200 2010 61100 2009 62700.
The costs incurred during the year in respect of these employees were Salaries 4631 4837 4713 Social security costs 783 693 644 Pension costs Other employment costs 496 408 560 6400 6439 6433 Pension costs excludes gains of 791m arising from changes made to benefits under certain of the Groups postretirement benefit plans.
Severance costs of 431m are not included above 2010 531m 2009 285m.
The Directors believe that together with the basic salary system the Groups employee incentive schemes provide competitive and market related packages to motivate employees.
They should also align the interests of employees with those of shareholders as a whole through longterm share ownership in the Company.
The Groups current UK Swedish and US schemes are described below other arrangements apply elsewhere.
Bonus plans The AstraZeneca UK Performance Bonus Plan Employees of participating AstraZeneca UK companies are invited to participate in this bonus plan which rewards strong individual performance.
Bonuses in respect of performance during 2011 will be paid in cash as they were in 2010.
Bonuses in respect of 2009 and earlier years were paid partly in the form of Ordinary Shares in the Company under the HM Revenue and Customs HMRCapproved AstraZeneca AllEmployee Share Plan and up to a maximum annual value of 3000 and partly in cash.
A taxefficient share retention scheme under which employees leave their bonus shares in trust forms part of the AllEmployee Share Plan.
The Company also offers UK employees the opportunity to buy Partnership Shares Ordinary Shares under the AllEmployee Share Plan.
Employees may invest up to 1500 over a 12month accumulation period and purchase Partnership Shares in the Company with the total proceeds at the end of the period.
The purchase price for the shares is the lower of the price at the beginning or the end of the 12month period.
A taxefficient share retention scheme is also available in respect of Partnership Shares.
In 2010 the Company introduced a Matching Share element in respect of Partnership Shares the first award of which was made in 2011.
At the Companys AGM in 2002 shareholders approved the issue of new shares for the purposes of the AllEmployee Share Plan.
The AstraZeneca Executive Annual Bonus Scheme This scheme is a performance bonus scheme for Directors and senior employees who do not participate in the AstraZeneca UK Performance Bonus Plan.
Annual bonuses are paid in cash and reflect both corporate and individual performance measures.
The Remuneration Committee has discretion to reduce or withhold bonuses if business performance falls sufficiently short of expectations in any year such as to make the payment of bonuses inappropriate.
The AstraZeneca Deferred Bonus Plan This plan was introduced in 2006 and is used to defer a portion of the bonus earned under the AstraZeneca Executive Annual Bonus Scheme into Ordinary Shares in the Company for a period of three years.
The plan currently operates only in respect of Executive Directors and members of the SET.
Awards of shares under this plan are typically made in February each year the first award having been made in February 2006.
Sweden
In Sweden an allemployee performance bonus plan is in operation which rewards strong individual performance.
Bonuses are paid 50% into a fund investing in AstraZeneca equities and 50% in cash.
The AstraZeneca Executive Annual Bonus Scheme the AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan and the AstraZeneca Global Restricted Stock Plan all operate in respect of relevant AstraZeneca employees in Sweden.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 177 Financial Statements 24 Employee costs and share plans for employees continued
In the US there are two allemployee shortterm or annual performance bonus plans in operation to differentiate and reward strong individual performance.
Annual bonuses are paid in cash.
There is also one senior staff longterm incentive scheme under which approximately 70 participants may be eligible for awards granted as AstraZeneca ADSs.
AstraZeneca ADSs necessary to satisfy the awards are purchased in the market or funded via a share trust.
The AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan and the AstraZeneca Global Restricted Stock Plan operate in respect of relevant employees in the US.
Share plans The charge for sharebased payments in respect of share plans is 153m 2010 120m 2009 81m.
The plans are equity settled.
The AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan This plan was approved by shareholders in 2005 for a period of 10 years.
Generally awards can be granted at any time but not during a close period of the Company.
The first grant of awards was made in June 2005.
The main grant of awards in 2011 under the plan was in March with a further smaller grant in August.
Awards granted under the plan vest after three years and can be subject to the achievement of performance conditions.
For awards to all participants in 2011 except employees of MedImmune 50% of the award will vest subject to the performance of the Companys total shareholder return TSR compared with that of a selected peer group of other pharmaceutical companies and 50% will vest subject to the achievement of a net cash flow target.
A separate performance condition applies to employees of MedImmune.
The Remuneration Committee has responsibility for agreeing any awards under the plan and for setting the policy for the way in which the plan should be operated including agreeing performance targets and which employees should be invited to participate.
A fuller description of this plan can be found in the AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan section from page 120 in the Directors Remuneration Report.
Shares
WAFV pence
Shares awarded in March 2009 1190 1140 16.70 Shares awarded in August 2009 8 1424 23.18 Shares awarded in March 2010 2002 1495 22.38 Shares awarded in Maytel 21.48 Shares awarded in Augusttel 24.95 Shares awarded in November 2010 4 NA 25.11 Shares awarded in March 2011 2964 1427 23.09 Shares awarded in Augusttel 23.33 Weighted average fair value.
The AstraZeneca Investment Plan This plan was introduced in 2010 and approved by shareholders at the 2010 AGM.
The main grant of awards in 2011 under the plan was in March with a further smaller grant in August.
Awards granted under the plan vest after eight years and are subject to performance conditions measured over a period of between three and eight years.
For awards granted in 2011 the performance conditions relate to the annual dividend paid to shareholders and dividend cover over a fouryear performance period.
The awards are then subject to a fouryear holding period before they can vest.
The Remuneration Committee has responsibility for agreeing any awards under the plan and for setting the policy for the way in which the plan should be operated including agreeing performance targets and which employees should be invited to participate.
A fuller description of this plan can be found in the AstraZeneca Investment Plan section from page 120 of the Directors Remuneration Report.
Shares
WAFV pence
Shares awarded in May 2010 76 2575 38.66 Shares awarded in August 2010 15 2904 NA Shares awarded in March 2011 95 2853 46.18 Shares awarded in August 2011 3 2841 NA The AstraZeneca Global Restricted Stock Plan This plan was introduced in 2010 and replaces the AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP Restricted Stock Unit Award Plan and the MedImmune
2008 Restricted Stock Unit Award Plan described below.
The main grant of awards in 2011 under the plan was in March with a further smaller grant in August.
This plan provides for the grant of restricted stock unit RSU awards to selected below SETlevel employees and is used in conjunction with the AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan to provide a mix of RSUs and performance shares.
Awards typically vest on the third anniversary of the date of grant and are contingent on continued employment with the Company.
The Remuneration Committee has responsibility for agreeing any awards under the plan and for setting the policy for the way in which the plan should be operated.
Shares
WAFV pence
Shares awarded in March 2010 2672 2989 44.75 Shares awarded in August 2010 8 3227 49.89 Shares awarded in March 2011 2706 2853 46.18 Shares awarded in August 2011 54 2841 46.65 Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 178 Financial Statements 24 Employee costs and share plans for employees continued The AstraZeneca Restricted Share Plan This plan was introduced in 2008 and provides for the grant of restricted share awards to key employees excluding Executive Directors.
Awards are made on an ad hoc basis with variable vesting dates.
The plan has been used seven times in 2011 to make awards to 26 employees.
The Remuneration Committee has responsibility for agreeing any awards under the plan and for setting the policy for the way in which the plan should be operated.
Shares
WAFV pence
Shares awarded in August 2009 9 NA 46.36 Shares awarded in September 2009 22 NA 44.61 Shares awarded in Februarytel 47.70 Shares awarded in May 2010 25 2861 42.96 Shares awarded in Augusttel 49.89 Shares awarded in November 2010 27 NA 50.21 Shares awarded in December 2010 20 NA 48.30 Shares awarded in January 2011 2 2955 NA Shares awarded in Februarytel 48.55 Shares awarded in March 2011 29 NA 46.37 Shares awarded in May 2011 14 3052 50.45 Shares awarded in July 2011 21 3026 NA Shares awarded in August 2011 27 2841 46.65 Shares awarded in November 2011 10 NA 49.02 The AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP Executive Performance Share Plan This plan was introduced in 2007 and up to and including the awards made in 2009 was used to grant awards of performance shares to selected US employees under broadly the same terms as awards are made under the AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan.
All awards of performance shares to US employees in 2010 and 2011 were made under the AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan described above.
Shares
WAFV
Shares awarded in March 2009 2288 16.70 Shares awarded in August 2009 6 23.18 The AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP Restricted Stock Unit Award Plan This plan was introduced in 2007 and previously provided for the grant of RSU awards to selected employees predominantly in the US.
This plan was used in conjunction with the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan to provide a mix of RSUs and share options.
This plan was replaced in 2010 by the Global Restricted Stock Plan described above.
Units
WAFV
Units awarded in March 2009 1283 33.39 The MedImmune Inc.
2008 Restricted Stock Unit Award Plan This plan was introduced in 2008 and previously provided for the grant of RSU awards to selected employees of MedImmune.
This plan was used in conjunction with the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan to provide a mix of RSUs and share options.
This plan was replaced in 2010 by the Global Restricted Stock Plan described above.
Units
WAFV
Units awarded in March 2009 177 33.39 The fair values were determined using a modified version of the binomial model.
This method incorporated expected dividends but no other features into the measurements of fair value.
The grant date fair values of share awards disclosed in this section do not take account of service and nonmarket related performance conditions.
Share option plans The charge for sharebased payments in respect of share options is 37m 2010 53m 2009 105m which is comprised entirely of equity settled transactions.
At 31 December 2011 there were options outstanding under the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Plan and the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 179 Financial Statements 24 Employee costs and share plans for employees continued 1 Summary of the AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Plan SAYE Scheme The AstraZeneca SavingsRelated Share Option Plan was approved by shareholders in 2003 for a period of 10 years.
The first grant of options under this plan was made in September 2003.
Eligibility
UKresident employees of participating AstraZeneca companies are automatically eligible to participate.
Grant of options Invitations to apply for options may be issued within six weeks after the announcement by the Company of its results for any period and at other times in circumstances considered to be exceptional by the Directors.
No invitations may be issued later than 10 years after the approval of the scheme by shareholders.
Options may only be granted to employees who enter into HM Revenue and Customsapproved savings contracts with the savings body nominated by the Company under which monthly savings of a fixed amount currently not less than 5 nor more than 250 are made over a period of three or five years.
The number of Ordinary Shares over which an option is granted will be such that the total amount payable on its exercise will be the proceeds on maturity of the related savings contract.
No payment will be required for the grant of an option.
Options are not transferable.
Individual participation Monthly savings by an employee under all savings contracts linked to options granted under any Save As You Earn scheme may not exceed 250 or such lower amounts as may be determined by the Directors.
Acquisition price The price per Ordinary Share payable upon the exercise of an option will not normally be less than the higher of a 90% of the arithmetical average of the middlemarket quotations for an Ordinary Share on the London Stock Exchange on three consecutive dealing days shortly before the date on which invitations to apply for options are issued provided that no such day may fall before the Company last announced its results for any period or such other dealing day or days falling within the sixweek period for the issue of invitations as the Directors may decide and b the nominal value of an Ordinary Share unless the option is expressed to relate only to existing Ordinary Shares.
Exercise of options An option will normally be exercisable only for six months commencing on the third or fifth anniversary of the commencement of the related savings contract.
Options are satisfied by the issue of new Ordinary Shares.
Options normally lapse on cessation of employment.
Exercise is however permitted for a limited period irrespective of the period during which the option has been held following cessation of employment in certain compassionate circumstances andor where an option has been held for more than three years except on dismissal for misconduct andor on an amalgamation takeover or windingup of the Company.
2 Summary of the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan This is a share option plan for employees of participating AstraZeneca Group companies which was approved by shareholders at the Companys AGM in 2000.
The first grant of options occurred in August 2000 for a period of 10 years.
The final grant of options under the plan was in August 2009.
There were no grants of options under the plan in 2010 and 2011 and no further grants will be made.
Options are not transferable.
Options were granted over AstraZeneca Ordinary Shares or ADSs.
Acquisition price The price per Ordinary Share payable upon the exercise of an option is not less than an amount equal to the average of the middlemarket closing price for an Ordinary Share or ADS of the Company on the London or New York Stock Exchange on the three consecutive dealing days immediately before the date of grant or as otherwise agreed with HM Revenue and Customs.
Where the option is an option to subscribe the price payable upon exercise cannot be less than the nominal value of an Ordinary Share of the Company.
Exercise of options An option will normally be exercisable between three and 10 years following its grant provided any relevant performance condition has been satisfied.
Options may be satisfied by the issue of new Ordinary Shares or by existing Ordinary Shares purchased in the market.
The Remuneration Committee sets the policy for the Companys operation of the plan including as regards whether any performance targets will apply to the grant andor exercise of each eligible employees option.
Options normally lapse on cessation of employment.
Exercise is however permitted for a limited period following cessation of employment either for reasons of injury or disability redundancy or retirement or at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee and on an amalgamation takeover or windingup of the Company.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 180 Financial Statements 24 Employee costs and share plans for employees continued 3 Summary of the Zeneca 1994 Executive Share Option Scheme 1994 Scheme The Zeneca 1994 Executive Share Option Scheme was introduced in 1994.
The last date for the grant of options was 16 March 2000 and the scheme was replaced by the AstraZeneca Share Option Plan.
Options granted under the 1994 Scheme are normally exercisable between three and 10 years following grant provided the relevant performance condition has been satisfied.
Options are satisfied by the issue of new Ordinary
The performance condition applicable to the 1994 Scheme was that earnings per share must have grown by at least the increase in the UK Retail Price Index over three years plus 3% per annum.
Satisfaction of this condition was tested annually by reference to the audited financial statements.
All options granted under the 1994 Scheme have become exercisable the performance conditions having been satisfied.
There are no longer any options outstanding under the 1994 Scheme the remaining outstanding options having lapsed or been exercised in 2010.
SAYE Schemes AstraZeneca Share Option Plan 1994 Scheme
WAEP pence
WAEP pence
WAEP pence At 1 January 2009 Options outstanding 2140 2304 52568 2978 1285 2934 Movements during 2009 Options granted 351 2563 15246 2281 Options exercised 286 2258 2275 2213 317 2670 Options forfeited 169 2340 3141 2604 51 2688 Weighted average fair value of options granted during the year 425 423 At 31 December 2009 Options outstanding 2036 2349 62398tel Movements during 2010 Options granted 276 2907 Options exercised 455 2216 10144 2538 765 2714 Options forfeited 183 2559 3189 2470 152 2714 Weighted average fair value of options granted during the year 267 At 31 December 2010 Options outstanding 1674 2455 49065 2439 Movements during 2011 Options granted 397 2551 Options exercised 268 2372 10408 2125 Options forfeited 116 2627 3435 2933 Weighted average fair value of options granted during the year 245 At 31 December 2011 Options outstanding 1687 2479 35222 2484 Range of exercise prices to 3001 to 3487 Weighted average remaining contractual life 743 days 1887 days Options exercisable 80 2794 23556 2598 Weighted average exercise price.
The fair value of options is estimated at the date of grant using the BlackScholes option pricing model.
The following table gives the assumptions applied to the options granted in the respective periods shown.
Expectations of early exercise are incorporated into the model.
Average share price pencetel Weighted average exercise price pence AstraZeneca Share Option Plan   2281 SAYE Schemestel Expected volatility % 20.0 20.0 25.0 Dividend yield % 6.0 5.5 4.0 Riskfree interest rate % 3.6 2.5 3.7 Expected lives AstraZeneca Share Option Plan years   6.0 Expected lives SAYE Schemes years 4.5 4.2 4.2 The expected volatility is based on the historic volatility calculated based on the weighted average remaining life of the share options adjusted for any expected changes to future volatility due to publicly available information.
No other features of options granted were incorporated into the measurement of fair value.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 181 25 Commitments and contingent liabilities
Contracts placed for future capital expenditure on property plant and equipment and software development costs not provided for in these accounts 190 259 368 Guarantees and contingencies arising in the ordinary course of business for which no security has been given are not expected to result in any material financial loss.
Research and development collaboration payments The Group has various ongoing collaborations including inlicensing and similar arrangements with development partners.
Such collaborations may require the Group to make payments on achievement of stages of development launch or revenue milestones although the Group generally has the right to terminate these agreements at no cost.
The Group recognises research and development milestones as intangible assets once it is committed to payment which is generally when the Group reaches set trigger points in the development cycle.
Revenuerelated milestones are recognised as intangible assets on product launch at a value based on the Groups longterm revenue forecasts for the related product.
The table below indicates potential development and revenuerelated payments that the Group may be required to make under such collaborations.
Total
Under 1 year Years 1 and 2 Years 3 and 4 Years 5 and greater Future potential research and development milestone payments 292tel1371 Future potential revenue milestone payments 3374 The table includes all potential payments for achievement of milestones under ongoing research and development arrangements.
Revenuerelated milestone payments represent the maximum possible amount payable on achievement of specified levels of revenue as set out in individual contract agreements but exclude variable payments that are based on unit sales eg royaltytype payments which are recognised as the associated sale is recognised in the comprehensive income statement.
The table excludes any payments already capitalised in the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2011 and excludes payments under the Merck agreements detailed below.
The future payments we disclose represent contracted payments and as such are not discounted and are not risk adjusted.
As detailed in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 130 the development of any pharmaceutical product candidate is a complex and risky process that may fail at any stage in the development process due to a number of factors including items such as failure to obtain regulatory approval unfavourable data from key studies adverse reactions to the product candidate or indications of other safety concerns.
The timing of the payments is based on the Groups current best estimate of achievement of the relevant milestone.
Arrangements with Merck
In 1982 Astra AB set up a joint venture with Merck and Co.
Inc.
Merck Sharp and Dohme Corp. a subsidiary of the new Merck and Co.
Inc.
In 1998 this joint venture was restructured Restructuring.
Under the agreements relating to the Restructuring Agreements a US limited partnership Partnership was formed in which Merck is the limited partner and AstraZeneca is the general partner and AstraZeneca obtained control of the joint ventures business subject to certain limited partner and other rights held by Merck and its affiliates.
These rights provide Merck with safeguards over the activities of the Partnership and place limitations on AstraZenecas commercial freedom to operate.
The Agreements provided for A payment to Merck in the event of a business combination between Astra and a third party in order for Merck to relinquish certain claims to that third partys products.
Annual contingent payments.
Termination arrangements which cause Merck to relinquish its interests in AstraZenecas products and activities in stages some of which are mandatory and others optional.
These elements are discussed in further detail below together with a summary of their accounting treatments.
Payment in the event of a business combination On the merger of Astra and Zeneca a onetime lump sum payment of 809m was triggered.
As a result of this payment Merck relinquished any claims it may have had to Zeneca products.
This payment was expensed at the point of merger since it caused no incremental benefits over the prior years aggregate Astra and Zeneca performance to accrue to the merged AstraZeneca entity.
Annual contingent payments AstraZeneca makes ongoing payments to Merck based on sales of certain of its products in the US the contingent payments on the agreement products.
Contingent payments in respect of Prilosec and Nexium will continue until the Second Option is exercised and consummated as discussed under Second Option below.
If
AstraZeneca exercises the Second Option in 2012 contingent payments in respect of Prilosec and Nexium will cease in late 2012 or in early 2013 depending on when AstraZeneca consummates the Second
If AstraZeneca does not exercise the Second Option in 2012 contingent payments in respect of Prilosec and Nexium will continue until at least 2017.
Contingent payments in respect of the authorised generic version of felodipine will continue until AstraZenecas third party distribution arrangement ends currently expected to occur in June 2012.
Contingent payments on the other agreement products ceased in 2010 when AstraZeneca consummated the First Option as discussed under First Option below.
The annual contingent payments on agreement products are expensed as incurred.
Termination arrangements The Agreements provided for arrangements and payments under which subject to the exercise of certain options the rights and interests in AstraZenecas activities and products held by Merck immediately prior to the merger would be terminated including details of the Advance Payment the Partial Retirement the TrueUp the Loan Note Receivable the First Option the Second Option.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 182 Financial Statements Advance Payment The merger between Astra and Zeneca in 1999 triggered the first step in the termination arrangements.
Merck relinquished all rights including contingent payments on future sales to potential Astra products with no existing or pending US patents at the time of the merger.
As a result AstraZeneca now has rights to such products and is relieved of potential obligations to Merck and restrictions in respect of those products including annual contingent payments affording AstraZeneca substantial freedom to exploit the products as it sees fit.
At the time of the merger the Advance Payment was paid.
It was calculated as the then net present value of 2.8bn discounted from 2008 to the date of merger at a rate of 13% per annum and amounted to 967m.
It was subject to a trueup in 2008 as discussed under TrueUp below.
Partial Retirement In March 2008 there was a partial retirement of Mercks limited partnership interest by payment to Merck of an amount calculated as a multiple of the average annual contingent payments from 2005 to 2007 on the relevant products plus 750m.
The payment was 4271m.
Upon the Partial Retirement Mercks rights in respect of certain of the agreement products ended.
The products covered by the Partial Retirement include ToprolXL Pulmicort Rhinocort and Symbicort.
TrueUp
In 2008 in accordance with the Agreements there was a TrueUp of the Advance Payment.
The TrueUp amount was based on a multiple of the average annual contingent payments from 2005 to 2007 in respect of all the agreement products with the exception of Prilosec and Nexium subject to a minimum of 6.6bn plus other defined amounts totalling 912m.
In accordance with the Agreements the calculated amount was then reduced by the Appraised Value as discussed under First Option below the Partial Retirement payment and the Advance Payment at its undiscounted amount of 2.8bn.
This TrueUp amount was settled in an amount equal to 241m paid by Merck to AstraZeneca.
Loan Note Receivable Included in the assets and liabilities covered by the Restructuring was a loan note receivable by AstraZeneca from Merck with a face value of 1.38bn.
In 2008 at the same time as the settlement of the Partial Retirement and the TrueUp Merck settled the loan note receivable by paying AstraZeneca 1.38bn.
If Merck had exercised the First Option in 2008 the net minimum payment that would have been made to Merck would have been 3.3bn being the minimum combined payments of 4.7bn specified in the Agreements on the Partial Retirement the TrueUp and First Option less the repayment of the loan note of 1.38bn.
In accounting for the Restructuring in 1998 the loan note was included in the determination of the fair values of the assets and liabilities to be acquired.
At that time the loan note was ascribed a fair value of zero on acquisition and on the balance sheet because it was estimated that the net minimum payment of 3.3bn equated to the fair value of the rights to be acquired under the Partial Retirement TrueUp and First Option.
First Option In accordance with the Agreements in 2008 a calculation was made of the Appraised Value being the net present value of the future contingent payments in respect of all agreement products not covered by the Partial Retirement other than Prilosec and Nexium.
The Appraised Value was calculated in 2008 as 647m.
Payment of the Appraised Value to Merck in March 2008 would have taken place only if Merck had exercised the First Option in 2008.
Merck did not exercise this option.
Under the Agreements AstraZeneca could exercise the First Option in the first two months of 2010 for a sum equal to the 2008 Appraised Value.
In 2010 AstraZeneca exercised the First Option.
Payment of 647m to Merck was made on 30 April 2010.
This payment resulted in AstraZeneca acquiring Mercks interests in products covered by the First Option including Entocort Atacand Plendil and the authorised generic version of felodipine and certain products then still in development principally Brilinta and lesogaberan.
On 30 April 2010 contingent payments on these products except for the authorised generic version of felodipine ceased with respect to periods after this date and AstraZeneca obtained the ability to exploit these products and other opportunities in the Cardiovascular and Neuroscience therapy areas.
Contingent payments on the authorised generic version of felodipine will continue until AstraZenecas third party distribution arrangement ends which is currently expected to occur in June 2012.
As detailed in Note 9 the intangible asset relating to lesogaberan of 128m was subsequently impaired to a value of nil following a decision to terminate further development of this compound.
Second Option AstraZeneca may exercise a Second Option to purchase Mercks interests in the Merck affiliates that hold the limited partner and other rights referred to above.
Exercise of the Second Option would result in the repurchase by AstraZeneca of Mercks interests in Prilosec and Nexium in the US.
This option is exercisable by AstraZeneca in May to October of 2012 or in 2017 or if combined annual sales of the two products fall below a minimum amount.
If AstraZeneca exercises the Second Option consummation of the transaction will occur five to six months later.
AstraZenecas consummation of the Second Option will end the contingent payments in respect of Prilosec and Nexium and will effectively end AstraZenecas relationship with and obligations to Merck other than some residual manufacturing arrangements.
In September 2010 AstraZeneca and Merck reached an agreement with respect to the treatment of Vimovo under the Agreements pursuant to which AstraZeneca will pay Merck certain amounts with respect to Vimovo only if it exercises the Second Option and as part of the exercise price for the Second Option.
The exercise price for the Second Option is the sum of the net present value of the future annual contingent payments on Nexium and Prilosec as determined at the time of exercise and the net present value of up to 5% of future US sales of Vimovo with the precise amount dependent on the level of annual sales and the timing of the option exercise as well as 13 times Mercks average annual 1% profit allocation in the Partnership for the prior three years.
The exercise price of the Second Option cannot be determined at this time.
Accounting treatment of termination arrangements AstraZeneca considers that the termination arrangements described above represent the acquisition in stages of Mercks interests in the Partnership and agreement products including Mercks rights to contingent payments and depend in part on the exercise of the First and Second Options.
The effects will only be reflected in the financial statements as these stages are reached.
If and when all such payments are made AstraZeneca will have unencumbered discretion in its operations in the US market.
AstraZeneca anticipates that the benefits that accrue under all of the termination arrangements arise Currently from the substantial freedom over products acquired or discovered postmerger.
On occurrence of each stage of such arrangements from enhanced contributions from and substantial freedom over those products that have already been launched for example Prilosec Nexium Brilinta Pulmicort Symbicort Rhinocort and Atacand and those that are in development.
Economic benefits include relief from contingent payments anticipated cost savings from cessation of manufacturing arrangements and other cost efficiencies together with the strategic advantages of increased freedom to operate.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 183 The Advance Payment has been accounted for as an intangible asset and is being amortised over 20 years.
This approach reflects the fact that under the Agreements AstraZeneca has acquired rights relieving it of potential obligations and restrictions in respect of Astra products with no existing or pending patents at the time of merger.
Although these rights apply in perpetuity the period of amortisation of 20 years has been chosen to reflect the typical timescale of development and marketing of a product.
The net payment made in 2008 consisting of the Partial Retirement payment of 4.271bn less the TrueUp amount of 241m and loan note receivable of 1.38bn in total 2.6bn has been capitalised as intangible assets.
Part of the net payment made in 2008 resulted in AstraZeneca acquiring Mercks interests in certain AstraZeneca products including Pulmicort Rhinocort Symbicort and ToprolXL.
Consequently AstraZeneca no longer makes contingent payments on these products to Merck and has obtained the ability to fully exploit these products and to fully exploit other opportunities in the Respiratory therapy area that AstraZeneca was previously prevented from doing by Mercks interests in these products.
Intangible assets aggregating 994m have been recognised in respect of these acquired product rights and these are being amortised over various periods giving rise to an annual expense of approximately 50m going forward.
The balance of the net payment made in 2008 1656m represented nonrefundable deposits for future product rights associated with the First and Second Options.
In 2010 647m was recognised as an intangible asset as a result of payment of the Appraised Value for the First Option see page 182.
Together with the 1656m non refundable deposits recognised in 2008 the total sum of 2303m was allocated as follows 689m to contingent payment relief 1140m to intangible assets reflecting the ability to fully exploit the products in the Cardiovascular and Neuroscience therapy areas and 474m as nonrefundable deposits associated with the Second
The intangible assets recognised on exercise of the First Option give rise to an additional amortisation expense in the range of 20m to 40m per annum charged to cost of sales in respect of contingent payment relief the precise amount dependent upon the launch status of the covered pipeline compounds and an additional charge to SGandA of around 60m per annum.
Amortisation on these intangible assets began when the 647m payment was made on 30 April 2010.
The remaining 474m relating to the nonrefundable deposits will not be subject to amortisation until the Second Option is exercised and the related product rights are acquired.
If the Second Option is exercised then amortisation related to the ability to exploit opportunities in the Gastrointestinal therapy area will commence in the amount of around 100m per annum charged to SGandA as well as an as yet indeterminable amount of amortisation related to relief from contingent payments.
The intangible assets relating to purchased product rights and the intangible assets relating to nonrefundable deposits are subject to impairment testing and would be partially or wholly impaired if a product is withdrawn or if activity in any of the affected therapy areas is significantly curtailed.
Consequently following the discontinuation of the development of lesogaberan in the third quarter of 2010 an impairment of 128m was recognised.
As noted earlier AstraZeneca has the ability to exercise the Second Option in 2012 2017 or if combined annual sales of Prilosec and Nexium fall below a minimum amount.
If we do not exercise the Second Option in 2012 this will trigger an impairment review of the nonrefundable deposits of 474m associated with the Second Option.
In addition if it becomes probable that the Second Option will not be exercised the non refundable deposits for the product rights available to be acquired under the Second Option will be expensed immediately.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued Environmental costs and liabilities The Groups expenditure on environmental protection including both capital and revenue items relates to costs which are necessary for implementing internal systems and programmes and meeting legal and regulatory requirements for processes and products.
They are an integral part of normal ongoing expenditure for carrying out the Groups research manufacturing and commercial operations and are not separated from overall operating and development costs.
There are no known changes in legal regulatory or other requirements resulting in material changes to the levels of expenditure for 2009 2010 or 2011.
In addition to expenditure for meeting current and foreseen environmental protection requirements the Group incurs costs in investigating and cleaning up land and groundwater contamination.
In particular AstraZeneca has environmental liabilities at some currently or formerly owned leased and third party sites.
In the US Zeneca Inc.
19 sites where Zeneca Inc. allocation schemes together US Environmental Consequences.
Similarly Stauffer Management Company LLC SMC which was established in 1987 to own and manage certain assets of Stauffer Chemical Company acquired that year andor its indemnitees have been named as PRPs or defendants at 29 sites where SMC is likely to incur US Environmental Consequences.
AstraZeneca has also given indemnities to third parties for a number of sites outside the US.
These environmental liabilities arise from legacy operations that are not currently part of the Groups business and at most of these sites remediation where required is either completed or nearing completion.
AstraZeneca has made provisions for the estimated costs of future environmental investigation remediation operation and maintenance activity beyond normal ongoing expenditure for maintaining the Groups RandD and manufacturing capacity and product ranges where a present obligation exists it is probable that such costs will be incurred and they can be estimated reliably.
With respect to such estimated future costs there were provisions at 31 December 2011 in the aggregate of 92m 2010 119m 2009 112m mainly relating to the US.
Where we are jointly liable or otherwise have cost sharing agreements with third parties we reflect only our share of the obligation.
Where the liability is insured in part or in whole by insurance or other arrangements for reimbursement an asset is recognised to the extent that this recovery is virtually certain.
It is possible that AstraZeneca could incur future environmental costs beyond the extent of our current provisions.
The extent of such possible additional costs is inherently difficult to estimate due to a number of factors including 1 the nature and extent of claims that may be asserted in the future 2 whether AstraZeneca has or will have any legal obligation with respect to asserted or unasserted claims 3 the type of remedial action if any that may be selected at sites where the remedy is presently not known 4 the potential for recoveries from or allocation of liability to third parties and 5 the length of time that the environmental investigation remediation and liability allocation process can take.
Notwithstanding and subject to the foregoing we estimate the potential additional loss for future environmental investigation remediation remedial operation and maintenance activity above and beyond our provisions to be in aggregate between 50m to 90m 2010 20m to 40m 2009 10m to 25m which relates solely to the US.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 184 Financial Statements Legal proceedings AstraZeneca is involved in various legal proceedings considered typical to its business including actual or threatened litigation andor actual or potential government investigations relating to employment matters product liability commercial disputes pricing sales and marketing practices infringement of IP rights the validity of certain patents and competition laws.
The more significant matters are discussed below.
Most of the claims involve highly complex issues.
Often these issues are subject to substantial uncertainties and therefore the probability of a loss if any being sustained and an estimate of the amount of any loss is difficult to ascertain.
Consequently for a majority of these claims it is not possible to make a reasonable estimate of the expected financial effect if any that will result from ultimate resolution of the proceedings.
In these cases AstraZeneca discloses information with respect to the nature and facts of the cases.
With respect to each of the legal proceedings described below other than those for which provision has been made we are unable to make estimates of the possible loss or range of possible losses at this stage other than as set forth in this section.
We also do not believe that disclosure of the amount sought by plaintiffs if known would be meaningful with respect to those legal proceedings.
This is due to a number of factors including 1 the stage of the proceedings in many cases trial dates have not been set and the overall length and extent of pretrial discovery 2 the entitlement of the parties to an action to appeal a decision 3 clarity as to theories of liability damages and governing law 4 uncertainties in timing of litigation and 5 the possible need for further legal proceedings to establish the appropriate amount of damages if any.
While there can be no assurance regarding the outcome of any of the legal proceedings referred to in this Note 25 based on managements current and considered view of each situation we do not currently expect them to have a material adverse effect on our financial position.
This position could of course change over time not least because of the factors referred to above.
In cases that have been settled or adjudicated or where quantifiable fines and penalties have been assessed and which are not subject to appeal or other similar forms of relief or where a loss is probable and we are able to make a reasonable estimate of the loss we indicate the loss absorbed or the amount of the provision accrued.
Where it is considered that the Group is more likely than not to prevail legal costs involved in defending the claim are charged to profit as they are incurred.
Where it is considered that the Group has a valid contract which provides the right to reimbursement from insurance or otherwise of legal costs andor all or part of any loss incurred or for which a provision has been established and we consider recovery to be virtually certain the best estimate of the amount expected to be received is recognised as an asset.
Assessments as to whether or not to recognise provisions or assets and of the amounts concerned usually involve a series of complex judgements about future events and can rely heavily on estimates and assumptions.
AstraZeneca believes that the provisions recorded are adequate based on currently available information and that the insurance recoveries recorded will be received.
However given the inherent uncertainties involved in assessing the outcomes of these cases and in estimating the amount of the potential losses and the associated insurance recoveries we could in the future incur judgments or insurance settlements that could have a material adverse effect on our results in any particular period.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued IP claims include challenges to the Groups patents on various products or processes and assertions of noninfringement of patents.
A loss in any of these cases could result in loss of patent protection on the related product.
The consequences of any such loss could be a significant decrease in product sales which could have a material adverse effect on our results.
The lawsuits filed by AstraZeneca for patent infringement against companies that have filed ANDAs in the US seeking to market generic forms of products sold by the Group prior to the expiry of the applicable patents covering these products typically also involve allegations of noninfringement invalidity and unenforceability of these patents by the ANDA filers.
In the event that the Group is unsuccessful in these actions or the statutory 30month stay expires before a ruling is obtained the ANDA filers involved will also have the ability subject to FDA approval to introduce generic versions of the product concerned.
AstraZeneca has full confidence in and will vigorously defend and enforce its IP.
Over the course of the past several years including in 2011 a significant number of commercial litigation claims in which AstraZeneca is involved have been resolved particularly in the US thereby reducing potential contingent liability exposure arising from such litigation.
Similarly in part due to patent litigation and settlement developments greater certainty has been achieved regarding possible generic entry dates with respect to some of our patented products.
At the same time like other companies in the pharmaceutical sector and other industries AstraZeneca continues to be subject to government investigations around the world.
Patent Litigation Arimidex anastrozole Patentregulatory proceedings outside the US AstraZeneca is engaged in proceedings in Canada and Russia regarding patent andor regulatory exclusivity for Arimidex.
Atacand candesartan cilexetil Patentregulatory proceedings outside the US AstraZeneca is engaged in proceedings in Portugal and Canada regarding patent andor regulatory exclusivity for Atacand.
Atacand Plus candesartan cilexetilhydrochlorothiazide Patentregulatory proceedings outside the US AstraZeneca is engaged in proceedings in Portugal and Canada regarding patent andor regulatory exclusivity for Atacand Plus.
In July 2011 an Atacand Plus patent European patent no.
Office EPO.
In Canada in 2011 AstraZeneca settled notice of compliance proceedings with Pharmascience Inc.
Teva Canada Limited and Sandoz Canada Inc. market on 23 September 2012 or earlier in certain circumstances.
Crestor rosuvastatin calcium US patent litigationregulatory proceedings Several defendants appealed the 2010 decision in the US District Court for the District of Delaware finding in favour of AstraZeneca that the substance patent covering the active ingredient in Crestor tablets is valid enforceable and infringed.
The parties await the decision of the US Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit the Federal Circuit.
AstraZeneca is also engaged in patent litigation in the US District Court for the District of Delaware in which it contends that a 505b2 NDA for rosuvastatin zinc tablets infringes the substance patent and other patents for Crestor tablets.
The Court has scheduled a trial in this litigation to begin on 24 September 2012.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 185 AstraZeneca appealed the 2010 dismissal by the US District Court for the District of Delaware of patent infringement actions brought by AstraZeneca against numerous generic drug manufacturers regarding two methodofuse patents covering Crestor.
The parties await the decision of the Federal Circuit.
In November 2011 AstraZeneca filed a Citizen Petition with the FDA in respect of Crestor requesting the FDA to withhold approval of any generic rosuvastatin drug product that omits from its labelling the diabetesrelated warning and adverse reaction information which AstraZeneca was required to include in Crestors labelling when the FDA approved Crestors primary prevention of cardiovascular disease indication.
The FDA is required to issue a decision by 12 May 2012.
AstraZeneca is also defending a patent infringement lawsuit filed in April 2011 in the US District Court for the District of South Carolina by Palmetto Pharmaceuticals LLC Palmetto which among other claims asserts that AstraZenecas Crestor sales induce infringement of a Palmetto patent.
In December 2011 the Federal Circuit affirmed the summary judgment of the US District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania invalidating a Teva Pharmaceutical Industries LTD Teva LTD formulation patent which Teva LTD had alleged was infringed by sales of Crestor.
Patentregulatory proceedings outside the US AstraZeneca is engaged in proceedings in Australia Brazil Canada Mexico Portugal and Singapore regarding patent andor regulatory exclusivity for Crestor.
Generic drug manufacturers have commenced sales of generic rosuvastatin drug products in Brazil and Mexico.
In Canada in January 2012 the Federal Court of Canada held a hearing in the patent proceeding involving Pharmascience Inc.
The parties await the Courts decision.
In 2011 AstraZeneca reached settlements with Mylan Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Pharmaceuticals Canada Inc.
AstraZenecas Crestor substance patent and as part of the agreements those companies may enter the Canadian market on 2 April 2012 or earlier in certain circumstances.
In Australia in November 2011 AstraZeneca was informed that Apotex Pty Ltd.
Apotex intended to start commercialising its generic rosuvastatin product.
AstraZeneca sought and was granted a preliminary injunction.
Apotexs motion to vacate the injunction was heard on 31 January 2012.
A decision is pending.
In January 2012 AstraZeneca instituted proceedings against Watson Pharm Pty Ltd.
Watson and Actavis Australia Pty Ltd.
Actavis asserting infringement of various formulation and method patents for Crestor.
AstraZeneca has applied for interlocutory relief against both Watson and Actavis pending resolution of the infringement actions.
Sandoz has agreed to an undertaking to refrain from launching a product pending decisions on the Apotex Watson and Actavis injunctions.
Entocort EC budesonide US patent litigation AstraZeneca has appealed the 2011 US District Court for the District of Delawares decision which found that Mylan Pharmaceuticals Inc. infringe AstraZenecas patent.
LosecPrilosec omeprazole US patent litigation AstraZeneca continues litigation to recover infringement damages against Andrx Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Apotex Corp. and Apotex Inc.
Patent litigation outside the US In Canada the AstraZeneca patent infringement proceeding against Apotex Inc. pending.
Similarly Apotex Incs action seeking section 8 damages against AstraZeneca is also pending.
The hearing of the damages action is scheduled to begin in March 2012.
Nexium esomeprazole magnesium US patent litigation In May 2011 and January 2012 AstraZeneca entered into agreements respectively with each of Sandoz Inc.
Sandoz and Lupin Limited Lupin settling AstraZenecas patent infringement actions against those entities.
As part of those settlements Sandoz and Lupin were granted licences to enter the US market with generic esomeprazole magnesium on 27 May 2014 subject to regulatory approval or earlier in certain circumstances.
As previously disclosed in 2008 AstraZeneca entered into a settlement agreement with Ranbaxy Pharmaceuticals the Ranbaxy ANDA patent litigation respecting Nexium.
The settlement agreement allows Ranbaxy to commence sales of a generic version of Nexium under a licence from AstraZeneca on 27 May 2014.
In January 2012 AstraZeneca received a Paragraph IV Certification notice letter from Mylan Laboratories Limited Mylan stating that it had submitted an ANDA for approval to market esomeprazole magnesium capsules.
Mylan alleges noninfringement andor invalidity of three patents listed in the Orange Book in reference to Nexium.
AstraZeneca is evaluating Mylans notice.
In December 2011 AstraZeneca received a Paragraph IV Certification notice letter from Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
Torrent stating that it had submitted an ANDA for approval to market esomeprazole magnesium capsules.
Torrent alleges noninfringement andor invalidity of 11 patents listed in the Orange Book in reference to Nexium.
In
January 2012 AstraZeneca commenced a patent infringement action against Torrent in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey.
In June 2011 AstraZeneca received a Paragraph IV Certification notice letter from Hetero Drugs Ltd.
Unit III and Hetero USA Inc. to market esomeprazole magnesium capsules.
Hetero alleges noninfringement andor invalidity of 11 patents listed in the Orange Book in reference to Nexium.
In July 2011 AstraZeneca commenced a patent infringement action against Hetero in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey.
In February 2011 AstraZeneca also commenced a patent infringement action in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey against Hanmi USA Inc. et al.
505b2 for FDA approval to market 20mg and 40mg esomeprazole strontium capsules.
The defendant alleges noninfringement or invalidity of 11 patents listed in the Orange Book with reference to Nexium.
Patentregulatory proceedings outside the US AstraZeneca is involved in proceedings in several countries outside the US regarding patent andor regulatory exclusivity for Nexium including Australia Austria Belgium Brazil Canada China the Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Italy Latvia Lithuania Mexico the Netherlands Norway Philippines Poland Portugal Singapore Slovenia Sweden Turkey Ukraine and the UK.
There is generic entry in many European markets.
Outside of Europe Canada is the only major market with generic entry.
In the European Patent Office EPO in June and July 2011 the Opposition Division of the EPO revoked EP  the 461 patent which relates to Nexium and EP  which relates to Nexium i.
AstraZeneca has appealed these decisions.
AstraZeneca initiated infringement proceedings against Consilient Health Limited and Krka d.
Novo Mesto in September 2010 in the
These companies agreed not to launch their generic esomeprazole product pending the outcome of the main infringement case.
AstraZeneca has undertaken to be liable for losses of the defendants and third parties if the injunction is lifted at a later date.
In July 2011 the injunction was lifted at the request of AstraZeneca.
In December 2011 the parties agreed to settle the infringement case but AstraZenecas undertaking regarding liability remains in effect.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 186 Financial Statements In July 2011 the UK High Court held that Ranbaxy UK Ltds generic esomeprazole product does not infringe the Nexium esomeprazole magnesium patent the 461 patent.
In the Netherlands in July 2011 the District Court of the Hague upheld the validity of the Nexium esomeprazole magnesium patent the 461 patent.
This decision has been appealed.
In Finland the District Court of Helsinki found the Nexium esomeprazole enantiomer patent FI  invalid in December 2011.
In Norway in March 2011 the Appeal Court upheld the validity of the Nexiumrelated substance patent NO  and invalidated the Nexiumrelated formulation patent NO .
Nexium i.
US patent litigation In October 2011 AstraZeneca entered into an agreement with Sun Pharma Global FZE and affiliates together Sun to settle the ongoing patent infringement suit against Sun in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey with respect to Suns ANDA for esomeprazole sodium intravenous formulation.
As part of the settlement agreement AstraZeneca granted Sun a licence to enter the US market with its generic esomeprazole sodium intravenous formulation on 1 January 2014 subject to regulatory approval or earlier in certain circumstances.
Pulmicort Respules budesonide inhalation suspension US patent litigation AstraZenecas consolidated patent infringement lawsuits against various generic companies for infringement of US patents directed to methods of use and the form of active ingredient for Pulmicort Respules proceed in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey.
The 2010 preliminary injunction against generic defendants Apotex Inc.
Apotex Corp. remains in place.
As previously disclosed in 2008 AstraZeneca resolved patent litigation with Teva respecting its generic copies of Pulmicort Respules thereby allowing Teva to begin marketing its generic product in December 2009.
In May 2011 AstraZeneca received a Paragraph IV Certification notice letter from Watson Laboratories Inc.
Watson indicating that it was seeking approval to market a generic version of the 1.0mg2.0ml dosage form of Pulmicort Respules before patent expiration.
In June 2011 AstraZeneca filed a patent infringement suit against Watson in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey.
Seroquel quetiapine fumarate US regulatory proceedings In September 2011 AstraZeneca filed a Citizen Petition with the FDA in respect of Seroquel requesting the FDA withhold approval of any generic quetiapine drug product which omits from its labelling certain hyperglycemia and suicidality warning language that the FDA required AstraZeneca to include in the Seroquel labelling.
The FDA is required to issue a decision by 7 March 2012.
Patentregulatory proceedings outside the US AstraZeneca is engaged in proceedings in Portugal regarding Seroquel related patents andor regulatory exclusivity for Seroquel.
Seroquel XR quetiapine fumarate US patent litigationregulatory proceedings AstraZenecas several patent infringement actions proceeded in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey against various generic drug manufacturers who have filed ANDAs seeking approval to market generic copies of Seroquel XR tablets prior to the expiration of AstraZenecas product patent covering Seroquel XR.
In May 2011 the US District Court for the District of New Jersey entered a consent order dismissing the pending patent infringement case against Biovail Laboratories International SRL.
In September 2011 AstraZeneca settled its patent infringement action against Handa Pharmaceuticals LLC Handa by granting Handa a licence to the Seroquel XR product patent effective 1 November 2016 or earlier under certain circumstances.
Also in September 2011 AstraZeneca filed a Citizen Petition with the FDA in respect of Seroquel XR requesting the FDA to withhold approval of any generic quetiapine drug product which omits from its labelling certain hyperglycemia and suicidality warning language that the FDA required AstraZeneca to include in the Seroquel XR labelling.
The FDA is required to issue a decision by 7 March 2012.
In October 2011 AstraZeneca settled its patent infringement action against Intas Pharmaceutical Ltd. and Accord Healthcare Inc. circumstances.
In October 2011 the US District Court for the District of New Jersey conducted a trial in the patent infringement actions involving the product patent against four of the five remaining defendant generic drug manufacturers.
A decision on claims of infringement and invalidity of AstraZenecas product patent is pending.
Patentregulatory proceedings outside the US AstraZeneca is engaged in proceedings in Canada the Czech Republic Germany Hungary the Netherlands Portugal Romania Spain Turkey and the UK regarding Seroquel XR related patents andor regulatory exclusivity for Seroquel XR.
Trials are scheduled in the first quarter of 2012 in the Netherlands Spain and the UK.
Synagis palivizumab US patent litigation In December 2008 MedImmune initiated patent litigation against PDL BioPharma Inc.
PDL in the US District Court for the Northern District of California.
MedImmune sought a declaratory judgment that the Queen patents owned by PDL are invalid andor not infringed by Synagis andor motavizumab and that no further royalties are owed under a patent licence MedImmune and PDL signed in 1997.
The matter was settled in February 2011.
This resulted in the recognition of 131m credit to operating profit in 2011.
Symbicort budesonideformoterol US patent litigation In December 2011 a complaint alleging patent infringement was filed against AstraZeneca in the US District Court for the Eastern District of Texas by Accuhale LLC Accuhale.
Accuhale is purportedly the owner of US patent no.
5718355 which Accuhale alleges is infringed by sales of Symbicort.
AstraZeneca is evaluating the complaint.
Patent litigation outside the US AstraZeneca is engaged in proceedings related to the validity andor infringement of AstraZenecas patents covering Symbicort in Turkey.
Vimovo fixed dose combination of naproxen and esomeprazole US patent litigation In 2011 AstraZeneca and Pozen commenced patent infringement actions in the US District Court for the District of New Jersey against three ANDA challengers seeking approval to market generic copies of Vimovo prior to expiry of seven patents listed in the Orange Book including the patent inlicensed from Pozen.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 187 Zestril lisinopril Patentregulatory proceedings outside the US As previously disclosed in 1996 two of AstraZenecas predecessor companies Zeneca Limited and Zeneca Pharma Inc.
Merck and Co.
Inc.
Group commenced a patent infringement action in Canada against Apotex Inc.
Apotex alleging infringement of Merck Groups lisinopril patent.
In 2010 after having established Apotexs liability AstraZeneca and the Merck Group initiated proceedings to recover damages.
That damages matter proceeded in 2011.
Zomig zolmitriptan Patentregulatory proceedings outside the US AstraZeneca is engaged in proceedings in Canada and Portugal regarding patent andor regulatory exclusivity for Zomig.
Product Liability Litigation Iressa gefitinib Between 2004 and 2008 seven claims were filed against AstraZeneca in Japan in the Osaka and Tokyo District Courts.
In these claims it is alleged that Iressa caused a fatal incidence of interstitial lung disease in Japanese patients.
In November 2011 the Tokyo High Court reversed the Tokyo District Courts decision and ruled that neither AstraZeneca nor the Japanese Ministry of Health Labour and Welfare had any liability for the Iressa product liability claims filed in the Tokyo District
The plaintiffs have appealed the Tokyo High Court decision to the Japanese Supreme Court.
AstraZeneca is awaiting a ruling from the Osaka High Court on AstraZenecas appeal of the February 2011 Osaka District Court decision which ordered AstraZeneca to pay approximately 670000 plus interest.
Nexium esomeprazole magnesium Since April 2011 AstraZeneca has been named as a defendant in product liability lawsuits brought by plaintiffs alleging bone deterioration loss of bone density andor bone fractures caused by Nexium and or Prilosec in the US.
Currently there are five served cases involving 101 plaintiffs.
Seroquel quetiapine fumarate With regard to Seroquel product liability litigation in the US which primarily relates to diabetes andor other related injuries as of 31 January 2012 AstraZeneca was aware of approximately 25 claims that have not been settled in principle.
As of 31 January 2012 pursuant to courtordered mediation AstraZeneca has reached agreements in principle on monetary terms subject to various subsequent conditions approvals and agreement on nonmonetary terms with the attorneys representing 28575 claimants.
The mediation process is ongoing with regard to other currently unsettled claims.
In Canada four putative class actions remain pending in the provinces of British Columbia Alberta Ontario and Quebec alleging that AstraZeneca failed to provide adequate warnings in connection with an alleged association between Seroquel and the onset of diabetes.
AstraZeneca is awaiting an appellate ruling on the dismissal of the Quebec action.
A decision on class certification in the Ontario action is pending.
A provision has been established in respect of the Seroquel product liability claims regarding both current and anticipated future settlement costs as well as anticipated future defence costs associated with resolving all or substantially all remaining claims.
With regard to insurance coverage for the substantial legal defence costs and settlements that have been incurred in connection with the Seroquel product liability claims which now exceed the total amount of insurance coverage available disputes continue with insurers about the availability of coverage under insurance policies.
These policies have aggregate coverage limits of 300m.
No insurance receivable can be recognised under applicable accounting standards at this time.
Commercial Litigation Nexium esomeprazole magnesium Of the various putative class actions in the US alleging that AstraZenecas promotion advertising and pricing of Nexium to physicians consumers and third party payers was unfair unlawful and deceptive only two cases remain pending.
In the Massachusetts State Court case a bench trial has been set to commence on 9 October 2012.
The Delaware State Court case has been stayed since May 2005.
Seroquel quetiapine fumarate Of the various state laws actions generally alleging that AstraZeneca made false andor misleading statements in marketing and promoting Seroquel AstraZeneca remains in litigation with the Attorneys General of Montana New Mexico South Carolina Utah and Mississippi.
In 2011 AstraZeneca reached settlement agreements in principle with the Attorneys General of the states of Arkansas and Alaska and provisions have been taken.
In March 2011 the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the November 2008 dismissal of a putative nationwide third party payer class action lawsuit which alleged that AstraZeneca promoted Seroquel for offlabel uses and as superior to lowercost alternative medicines.
No further appeals were taken.
Synagis palivizumab In September 2011 AstraZenecas biologics unit MedImmune filed a declaratory judgment action against Abbott International LLC Abbott in the Circuit Court for Montgomery County Maryland seeking a declaratory judgment related to a contract dispute between the parties as to when the transfer price of Synagis would revert to a lower amount the Reversion Event.
Abbott moved to dismiss the action and MedImmune filed its opposition.
A hearing on the motions has been set for 9 February 2012.
In September 2011 Abbott filed a parallel action in the Illinois State Court for breach of contract and for a declaratory judgment regarding the Reversion Event.
MedImmune filed a motion to dismiss the action and Abbott filed a motion seeking to deposit the disputed funds in escrow.
Both MedImmunes motion to dismiss and Abbotts motion for escrow were heard on 19 January 2012.
A ruling on those motions is expected by midFebruary 2012.
ToprolXL metoprolol succinate AstraZeneca is defending against antitrust claims in the US regarding the listing and enforcement of patents protecting ToprolXL brought by both direct purchasers and endpayers.
In 2011 AstraZeneca paid 35.75m in aggregate in connection with agreements to settle the claims of the putative class of direct purchasers and those plaintiffs who have optedout of that class.
A provision has been taken.
AstraZeneca continues to defend against the remaining claims alleged by endpayers.
Other Commercial Litigation Verus Pharmaceuticals litigation In June 2011 the US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the trial courts dismissal of Verus Pharmaceuticals Inc. develop novel paediatric asthma treatments.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 188 Financial Statements Average Wholesale Price litigation Of the various lawsuits against AstraZeneca and other pharmaceutical manufacturers involving allegations that by causing the publication of allegedly inflated wholesale list prices defendants caused entities to overpay for prescription drugs AstraZeneca remains in litigation with the Attorneys General of the states of Kentucky Louisiana Oklahoma Utah and Wisconsin.
In 2011 AstraZeneca settled the cases brought by the Attorneys General of the states of Alaska Idaho Illinois Kansas and Mississippi and those settlement amounts have been paid.
A provision has been taken.
AstraZeneca is currently pursuing an appeal before the Commonwealth of Kentucky Court of Appeals seeking to reverse the judgment against it in the case brought by the Attorney General of Kentucky and the corresponding award of damages and penalties.
Following the underlying 2009 trial a Kentucky jury found AstraZeneca liable under the Commonwealth of Kentuckys Consumer Protection and Medicaid Fraud statutes and awarded 14.72m in compensatory damages and 100 in punitive damages.
The trial court subsequently awarded an additional 5.4m in statutory penalties.
No provision has been recognised.
Medco qui tam litigation Schumann AstraZeneca has been named as a defendant in a lawsuit filed in Federal Court in Philadelphia under the qui tam whistleblower provisions of the federal and certain state False Claims Acts alleging overpayments by federal and state governments resulting from alleged improper payments intended to influence the formulary status of Prilosec and Nexium to Medco and its customers.
The action was initially filed in September 2003 but remained under seal until July 2009 at which time AstraZeneca was served with a copy of the amended complaint following the US governments decision not to intervene in the case.
AstraZenecas motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction remains pending.
Average Manufacturers Price qui tam litigation Streck AstraZeneca is one of several manufacturers named as a defendant in a lawsuit filed in the US Federal Court in Philadelphia under the qui tam whistleblower provisions of the federal and certain state False Claims Acts alleging inaccurate reporting of Average Manufacturers Prices to the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services.
The action was initially filed in October 2008 but remained under seal until May 2011 following the US governments decision not to intervene in the case with regard to certain manufacturers including AstraZeneca.
In December 2011 the manufacturer defendants filed a joint motion to dismiss the complaint.
340B Class Action litigation In March 2011 the US Supreme Court reversed a decision of the US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit and held that covered entities under the 340B programme do not have enforceable rights to sue as third party beneficiaries of the Pharmaceutical Pricing Agreement.
The putative class action suit filed by the County of Santa Clara on behalf of similarly situated California counties and cities was thereby dismissed.
Drug importation and antitrust litigation In August 2004 Californian retail pharmacy plaintiffs filed an action in the Superior Court of California alleging a conspiracy by AstraZeneca and approximately 15 other pharmaceutical manufacturer defendants to set the price of drugs sold in California at or above the Canadian sales price for those same drugs and otherwise restrict the importation of pharmaceuticals into the US.
In March 2011 the Superior Court of California granted the defendants motion for summary judgment.
In April 2011 the plaintiffs appealed.
Employment  wagehour litigation In September 2006 Marc Brody filed a putative class action lawsuit against AstraZeneca on behalf of himself and a class of sales specialists employed by the Group in California.
The plaintiff alleged he and the proposed class members were unlawfully classified as exempt employees and denied overtime compensation and meal breaks in violation of the California Labor Code.
The US District Court for the Central District of California granted summary judgment in favour of
The plaintiff has filed a Notice of Appeal with the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in California.
The case is currently stayed.
In November 2010 a separate group of plaintiffs counsel filed a nationwide collective action in the US District Court for the Southern District of Indiana against AstraZeneca alleging violations of federal wageandhour law for nonpayment of overtime wages.
The plaintiff voluntarily dismissed the case with prejudice in March 2011.
In January 2011 a third group of plaintiffs attorneys filed a separate nationwide collective action against AstraZeneca alleging that AstraZeneca violated federal wageandhour law by failing to pay overtime compensation to pharmaceutical sales representatives across the country.
The court has stayed the case pending a decision from the US Supreme Court in Christopher v.
Smithkline Beecham
Case No.
11204 which is addressing similar issues in the pharmaceutical sales context.
Government investigationsproceedings Except as otherwise noted the precise parameters of the following inquiries are unknown and AstraZeneca is not in a position at this time to predict the scope duration or outcome of these matters including whether they will result in any liability to AstraZeneca.
LosecPrilosec omeprazole European Commission case AstraZeneca is awaiting a ruling on the crossappeals from the General Court of the EUs judgment regarding the European Commissions 2005 Decision fining AstraZeneca 60m reduced to 52.5m by the General Court for abuse of a dominant position regarding omeprazole.
An oral hearing took place on 12 January 2012.
Nexium esomeprazole magnesium European Commission investigation The European Commission investigation into alleged practices regarding Nexium and alleged breaches of EU competition laws which commenced in November 2010 remains pending.
Dutch Competition Authority investigation The Dutch National Competition Authority NMa investigation into alleged practices regarding Nexium and alleged breaches of both Dutch and EU competition laws is ongoing.
In December 2011 the investigation team issued a report alleging foreclosure of generic versions of certain proton pump inhibitors.
The file has now been passed to the Legal Department of the NMa.
US FTC Civil Investigative Demand AstraZeneca has completed its response to the 2008 Civil Investigative Demand from the US Federal Trade Commission seeking information regarding the Nexium patent litigation settlement with Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd.
Department of JusticeAttorney General of Texas investigation AstraZeneca has received a subpoena from the Department of Justice and a Civil Investigative Demand issued by the Attorney General of Texas in connection with an investigation of the possible submission of false or otherwise improper pricing information for certain formulations of Nexium to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services CMS.
Other government investigationsproceedings Foreign Corrupt Practices Act In connection with an investigation into Foreign Corrupt Practices Act issues in the pharmaceutical industry AstraZeneca has received inquiries from the US Department of Justice and the SEC regarding among other things sales practices internal controls certain distributors and interactions with healthcare providers in several countries.
AstraZeneca is cooperating with these inquiries.
AstraZeneca is investigating indications of inappropriate conduct in certain countries including China.
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 189
In August 2011 AstraZeneca UK Limiteds Representative Office in Belgrade Serbia was served with a criminal indictment alleging that local employees of AstraZeneca and several other pharmaceutical companies who are also named defendants in the indictment made allegedly improper payments to physicians at the Institute of Oncology and Radiology of Serbia.
AstraZeneca filed a number of preliminary procedural objections asking the Serbian criminal court to dismiss the indictment against the Representative Office and those objections were granted in November 2011.
The Serbian prosecutor then amended and reserved the indictment and in December 2011 AstraZeneca asked the Court again to dismiss the indictment.
Korea
In September 2011 the Korean Fair Trade Commission KFTC announced administrative fines against AstraZeneca and five other pharmaceutical companies as a result of the third and final wave of its investigation into alleged unfair trade practices related to interactions between the local pharmaceutical industry and Korean healthcare providers.
AstraZeneca was fined KRW 1512m 1.24m but was not referred to the public prosecutor for criminal proceedings.
The KFTCs final investigation report was provided to AstraZeneca in November 2011 and alleges that AstraZeneca induced prescriptions through improper marketing to physicians in 2006 and 2007 yet recognises that such alleged unfair conduct stopped in 2007 after AstraZeneca voluntarily implemented an improved and effective compliance programme across its business.
Other US Attorneys Offices andor State Attorneys General investigations The US Attorneys Offices in Alabama Delaware and Texas are conducting investigations related to sales and marketing activities potentially involving more than one product including Crestor and Seroquel XR in response to the filing of qui tam whistleblower lawsuits.
The US Attorneys Office for the District of Delaware Criminal Division is conducting an investigation relating to AstraZenecas relationship with Medco and sales of Nexium Plendil ToprolXL and Prilosec.
In November 2006 AstraZeneca was notified of an inquiry by the US Attorneys Office for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania regarding whether a payment made by AstraZeneca to Advance PCS was taken into account when calculating best price.
In December 2011 the matter was resolved in principle with CMS and the Department of Justice.
In June 2011 MedImmune received a demand from the US Attorneys Office for the Southern District of New York requesting certain documents related to the sales and marketing activities of Synagis.
In July 2011 MedImmune received a similar court order to produce documents from the Office of the Attorney General for the State of New York Medicaid and Fraud Control Unit.
MedImmune is coordinating with the Government offices to provide the appropriate responses and cooperate with any related investigation.
Tax
Where tax exposures can be quantified an accrual is made based on best estimates and managements judgement.
Details of the movements in relation to material tax exposures are discussed below.
As accruals can be built up over a long period of time but the ultimate resolution of tax exposures usually occurs at a point in time and given the inherent uncertainties in assessing the outcomes of these exposures which sometimes can be binary in nature we could in future periods experience adjustments to these accruals that have a material positive or negative effect on our results in any particular period.
Transfer pricing and other international tax contingencies The total net accrual included in the Group Financial Statements to cover the worldwide exposure to transfer pricing audits is 649m a reduction of 1661m compared to 2010 primarily due to the agreement announced in March 2011 referred to below.
In March 2011 AstraZeneca announced that HM Revenue and Customs in the UK and the US Internal Revenue Service agreed the terms of an Advance Pricing Agreement regarding transfer pricing arrangements for AstraZenecas US business for the period from 2002 to the end of 2014 and a related valuation matter arising on integration of the legacy Astra and legacy Zeneca US businesses in 2000 following the global AstraZeneca merger in 1999.
Based on these agreements AstraZeneca paid a net amount of 1133m during 2011 to resolve all US transfer pricing and related valuation matters for all periods from 2000 to the end of 2010 and this net amount reflects expected US tax payments and updated estimates of corresponding tax refunds in other jurisdictions.
As a consequence of this agreement AstraZeneca released a portion of the provision related to these matters resulting in a benefit to earnings in the year of 520m.
AstraZeneca faces a number of transfer pricing audits in jurisdictions around the world and in some cases is in dispute with the tax authorities.
The issues under discussion are often complex and can require many years to resolve.
Accruals for tax contingencies require management to make estimates and judgements with respect to the ultimate outcome of a tax audit and actual results could vary from these estimates.
The international tax environment presents increasingly challenging dynamics for the resolution of transfer pricing disputes.
These disputes usually result in taxable profits being increased in one territory and correspondingly decreased in another.
Our balance sheet positions for these matters reflect appropriate corresponding relief in the territories affected.
Management considers that at present such corresponding relief will be available but given the challenges in the international tax environment will keep this aspect under careful review.
Management continues to believe that AstraZenecas positions on all its transfer pricing audits and disputes are robust and that AstraZeneca is appropriately provided.
For transfer pricing audits where AstraZeneca and the tax authorities are in dispute AstraZeneca estimates the potential for reasonably possible additional losses above and beyond the amount provided to be up to 375m 2010 565m however management believes that it is unlikely that these additional losses will arise.
It is possible that some of these contingencies may reduce in the future to the extent that any tax authority challenge is unsuccessful or matters lapse following expiry of the relevant statutes of limitation resulting in a reduction in the tax charge in future periods.
Other tax contingencies Included in the tax accrual is 1672m relating to a number of other tax contingencies an increase of 243m mainly due to the impact of an additional year of transactions relating to contingencies for which accruals had already been established and exchange rate effects.
For these tax exposures AstraZeneca does not expect material additional losses.
It is however possible that some of these contingencies may reduce in the future if any tax authority challenge is unsuccessful or matters lapse following expiry of the relevant statutes of limitation resulting in a material reduction in the tax charge in future periods.
Timing of cash flows and interest It is not possible to estimate the timing of tax cash flows in relation to each outcome however it is anticipated that a number of significant disputes may be resolved over the next one to two years.
Included in the provision is an amount of interest of 291m 2010 608m.
Interest
25 Commitments and contingent liabilities continued Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 190 Financial Statements 26 Leases Total rentals charged to profit were as follows Operating leases 215 212 198 The future minimum lease payments under operating leases that have initial or remaining terms in excess of one year at 31 December 2011 were as follows Obligations under leases comprise Not later than one year 92 161 132 Rentals due after more than one year Later than one year and not later than five years 178 242 208 Later than five years 12tel34tel471 27 Statutory and other information Fees payable to KPMG Audit Plc and its associates Group audit fee 2.4 2.3 2.4 Fees payable to KPMG Audit Plc and its associates for other services The audit of subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 5.5 6.5 6.6 Other services pursuant to legislation 2.4 3.3 2.9 Taxation 0.9 1.1 1.0 All other services 2.5 0.1 0.7 Fees payable to KPMG Audit Plc in respect of the Groups pension schemes The audit of subsidiaries pension schemes 0.6 0.6 0.5 Other services pursuant to legislation include fees of 1.9m 2010 2.4m 2009 2.3m in respect of section 404 of the SarbanesOxley Act.
Taxation services consist of tax compliance services and to a lesser extent tax advice.
All other services include assurance services in relation to third party compliance with manufacturing and distribution agreements and third party royalty agreements an audit in connection with the disposal of Astra Tech and advisory services supporting management in their development of competency and development frameworks for staff and in their outsourcing arrangements for the provision of IT infrastructure.
Related party transactions The Group had no material related party transactions which might reasonably be expected to influence decisions made by the users of these Financial Statements.
Key management personnel compensation Key management personnel are defined for the purpose of disclosure under IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures as the members of the Board and the members of the SET.
Shortterm employee benefits 19973 21925 20784 Postemployment benefits 2155 1793 2080 Termination benefits   3639 Sharebased payments 16064 11563 12547 38192 35281 39050 Total remuneration is included within employee costs see Note 24.
Further details of Directors emoluments are included in the Directors Remuneration Report from pages 113 to 128.
Subsequent events On 2 February 2012 AstraZeneca announced new restructuring initiatives to further reduce costs and increase business flexibility.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 191 Financial Statements At 31 December 2011 Country Percentage of voting share capital held Principal activity
AstraZeneca UK Limited England 100 Research and development manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca Treasury Limited England 100 Treasury Continental Europe NV AstraZeneca SA Belgium 100 Marketing AstraZeneca Dunkerque Production SCS France 100 Manufacturing AstraZeneca SAS France 100 Research manufacturing marketing Novexel SA France 100 Research AstraZeneca GmbH Germany 100 Development manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca Holding GmbH Germany 100 Manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca SpA Italy 100 Marketing AstraZeneca Farmaceutica Spain SA Spain 100 Marketing AstraZeneca AB Sweden 100 Research and development manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca BV Netherlands 100 Marketing LLC AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals Russia 100 Marketing The Americas AstraZeneca do Brasil Limitada Brazil 100 Manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca Canada Inc.
Canada 100 Research marketing AZ Reinsurance Limited Cayman Islands 100 Insurance and reinsurance underwriting IPR Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Puerto Rico 100 Development manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca LP US 99 Research and development manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP US 100 Research and development manufacturing marketing Zeneca Holdings Inc.
US 100 Manufacturing marketing MedImmune LLC US 100 Research and development manufacturing marketing Asia Africa and Australasia AstraZeneca Pty Limited Australia 100 Development manufacturing marketing AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals Co.
Limited China 100 Research and development manufacturing marketing AZ Wuxi Trading Co.
Limited China 100 Marketing AstraZeneca KK Japan 80 Manufacturing marketing All shares are held indirectly.
The companies and other entities listed above are those whose results or financial position principally affected the figures shown in the Group Financial Statements.
A full list of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates will be annexed to the Companys next annual return filed with the Registrar of Companies.
The country of registration or incorporation is stated alongside each company.
The accounting year ends of subsidiaries and associates are 31 December except for Aptium Oncology Inc. of the Financial Statements is 30 November.
AstraZeneca operates through 235 subsidiaries worldwide.
Products are manufactured in 16 countries worldwide and are sold in over 100 countries.
The Group Financial Statements consolidate the Financial Statements of the Company and its subsidiaries at 31 December 2011.
Principal Subsidiaries Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 192 Financial Statements We have audited the Parent Company Financial Statements of AstraZeneca PLC for the year ended 31 December 2011 set out on pages 193 to 197.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and UK Accounting Standards UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditor As explained more fully in the Preparation of the Financial Statements and the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 140 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the Parent Company Financial Statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the Parent Company Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards APBs Ethical Standards for Auditors.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements A description of the scope of an audit of financial statements is provided on the APBs website frc. iteapbscopeprivate. fm.
Opinion on financial statements In our opinion the Parent Company Financial Statements Give a true and fair view of the state of the Companys affairs as at 31 December 2011.
Have been properly prepared in accordance with UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
Have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion The part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
The information given in the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the Parent Company Financial Statements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters where the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion Adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us.
The Parent Company Financial Statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
Certain disclosures of Directors Remuneration specified by law are not made.
We have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Other matter We have reported separately on the Group Financial Statements of AstraZeneca PLC for the year ended 31 December 2011.
Jimmy Daboo Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of KPMG Audit Plc Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square London E14 5GL 2 February 2012 Independent Auditors Report to the Members of AstraZeneca PLC AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 193 Financial Statements AstraZeneca PLC
Fixed assets Fixed asset investments 1 23421 25232 Current assets Debtors  other 1 1 Debtors  amounts owed by Group undertakings 1937 3558 1938 3559 Creditors Amounts falling due within one year Nontrade creditors 2 3217 194 Interestbearing loans and borrowings 3 1749 4966 194 Net current liabilitiesassets 3028 3365 Total assets less current liabilities 20393 28597 Creditors Amounts falling due after more than one year Amounts owed to Group undertakings 3 283 283 Interestbearing loans and borrowings 3 6714 8486 6997 8769 Net assets 13396 19828 Capital and reserves Calledup share capital 6 323 352 Share premium account 4 3078 2672 Capital redemption reserve 4 139 107 Other reserves 4 2983 3020 Profit and loss account 4 6873 13677 Shareholders funds 5 13396 19828 m means millions of US dollars.
The Company Financial Statements from page 193 to 197 were approved by the Board on 2 February 2012 and were signed on its behalf by David R Brennan Simon Lowth Director Director Companys registered number Company Balance Sheet at 31 December Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 194 Financial Statements Company Accounting Policies Basis of accounting The Company Financial Statements are prepared under the historical cost convention modified to include revaluation to fair value of certain financial instruments as described below in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice UK GAAP.
The Group Financial Statements are presented on pages 142 to 191 and have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU and as issued by the IASB and in accordance with the Group Accounting Policies set out on pages 146 to 149.
The following paragraphs describe the main accounting policies under UK GAAP which have been applied consistently.
New accounting standards The Company has adopted the Amendments to FRS 25 IAS 32 Financial Instruments Presentation Classification of Rights Issues Abstract 47 Extinguishing Financial Liabilities with Equity Instruments and Improvements to Financial Reporting Standards 2010 November 2010 during the year.
The adoptions had no impact on the net results or net assets of the Company.
The Amendments to FRS 29 IFRS 7 Disclosures  Transfers of Financial Assets has been issued but not yet adopted by the Company.
Foreign currencies Profit and loss account items in foreign currencies are translated into US dollars at average rates for the relevant accounting periods.
Assets and liabilities are translated at exchange rates prevailing at the date of the Company Balance Sheet.
Exchange gains and losses on loans and on shortterm foreign currency borrowings and deposits are included within net interest payable.
Exchange differences on all other transactions except relevant foreign currency loans are taken to operating profit.
Taxation
The charge for taxation is based on the result for the year and takes into account taxation deferred because of timing differences between the treatment of certain items for taxation and for accounting purposes.
Full provision is made for the effects of these differences.
Deferred tax assets are recognised where it is more likely than not that the amount will be realised in the future.
These estimates require judgements to be made including the forecast of future taxable income.
Deferred tax balances are not discounted.
Accruals for tax contingencies require management to make judgements and estimates in relation to tax audit issues.
Tax benefits are not recognised unless the tax positions will probably be sustained.
Once considered to be probable management reviews each material tax benefit to assess whether a provision should be taken against full recognition of that benefit on the basis of potential settlement through negotiation andor litigation.
Any recorded exposure to interest on tax liabilities is provided for in the tax charge.
All provisions are included in creditors due within one year.
Investments
Fixed asset investments including investments in subsidiaries are stated at cost and reviewed for impairment if there are indications that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Sharebased payments The issuance by the Company to employees of its subsidiaries of a grant over the Companys options represents additional capital contributions by the Company to its subsidiaries.
An additional investment in subsidiaries results in a corresponding increase in shareholders equity.
The additional capital contribution is based on the fair value of the grant issued allocated over the underlying grants vesting period.
Financial instruments Loans and other receivables are held at amortised cost.
Longterm loans payable are held at amortised cost.
Litigation
Through the normal course of business the AstraZeneca Group is involved in legal disputes the settlement of which may involve cost to the Company.
Provision is made where an adverse outcome is probable and associated costs can be estimated reliably.
In other cases appropriate descriptions are included.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 195 Financial Statements 1 Fixed asset investments Investments in subsidiaries
Loans
Total
Cost and net book value at 1 January 2011 16465 8767 25232 Transfer to current assets  1747 1747 Capital contribution 38  38 Exchange  25 25 Amortisation  1 1 Cost and net book value at 31 December 2011 16427 6994 23421 A list of principal subsidiaries is included on page 191.
2 Nontrade creditors Amounts due within one year Shortterm borrowings unsecured 14 12 Other creditors 170 169 Amounts owed to Group undertakings 3033 13 3217 194 3 Loans
Amounts due within one year Interestbearing loans and borrowings unsecured US dollars 5.4% Callable bond 2012 1749 Amounts due after more than one year Amounts owed to subsidiaries unsecured US dollars 7.2% Loan telInterestbearing loans and borrowings unsecured US dollars 5.4% Callable bond 2012  1747 5.4% Callable bond tel5.9% Callable bond 2017 1744 1744 6.45% Callable bond 2037 2716 2718
5.125% Noncallable bond telPounds sterling 5.75% Noncallable bond tel6714 8486 Loans or instalments thereof are repayable After five years from balance sheet date 5279 5280 From two to five years 1718 1742 From one to two years  1747 Within one year 1749 Total unsecured 8746 8769 All loans are at fixed interest rates.
Accordingly the fair values of the loans will change as market rates change.
However since the loans are held at amortised cost changes in interest rates and the credit rating of the Company do not have any effect on the Companys net assets.
Notes to the Company Financial Statements Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 196 Financial Statements 4 Reserves
Capital redemption reserve
Profit and loss account
Total
At beginning of year 2672 107 3020 13677 19476 22927 Profit for the year    2961 2961 2043 Dividends    3752 3752 3494 Amortisation of loss on cash flow hedge    2 2 1 Sharebased payments   37  37 98 Share repurchases  32  6015 5983 2591 Issue of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares 406    406 492 At end of year 3078 139 2983 6873 13073 19476 Distributable reserves at end of year   1841 6873 8714 15518 As permitted by section  of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has not presented its own profit and loss account.
At 31 December 2011 6873m 31 December 2010 13677m of the profit and loss account reserve was available for distribution.
Included
Included within other reserves at 31 December 2011 is 1142m 31 December 2010 1179m in respect of cumulative sharebased payment awards.
These amounts are not available for distribution.
5 Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds At beginning of year 19828 23290 Net profit for the financial year 2961 2043 Dividends 3752 3494 Amortisation of loss on cash flow hedge 2 1 Sharebased payments 37 98 Issue of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares 409 494 Repurchase of AstraZeneca PLC Ordinary Shares 6015 2604 Net decrease in shareholders funds 6432 3462 Shareholders funds at end of year 13396 19828 Details of dividends paid and payable to shareholders are given in Note 21 to the Group Financial Statements on page 170.
6 Share capital Allotted calledup and fully paid Issued Ordinary Shares 0.25 each 323 352 Redeemable Preference Shares 1 each  50000 At 31 December 2011 1292355052 Ordinary Shares were in issue.
The Redeemable Preference Shares carry limited class voting rights and no dividend rights.
This class of shares is capable of redemption at par at the option of the Company on the giving of seven days written notice to the registered holder of the shares.
The movements in share capital during the year can be summarised as follows
At 1 January 2011 1409 352 Issues of shares 11 3 Repurchase of shares 128 32 At 31 December 2011 1292 323 Share repurchases During the year the Company repurchased 128m Ordinary Shares at an average price of 2932 pence per share 2010 54m Ordinary Shares at an average price of 3111 pence per share.
Share schemes A total of 11m Ordinary Shares were issued during the year in respect of share schemes.
Details of movements in the number of Ordinary Shares under option are shown in Note 24 to the Group Financial Statements details of options granted to Directors are shown in the Directors
Remuneration Report.
Shares held by subsidiaries No shares in the Company are held by subsidiaries.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Financial Statements 197 Financial Statements 7 Litigation and environmental liabilities In addition to those matters disclosed below there are other cases where the Company is named as a party to legal proceedings.
These include the Seroquel product liability litigation the Seroquel Attorney General commercial litigation the Nexium product liability litigation and the Symbicort freedom to operate lawsuit Accuhale LLC v.
AstraZeneca each of which are described more fully in Note 25 to the Group Financial Statements.
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act In connection with an investigation into Foreign Corrupt Practices Act issues in the pharmaceutical industry AstraZeneca has received inquiries from the US Department of Justice and the SEC regarding among other things sales practices internal controls certain distributors and interactions with healthcare providers in several countries.
AstraZeneca is cooperating with these inquiries.
AstraZeneca is investigating indications of inappropriate conduct in certain countries including China.
European Commission investigation The European Commission investigation into alleged practices regarding Nexium and alleged breaches of EU competition laws which was commenced in November 2010 remains pending.
European Commission case AstraZeneca is awaiting a ruling on the crossappeals from the General Court of the EUs judgment regarding the European Commissions 2005 Decision fining AstraZeneca 60m reduced to 52.5m by the General Court for abuse of a dominant position regarding omeprazole.
An oral hearing took place on 12 January 2012.
Dutch Competition Authority investigation The Dutch National Competition Authority NMa investigation into alleged practices regarding Nexium and alleged breaches of both Dutch and EU competition laws is ongoing.
In December 2011 the investigation team issued a report alleging foreclosure of generic versions of certain Proton Pump Inhibitors.
The file has now been passed to the Legal Department of the NMa.
Other
The Company has guaranteed the external borrowing of a subsidiary in the amount of 288m.
8 Statutory and other information The Directors were paid by another Group company in 2011 and 2010.
Financial Statements AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 198 Financial Statements For the year ended 31 December Revenue and profits Revenue 29559 31601 32804 33269 33591 Cost of sales 6419 6598 5775 6389 6026 Distribution costs 248 291 298 335 346 Research and development 5162 5179 4409 5318 5523 Selling general and administrative costs 10364 10913 11332 10445 11161 Profit on disposal of subsidiary     1483 Other operating income and expense 72tel777 Operating profit 8094 9144 11543 11494 12795 Finance income 95tel552 Finance expense 1070 1317 1198 1033 980 Profit before tax 7983 8681 10807 10977 12367 Taxation 2356 2551 3263 2896 2351 Profit for the period 5627 6130 7544 8081 10016 Other comprehensive income for the period net of tax 342 1906 54 25 546 Total comprehensive income for the period 5969 4224 7490 8106 9470 Profit attributable to Equity holders of the Company 5595 6101 7521 8053 9983 Noncontrolling interests Earnings per share Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share basic 3.74 4.20 5.19 5.60 7.33 Earnings per 0.25 Ordinary Share diluted 3.73 4.20 5.19 5.57 7.30 Return on revenues Operating profit as a percentage of revenues 27.4% 28.9% 35.2% 34.5% 38.1% Ratio of earnings to fixed charges 15.6 13.5 19.9 24.0 28.5 At 31 December Statement of Financial Position Property plant and equipment goodwill and intangible assets 29649 29240 29422 28986 27267 Other investments 29tel543 Deferred tax assets 1044 1236 1292 1475 1514 Current assets 16996 15869 23760 25131 23506 Total assets 47988 46950 54920 56127 52830 Current liabilities 15218 13415 17640 16787 15752 Noncurrent liabilities 17855 17475 16459 15930 13606 Net assets 14915 16060 20821 23410 23472 Share capital 36tel323 Reserves attributable to equity holders 14414 15550 20297 22861 22923 Noncontrolling interests 13tel226 Total equity and reserves 14915 16060 20821 23410 23472 For the year ended 31 December Cash flows Net cash inflowoutflow from Operating activities 7510 8742 11739 10680 7821 Investing activities 14887 3896 2476 2340 2022 Financing activities 6051 6362 3629 7220 9321 1326 1516 5634 1120 3522 For the purpose of computing the ratio of earnings to fixed charges earnings consist of the income from continuing ordinary activities before taxation of Group companies and income received from companies owned 50% or less plus fixed charges.
Fixed charges consist of interest on all indebtedness amortisation of debt discount and expense and that portion of rental expense representative of the interest factor.
Group Financial Record Development Pipeline at 31 December 2011 Throughout the development process we strive to obtain patent protection consistent with our patent process as described in the Intellectual Property section from page 34.
However until marketing approval in individual countries is obtained it is not possible to accurately predict the maximum period of product protection available from any such patents.
While the most significant uncertainties for development pipeline products progressing to launch are meeting development targets and obtaining regulatory marketing approvals as detailed in the Risk section from page 129 the date and language of any actual marketing approval will crucially determine the length of Patent Term Extension and the full range if any of pending patents that will protect the marketed product.
Further details of possible periods of patent RDP and related IP protections which may protect pipeline products once marketed are included on page 35.
Line Extensions Compound Mechanism Area Under Investigation Phase
Commenced
Phase
Estimated Filing US EU Japan Emerging
Axanum proton pump inhibitor  low dose aspirin FDC low dose aspirin associated peptic ulcer in high risk CV patients III Withdrawn Launched 1H 2013 Filed
Brilique PEGASUSTIMI ADP receptor antagonist outcomes study III 4Qtel 2014 2014
III Launched Launched Filed dapagliflozinmetformin
SGLT2 inhibitor  metformin
SGLT2 inhibitor diabetes  add on to DPPIV III 1Q 2010 3Q 2012 dapagliflozin SGLT2 inhibitor diabetes  add on to insulin and add on to metformin LT data III 2Q 2008 3Q 2012 dapagliflozin SGLT2 inhibitor diabetes  in patients with high CV risk  Study 18 and 19 data III 1Q 2013 3Q 2013 Kombiglyze XR
Komboglyze
TM
FDC
DPPIV inhibitor  metformin
Onglyza
TM
SAVORTIMI
DPPIV inhibitor outcomes study III 2Qtel 2016
Entocort glucocorticoid steroid Crohns disease and ulcerative colitis III Launched Launched 2014 TBC Nexium proton pump inhibitor peptic ulcer bleeding III Filed Launched Launched Nexium proton pump inhibitor GERD III Launched Launched Launched Launched
FluMistFluenz live attenuated intranasal influenza virus vaccine influenza III Launched Approved Launched
Diprivan sedative and anaesthetic conscious sedation III Launched 2H 2013 Launched
Oncology
Faslodex oestrogen receptor antagonist high dose 500mg 2nd line advanced breast cancer III Launched Launched Launched Launched Faslodex oestrogen receptor antagonist 1st line advanced breast cancer IIItel 2016 Iressa EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor 1st line EGFR mut NSCLC III Launched Launched Launched Iressa EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment beyond progression IIItel Respiratory and Inflammation Oxis longacting  2 agonist COPD III Launched Filed Symbicort inhaled steroidlongacting 2 agonist asthma
III 1H 2013 Symbicort inhaled steroidlongacting 2 agonist COPD III Launched Launched Filed Launched Symbicort inhaled steroidlongacting 2 agonist SMART III Launched Filed Launched Partnered product.
Kombiglyze XR
US Komboglyze
FDC EU.
2nd CRL received in June 2011.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Additional Information Development Pipeline 199 Development Pipeline
Phase IIIRegistration Compound Mechanism Area Under Investigation Phase
Commenced
Phase
Estimated Filing US EU Japan Emerging
BrilintaBrilique ADP receptor antagonist arterial thrombosis III Launched Launched 1H 2013 Launched dapagliflozin SGLT2 inhibitor diabetes III 3Q 2007 Filed Filed 1H 2013 Filed
CAZ AVI CAZ104 beta lactamase inhibitor cephalosporin serious infections III 1Qtel 2014 QLAIV Flu Vac
Zinforo ceftaroline extended spectrum cephalosporin with affinity to penicillinbinding proteins pneumoniaskin infections III 1Q 2007 Filed Filed
NKTR118 oral peripherallyacting opioid antagonist opioidinduced constipation III 2Q 2011 2H 2013 2H 2013
III 2Q 2010 3Q 2012 2015
Caprelsa vandetanib VEGFREGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor with RET kinase activity medullary thyroid cancer III Launched Filed 2014 Filed
TM denosumab antiRANKL MAb bone disorders stemming from bone metastasis III Approved Respiratory and Inflammation fostamatinib spleen tyrosine kinase SYK inhibitor rheumatoid arthritis III 3Q 2010 2H 2013 2H 2013 2H 2013 Partnered product.
CRL received in January 2012.
See page 61 of the Therapy Area Review for more information.
Phase III dosing expected in 1Q 2012. supplemental Biologics License Application sBLA in US MAA in EU.
Enrolment began in 1Q 2011.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 200 Development Pipeline NCEs Phases I and II Compound Mechanism Area Under Investigation Phase
Commenced
Phase
Estimated Filing US EU Japan Emerging
AZD2927 ion channel blockerinhibitor atrial fibrillation II 4Q 2011 AZD4017 11BHSD glaucoma II 1Q 2011
4MC4r partial agonist peptide obesity I 2Q 2011
Infection
AZD9773 antiTNFalpha polyclonal antibody severe sepsis II 1Q 2008
CEF104 beta lactamase inhibitor cephalosporin MRSA II 4Q 2010 AZD5099 gyrase B serious infections I 2Q 2011 AZD5847 oxazolidinone antibacterial inhibitor tuberculosis I 4Q 2009 MEDI534 RSVPIV3 vaccine RSVPIV prophylaxis I 2Q 2005 MEDI550 pandemic influenza virus vaccine pandemic influenza prophylaxis I 2Q 2006 MEDI557 antiRSV MAb extended halflife RSV prevention in highrisk adults COPDCHFother I 3Q 2007 MEDI559 paediatric RSV vaccine RSV prophylaxis I 4Q 2008
AZD2423 CCR2b antagonist chronic neuropathic pain II 4Q 2010
Alzheimers disease II 3Q 2007 AZD6765 NMDA receptor antagonist major depressive disorder II 3Q 2007
II 1Q 2011
Alzheimers disease I 4Q 2008 AZD3241 myeloperoxidase MPO inhibitor Parkinsons disease I 2Q 2007
AZD5213 histamine3 receptor antagonist Alzheimers diseaseADHD I 2Q 2010 MEDI578 antiNGF MAb OA pain I 1Q 2010
AZD4547 FGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor solid tumours II 4Q 2011 AZD8931 erbB kinase inhibitor breast cancer chemo. combi.
II 2Q 2010 fostamatinib spleen tyrosine kinase SYK inhibitor haematological malignancies II 1Q 2012
AZD6244
ARRY
MEK inhibitor solid tumours II 4Q 2006 tremelimumab antiCTLA4 MAb solid tumours II 3Q 2004 AZD1480 JAK1 2 inhibitor solid tumours I 2Q 2009 AZD2014 TOR kinase inhibitor solid tumours I 1Q 2010 AZD3514 androgen receptor downregulator prostate cancer I 3Q 2010
AKT inhibitor solid tumours I 4Q 2010
ARRY MEK inhibitor solid tumours I 1Q 2007
MEDI565 antiCEA BiTE solid tumours I 1Q 2011
MEDI3617 antiANG2 MAb solid tumours I 4Q 2010 moxetumomab pasudotox
AZD6244
ARRYMK2206
MEKAKT inhibitor solid tumours I 4Q 2009 Partnered product.
Added to pipeline table after starting Phase II in January 2012.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Additional Information Development Pipeline 201 Development Pipeline
Phases I and II continued Compound Mechanism Area Under Investigation Phase
Commenced
Phase
Estimated Filing US EU Japan Emerging Respiratory and Inflammation AZD1981 CRTh2 receptor antagonist asthmaCOPD II 3Q 2005 AZD2423 CCR2b antagonist COPD II 4Q 2010 AZD5069 CXCR2 COPD II 4Q 2010 AZD5423 inhaled SEGRA COPD II 4Q 2010 AZD8683 muscarinic antagonist COPD II 4Q 2010 benralizumab
CAM3001 antiGMCSFR MAb rheumatoid arthritis II 1Q 2010
MEDI545 antiIFNalpha MAb SLE II 3Q 2008 tralokinumab
AZD2115 MABA COPD I 1Q 2011
MEDI551 antiCD19 MAb scleroderma I 2Q 2010
Partnered product.
Discontinued projects between 27 January 2011 and 31 December 2011 NCELine Extension Compound Reason for Discontinuation Area Under Investigation
NCE AZD1656 SafetyEfficacy diabetes NCE AZD5658 SafetyEfficacy diabetes NCE AZD6714 SafetyEfficacy diabetes NCE AZD7687 SafetyEfficacy diabetes NCE AZD8329 SafetyEfficacy diabetes
NCE AZD2066 SafetyEfficacy major depressive disorder NCE AZD2066 SafetyEfficacy chronic neuropathic pain NCE AZD3043 Economic short acting sedativeanaesthetic NCE TC5619 Economic cognitive disorders in schizophrenia
NCE AZD1152 Economic haematological malignancies NCE AZD2461 SafetyEfficacy solid tumours NCE AZD7762 SafetyEfficacy solid tumours NCE AZD8055 SafetyEfficacy range of tumours NCE olaparib AZD2281 SafetyEfficacy serous ovarian cancer NCE Recentin SafetyEfficacy NSCLC NCE zibotentan ZD4054 SafetyEfficacy castrate resistant prostate cancer
NCE AZD9742 SafetyEfficacy MRSA NCE motavizumab Regulatory early and late treatment of RSV in paeds  1 year Respiratory and Inflammation NCE AZD3199 EconomicRegulatory asthmaCOPD NCE AZD9819 Economic COPD NCE MEDI528 SafetyEfficacy asthma
As disclosure of compound information is balanced by the business need to maintain confidentiality information in relation to some compounds listed here has not been disclosed at this time.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 202 Development Pipeline Shareholder Information AstraZeneca PLC share listings and pricestel 2010 2011 Ordinary Shares in issue  millions At year end 1457 1447 1451 1409 1292 Weighted average for year 1495 1453 1448 1438 1361 Stock market price  per Ordinary Share Highest pencetel 3385 3194 Lowest pencetel 2732 2543.5 At year end pencetel.5 2922 2975 Percentage analysis of issued share capital at 31 December By size of account
1001  5000 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.2 5001  10000 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 10001  50000 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.0 1.0 Over 1000000 Includes Euroclear and ADR holdings.
At 31 December 2011 the Company had 119435 registered holders of 1292355052 Ordinary Shares.
At 31 December 2011 there were approximately 209000 holders of ADRs representing 8.6% of the issued share capital of the Company and 136000 holders of Ordinary Shares held under the Euroclear Services Agreement representing 15.3% of the issued share capital of the Company.
The ADRs each of which is equivalent to one Ordinary Share are issued by JPMorgan Chase Bank JPMorgan.
During 2011 under AstraZenecas share repurchase programme which was introduced in 1999 127.4 million Ordinary Shares were repurchased and subsequently cancelled at a total cost of 6015 million representing 9.9% of the total issued share capital of the Company at 31 December 2011.
The average price paid per share in 2011 was 2932 pence.
This brings the total number of Ordinary Shares repurchased to date since the beginning of the repurchase programme in 1999 to 557 .4 million Ordinary Shares at an average price of 2767 pence per Ordinary Share for a consideration including expenses of 26717 million.
The excess of the consideration over the nominal value was charged against the profit and loss account reserve.
Ordinary Shares issued in respect of share schemes totalled 10.7 million.
In 1999 in connection with the merger between Astra and Zeneca through which the Company was formed the Companys share capital was redenominated in US dollars.
On 6 April 1999 Zeneca shares were cancelled and US dollar shares issued credited as fully paid on the basis of one dollar share for each Zeneca share then held.
This was achieved by a reduction of capital under section 135 of the Companies Act 1985.
Upon the reduction of capital becoming effective all issued and unissued Zeneca shares were cancelled and the sum arising as a result of the share cancellation credited to a special reserve which was converted into US dollars at the rate of exchange prevailing on the record date.
This
US dollar reserve was then applied in paying up at par newly created US dollar shares.
At the same time as the US dollar shares were issued the Company issued 50000 Redeemable Preference Shares for cash at par.
The
Redeemable Preference Shares carry limited class voting rights no dividend rights and are capable of redemption at par at the option of the Company on the giving of seven days written notice to the registered holder of the Redeemable Preference Shares.
A total of 826 million Ordinary Shares were issued to Astra shareholders who accepted the merger offer before the final closing date 21 May 1999.
The Company received acceptances from Astra shareholders representing 99.6% of Astras shares and the remaining 0.4% was acquired in 2000 for cash.
Since April 1999 following the merger of Astra and Zeneca the principal markets for trading in the shares of the Company are the London Stock Exchange LSE the Stockholm Stock Exchange SSE and the New York Stock Exchange NYSE.
The table below sets out for 2010 and 2011 the reported high and low share prices of the Company on the following bases AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Additional Information Shareholder Information 203 Shareholder Information For shares listed on the LSE the reported high and low middle market closing quotations are derived from the Daily Official List.
For shares listed on the SSE the high and low closing sales prices are as stated in the Official List.
For ADSs listed on the NYSE the reported high and low sales prices are as reported by Dow Jones ADR quotations.
Ordinary LSE ADS Ordinary SSE High pence Low pence High US Low US High SEK Low SEK 2010  Quarter 1 3102.5 2732.0 50.40 43.05 363.8 310.1 Quarter 2 3169.0 2772.0 48.74 40.91 368.0 314.0 Quarter 3 3385.0 3051.5 53.41 47.05 382.2 345.0 Quarter 4 3359.0 2922.0 53.50 45.80 354.7 309.3 2011  Quarter 1 3073.5 2801.5 49.38 45.40 320.6 289.0 Quarter 2 3194.0 2895.0 52.40 46.60 328.5 294.2 Quarter 3 3166.5 2543.5 51.08 40.95 324.5 269.3 Quarter 4 3080.5 2731.5 49.89 42.53 319.0 293.7 July 3166.5 2973.0 51.08 48.51 324.5 309.0 August 2950.5 2543.5 48.26 40.95 304.1 269.3 September 2916.0 2738.5 46.69 42.64 305.1 284.0 October 3080.5 2814.5 49.89 43.86 319.0 299.5 November 2976.5 2731.5 47.88 42.53 316.2 293.7 December 2975.0 2883.0 46.34 45.15 318.2 307.0 Major shareholdings At 2 February 2012 the following had disclosed an interest in the issued Ordinary Share capital of the Company in accordance with the requirements of rule 5.1.2 of the UK Listing Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rules
Number of shares Date of disclosure to
Percentage of issued share capital BlackRock Inc.
100885181 8 December 2009 7.87 Invesco Limited 72776277 6 October 2009 5.67 Axa SA 56991117 3 February 2009 4.44 Investor AB 51587810 2 February 2012 4.02 Legal and General Investment Management Limited 57675232 5 August 2010 4.50 Since the date of disclosure to the Company the interest of any person listed above in Ordinary Shares may have increased or decreased.
No requirement to notify the Company of any increase or decrease would have arisen unless the holding moved up or down through a whole number percentage level.
The percentage level may increase on the cancellation of shares following a repurchase of shares under the Companys share repurchase programme or decrease on the issue of new shares under any of the Companys share plans.
No other person held a notifiable interest in shares comprising 3% or more of the issued Ordinary Share capital of the Company.
Changes in the percentage ownership held by major shareholders during the past three years are set out below.
Major shareholders do not have different voting rights.
Percentage of issued share capital Shareholder 2 Feb 2012 27 Jan 2011 28 Jan 2010 29 Jan 2009 BlackRock Inc.
Invesco Limited 5.67 5.18 5.01 Investor AB 4.02 3.67 3.55 4.38 Legal and General Investment Management Limited 4.50 4.10 4.64 4.09 Capital Research and Management Company    4.92 Wellington Management Co.
LLP    4.18 Barclays PLC    4.26 ADSs evidenced by ADRs issued by JPMorgan as depositary are listed on the NYSE.
At 2 February 2012 the proportion of Ordinary Shares represented by ADSs was 8.66% of the Ordinary Shares outstanding.
Number of registered holders of Ordinary Shares at 2 February 2012 In the US 766 Total 119039 Number of record holders of ADRs at 2 February 2012 In the US 2165 Total 2176 So far as the Company is aware it is neither directly nor indirectly owned or controlled by one or more corporations or by any government.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 204 Shareholder Information At 2 February 2012 the total amount of the Companys voting securities owned by Directors and officers of the Company was Title of class
Percentage of class Ordinary Shares 533235 0.04 The Company does not know of any arrangements the operation of which might result in a change in the control of the Company.
Related party transactions During the period 1 January 2012 to 2 February 2012 there were no transactions loans or proposed transactions between the Company and any related parties which were material to either the Company or the related party or which were unusual in their nature or conditions see also Note 27 to the Financial Statements on page 190.
Options to purchase securities from registrant or subsidiaries a At 2 February 2012 options outstanding to subscribe for Ordinary Shares were Number of shares
36077128 1882  3487 2012  2019 The weighted average subscription price of options outstanding at 2 February 2012 was 2496 pence.
All options were granted under Company employee share schemes.
Number of shares
1552569 1882  3487 2012  2019 Included in paragraph b are options granted to individually named Directors.
Details of these option holdings at 31 December 2011 are shown in the Share option plans table on page 127.
During the period 1 January 2012 to 2 February 2012 no Director exercised any options.
Dividend payments For Ordinary Shares listed on the LSE and the SSE and ADRs listed on the NYSE the record date for the second interim dividend for 2011 payable on 19 March 2012 is 17 February 2012 and the exdividend date is 15 February 2012.
The record date for the first interim dividend for 2012 payable on 10 September 2012 is 10 August 2012.
Future dividends will normally be paid as follows First interim Announced in July and paid in September.
Second interim Announced in February and paid in March.
Shareview
The Companys shareholders with internet access may visit the websitesite and register their details to create a portfolio.
Shareview is a free and secure online service from the Companys registrars Equiniti Limited which gives access to shareholdings including balance movements indicative share prices and information about recent dividends.
ShareGift
The Company welcomes and values all of its shareholders no matter how many or how few shares they own.
However shareholders who have only a small number of shares whose value makes it uneconomic to sell them either now or at some stage in the future may wish to consider donating them to charity through ShareGift an independent charity share donation scheme.
One feature of the scheme is that there is no gain or loss for UK capital gains tax purposes on gifts of shares through ShareGift and it may now also be possible to obtain UK income tax relief on the donation.
Further information about ShareGift can be found on its website sharegift.
17 Carlton House Terrace London SW1Y 5AH.
ShareGift is administered by The Orr Mackintosh Foundation registered charity number More information about the UK tax position on gifts of shares to ShareGift can be obtained from HM Revenue and Customs on their website hmrc.
The Unclaimed Assets Register The Company supplies unclaimed dividend data to the Unclaimed Assets Register UAR which provides investors who have lost track of shareholdings with an opportunity to search the UARs database of unclaimed financial assets on payment of a small fixed fee.
The UAR donates part of the search fee to charity.
The UAR can be contacted ontel or at PO Box 9501 Nottingham NG80 1WD.
Results
Unaudited trading results of AstraZeneca in respect of the first three months of 2012 will be published on 26 April 2012 and results in respect of the first six months of 2012 will be published on 26 July 2012.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Additional Information Shareholder Information 205 Shareholder Information Documents on display The Articles and other documents concerning the Company which are referred to in this Annual Report may be inspected at the Companys registered office at 2 Kingdom Street London W2 6BD.
Taxation for US residents The following summary of material UK and US federal income tax consequences of ownership of Ordinary Shares or ADRs held as capital assets by the US resident holders described below is based on current UK and US federal income tax law including the USUK double taxation convention relating to income and capital gains which entered into force on 31 March 2003 the Convention.
This summary does not describe all of the tax consequences that may be relevant in light of the US resident holders particular circumstances and tax consequences applicable to US resident holders subject to special rules such as certain financial institutions entities treated as partnerships for US federal income tax purposes persons whose functional currency for US federal income tax purposes is not the US dollar taxexempt entities or persons holding Ordinary Shares or ADRs in connection with a trade or business conducted outside of the United States.
US resident holders are urged to consult their tax advisers regarding the UK and US federal income tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of Ordinary Shares or ADRs in their particular circumstances.
This summary is based in part on representations of JPMorgan as depositary for ADRs and assumes that each obligation in the deposit agreement among the Company JPMorgan and the holders from time to time of ADRs and any related agreements will be performed in accordance with its terms.
The US Treasury has expressed concerns that parties to whom American depository shares are released before shares are delivered to the depositary prerelease or intermediaries in the chain of ownership between holders and the issuer of the security underlying the American depository shares may be taking actions that are inconsistent with the claiming by US holders of American depository shares of foreign tax credits for US federal income tax purposes.
Such actions would also be inconsistent with the claiming of the reduced tax rates described below applicable to dividends received by certain noncorporate US resident holders.
Accordingly the availability of the reduced tax rates for dividends received by certain noncorporate US resident holders could be affected by actions that may be taken by parties to whom ADRs are prereleased.
For purposes of this summary the term US resident holder means a beneficial owner of Ordinary Shares or ADRs that is for US federal income tax purposes a citizen or resident of the US a corporation or other entity taxable as a corporation created or organised in or under the laws of the US any state in the US or the District of Columbia or an estate or trust the income of which is subject to US federal income taxation regardless of its source.
This summary assumes that we are not and will not become a passive foreign investment company as discussed below.
UK and US income taxation of dividends The UK does not currently impose a withholding tax on dividends paid by a UK company such as the Company.
For US federal income tax purposes distributions paid by the Company to a US resident holder are included in gross income as foreign source ordinary dividend income to the extent paid out of the Companys current or accumulated earnings and profits calculated in accordance with US federal income tax principles.
Because the Company does not maintain calculations of its earning and profits under US federal income tax principles it is expected that distributions generally will be reported to US resident holders as dividends.
The amount of the dividend will be the US dollar amount received by the depositary for US resident holders of ADRs or in the case of Ordinary Shares the US dollar value of the pounds sterling payments made determined at the spot pound sterlingUS dollar rate on the date the dividend is received by the US resident holders regardless of whether the dividend is converted into US dollars and it will not be eligible for the dividends received deduction generally available to US corporations.
If the dividend is converted into US dollars on the date of receipt US resident holders of Ordinary Shares generally should not be required to recognise foreign currency gains or losses in respect of the dividend income.
They may have foreign currency gain or loss if the amount of such dividend is not converted into US dollars on the date of its receipt.
Subject to applicable limitations and the discussion above regarding concerns expressed by the US Treasury dividends received by certain noncorporate US resident holders of Ordinary Shares or ADRs in taxable years beginning before 1 January 2013 may be taxable at favourable US federal income tax rates up to a maximum rate of 15%.
US resident holders should consult their own tax advisers to determine whether they are subject to any special rules which may limit their ability to be taxed at this favourable rate.
Taxation on capital gains Under present UK law individuals who are neither resident nor ordinarily resident in the UK and companies which are not resident in the UK will not be liable for UK tax on capital gains made on the disposal of their Ordinary Shares or ADRs unless such Ordinary Shares or ADRs are held in connection with a trade profession or vocation carried on in the UK through a branch or agency or other permanent establishment.
A US resident holder will generally recognise US source capital gains or losses for US federal income tax purposes on the sale or exchange of Ordinary Shares or ADRs in an amount equal to the difference between the US dollar amount realised and such holders US dollar adjusted tax basis in the Ordinary Shares or ADRs.
US resident holders should consult their own tax advisers about the treatment of capital gains which may be taxed at lower rates than ordinary income for noncorporate US resident holders and capital losses the deductibility of which may be limited.
Passive Foreign Investment Company PFIC rules We believe that we were not a PFIC for US federal income tax purposes for the year ended 31 December 2011.
However since PFIC status depends on the composition of our income and assets and the market value of our assets including among others less than 25% owned equity investments from time to time there can be no assurance that we will not be considered a PFIC for any taxable year.
If we were treated as a PFIC for any taxable year during which Ordinary Shares or ADRs were held certain adverse tax consequences could apply to US resident holders.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 206 Shareholder Information Information reporting and backup withholding Payments of dividends and sales proceeds that are made within the US or through certain USrelated financial intermediaries generally are subject to information reporting and may be subject to backup withholding unless i the US resident holder is a corporation or other exempt recipient or ii in the case of backup withholding the US resident holder provides a correct taxpayer identification number and certifies that it is not subject to backup withholding.
The amount of any backup withholding from a payment to a US resident holder will be allowed as a credit against the holders US federal income tax liability and may entitle the holder to a refund provided that the required information is supplied to the IRS on time.
Certain US resident holders who are individuals or are controlled by individuals may be required to report information relating to securities issued by nonUS persons generally on IRS Form 8938 subject to certain exceptions including an exception for securities held through US financial institutions.
US resident holders should consult their tax advisers regarding their reporting obligations with respect to the Ordinary Shares or ADRs.
UK inheritance tax Under the current Double Taxation Estates Convention the Estate Tax Convention between the US and the UK Ordinary Shares or ADRs held by an individual shareholder who is domiciled for the purposes of the Estate Tax Convention in the US and is not for the purposes of the Estate Tax Convention a national of the UK will generally not be subject to UK inheritance tax on the individuals death or on a chargeable gift of the Ordinary Shares or ADRs during the individuals lifetime provided that any applicable US federal gift or estate tax liability is paid unless the Ordinary Shares or ADRs are part of the business property of a permanent establishment of the individual in the UK or in the case of a shareholder who performs independent personal services pertain to a fixed base situated in the UK.
Where the Ordinary Shares or ADRs have been placed in trust by a settlor who at the time of settlement was a US domiciled shareholder the Ordinary Shares or ADRs will generally not be subject to UK inheritance tax unless the settlor at the time of settlement was a UK national or the Ordinary Shares or ADRs are part of the business property of a permanent establishment of the individual in the UK or in the case of a shareholder who performs independent personal services pertain to a fixed base situated in the UK.
In the exceptional case where the Ordinary Shares or ADRs are subject to both UK inheritance tax and US federal gift or estate tax the Estate Tax Convention generally provides for double taxation to be relieved by means of credit relief.
UK stamp duty reserve tax and stamp duty A 1.5% stamp duty reserve tax is payable upon the deposit of Ordinary Shares in connection with the creation of but not subsequent dealing in
A 0.5% stamp duty is payable on all purchases of Ordinary Shares.
Exchange controls and other limitations affecting security holders There are no governmental laws decrees or regulations in the UK restricting the import or export of capital or affecting the remittance of dividends interest or other payments to nonresident holders of Ordinary Shares or ADRs.
There are no limitations under English law or the Articles on the right of nonresident or foreign owners to be the registered holders of or to exercise voting rights in relation to Ordinary Shares or ADRs or to be registered holders of notes or debentures of Zeneca Wilmington Inc. or the Company.
Exchange rates The following information relating to average and spot exchange rates used by AstraZeneca is provided for convenience SEKUS USGBP Average rates statement of comprehensive income statement of cash flows 2009 7.6552 1.5496 2010 7.2504 1.5453 2011 6.5059 1.5996 End of year spot rates statement of financial position 2009 7.1636 1.6072 2010 6.7511 1.5422 2011 6.9050 1.5443 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Additional Information Shareholder Information 207 History and development of the Company AstraZeneca PLC was incorporated in England and Wales on 17 June 1992 under the Companies Act 1985.
It is a public limited company domiciled in the UK.
The Companys registered number is and its registered office is at 2 Kingdom Street London W2 6BD telephonetel.
From February 1993 until April 1999 the Company was called Zeneca Group PLC.
On 6 April 1999 the Company changed its name to AstraZeneca PLC.
The Company was formed when the pharmaceutical agrochemical and specialty chemical businesses of Imperial Chemical Industries PLC were demerged in 1993.
In 1999 the Company sold the specialty chemical business.
Also in 1999 the Company merged with Astra of
In 2000 it demerged the agrochemical business and merged it with the similar agribusiness of Novartis to form a new company called Syngenta AG.
In 2007 the Group acquired MedImmune a biologics and vaccines business based in the US.
The Group owns and operates numerous RandD production and marketing facilities worldwide.
Its corporate office is at 2 Kingdom Street London W2 6BD.
Articles
Objects
The Companys objects were originally set out in its Memorandum of
By operation of law on 1 October 2009 these objects were deemed to be provisions of the Articles.
However by a special resolution of the shareholders at the Companys AGM held on 29 April 2010 those deemed objects were deleted from the Articles.
The
Companys objects are now unrestricted.
Any amendment to the Articles requires the approval of shareholders by a special resolution at a general meeting of the Company.
Directors
The Board has the authority to manage the business of the Company for example through powers to allot and repurchase its shares subject where required to shareholder resolutions.
Subject to certain exceptions Directors do not have power to vote at Board meetings on matters in which they have a material interest.
The quorum for meetings of the Board is a majority of the full Board of whom at least four must be NonExecutive Directors.
In the absence of a quorum the Directors do not have power to determine compensation arrangements for themselves or any member of the Board.
The Board may exercise all the powers of the Company to borrow money.
Variation of these borrowing powers would require the passing of a special resolution of the Companys shareholders.
All Directors must retire from office at the Companys AGM each year and may present themselves for election or reelection.
Directors are not prohibited upon reaching a particular age from submitting themselves for election or reelection.
Within two months of the date of their appointment Directors are required to beneficially own Ordinary Shares of an aggregate nominal amount of 125 which currently represents at least 500 shares.
Rights preferences and restrictions attaching to shares As at 31 December 2011 the Company had 1292355052 Ordinary Shares and 50000 Redeemable Preference Shares in issue.
The
Ordinary Shares represent 99.98% and the Redeemable Preference Shares represent 0.02% of the Companys total share capital these percentages have been calculated by reference to the closing midpoint USGBP exchange rate on 31 December 2011 as published in the London edition of the Financial Times newspaper.
As agreed by the shareholders at the Companys AGM held on 29 April 2010 the Articles were amended with immediate effect to remove the requirement for the Company to have an authorised share capital the concept of which was abolished under the Companies Act 2006.
Each Ordinary Share carries the right to vote at general meetings of the Company.
The rights and restrictions attaching to the Redeemable Preference Shares differ from those attaching to Ordinary Shares as follows The Redeemable Preference Shares carry no rights to receive dividends.
The holders of Redeemable Preference Shares have no rights to receive notices of attend or vote at general meetings except in certain limited circumstances.
They have one vote for every 50000 Redeemable Preference Shares held.
On a distribution of assets of the Company on a windingup or other return of capital subject to certain exceptions the holders of Redeemable Preference Shares have priority over the holders of Ordinary Shares to receive the capital paid up on those shares.
Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has the right to redeem the Redeemable Preference Shares at any time on giving not less than seven days written notice.
There are no specific restrictions on the transfer of shares in the Company which is governed by the Articles and prevailing legislation.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between holders of shares that may result in restrictions on the transfer of shares or that may result in restrictions on voting rights.
Action necessary to change the rights of shareholders In order to vary the rights attached to any class of shares the consent in writing of the holders of three quarters in nominal value of the issued shares of that class or the sanction of an extraordinary resolution passed at a general meeting of such holders is required.
General meetings AGMs and other general meetings as from time to time may be required where a special resolution is to be passed or a Director is to be appointed require 21 clear days notice to shareholders.
Subject to the Companies Act 2006 other general meetings require 14 clear days notice.
For all general meetings a quorum of two shareholders present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote on the business transacted is required unless each of the two persons present are corporate representatives of the same corporation or each of the two persons present are proxy of the same shareholder.
Shareholders and their duly appointed proxies and corporate representatives are entitled to be admitted to general meetings.
Limitations on the rights to own shares There are no limitations on the rights to own shares.
Property
Substantially all of our properties are held freehold free of material encumbrances and we believe that such properties are fit for their purpose.
Corporate Information AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 208 Corporate Information Market definitions United States of America Other Established Markets Emerging Markets US Western Europe Japan Emerging Europe China Other Emerging ROW Austria Albania
Belgium Canada Belarus Emerging Asia Pacific Gulf States Denmark Bosnia and Herzegovina Bangladesh Israel Finland Other Established ROW Bulgaria Cambodia Latin America France Australia Croatia Hong Kong Lebanon Germany New Zealand Czech Republic India Maghreb Greece Estonia Indonesia Saudi Arabia Iceland Georgia Laos South Africa Ireland Hungary Malaysia Italy Kazakhstan Philippines Luxembourg Latvia Singapore Netherlands Lithuania South Korea Norway Macedonia Sri Lanka Portugal Poland Taiwan Spain Romania Thailand Sweden Russia Vietnam Switzerland Serbia and Montenegro UK Slovakia
Turkey
Ukraine
Rest of World means Other Established Markets and Emerging Markets.
Established Markets means the US and Other Established Markets.
Established ROW means Canada Japan and Other Established ROW.
Latin America includes Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Peru and Venezuela.
Gulf States includes Bahrain Dubai Kuwait Oman Qatar and UAE.
Maghreb means Algeria Morocco and Tunisia.
IMS Health IMS Midas Quantum Q3 2011 data is not available or AstraZeneca does not subscribe for IMS Health quarterly data for these countries.
The above table is not an exhaustive list of all the countries in which AstraZeneca operates.
US equivalents Terms used in this Annual Report US equivalent or brief description Accruals Accrued expenses Allotted Issued Calledup share capital Issued share capital Creditors Liabilitiespayables Debtors Receivables and prepaid expenses Earnings Net income Employee share schemes Employee stock benefit plans Fixed asset investments Noncurrent investments Freehold Ownership with absolute rights in perpetuity Interest payable Interest expense Loans Longterm debt Prepayments Prepaid expenses Profit Income Profit and loss account Income statementconsolidated statement of comprehensive income Share premium account Premiums paid in excess of par value of Ordinary Shares Shortterm investments Redeemable securities and shortterm deposits
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Additional Information Glossary 209 Glossary Abbott  Abbott Pharmaceuticals PR Ltd. and Abbott Laboratories Inc. with respect to Crestor.
Accord  Accord Healthcare Inc.
Affordable Care Act  the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act which was signed into law on 23 March 2010 as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act which was signed into law on 30 March 2010.
ADR  an American Depositary Receipt evidencing title to an ADS.
ADS  an American Depositary Share representing one underlying Ordinary Share.
AGM  an Annual General Meeting of the Company.
ANDA  an abbreviated new drug application which is a marketing approval application for a generic drug submitted to the FDA.
Annual Report  this Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011.
API  active pharmaceutical ingredient.
Articles  the Articles of Association of the Company.
ASA  acetylsalicylic acid.
Astellas  Astellas Pharma Inc.
Astra  Astra AB being the company with whom the Company merged in 1999.
Astra Tech  Astra Tech AB.
AstraZeneca  the Company and its subsidiaries.
AZIP  AstraZeneca Investment Plan.
BMS  BristolMyers Squibb Company.
Board  the Board of Directors of the Company.
Bureau Veritas  Bureau Veritas UK Limited.
CEO  the Chief Executive Officer of the Company.
CER  constant exchange rates.
CFO  the Chief Financial Officer of the Company.
CHMP  the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use being a committee of the EMA.
CIS  Commonwealth of Independent States.
Code of Conduct  the Groups Code of Conduct.
Company or Parent Company  AstraZeneca PLC formerly Zeneca Group PLC Zeneca.
Complete Response Letter CRL  a letter issued by the FDA communicating its decision to a drug company that its NDA or biological licensing application is not approvable as submitted.
The submitting drug company is required to respond to the Complete Response Letter if it wishes to pursue an approval for its submission.
Corporate Integrity Agreement  the agreement described in the US Corporate Integrity Agreement reporting section on page 51.
Daiichi Sankyo  Daiichi Sankyo Company Limited.
Dainippon Sumitomo  Dainippon Sumitomo Pharmaceuticals Co.
Limited.
Director  a director of the Company. in issue during the year.
ECG  electrocardiagram.
EMA  the European Medicines Agency.
EMEA  Europe Middle East and Africa.
EU  the European Union.
FDA  the US Food and Drug Administration which is part of the US Department of Health and Human Services Agency which is the regulatory authority for all pharmaceuticals including biologics and vaccines and medical devices in the US.
Forest  Forest Laboratories Holdings Limited.
EFPIA  European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and
GAAP  Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
GDP  gross domestic product.
GERD  gastrooesophageal reflux disease.
GIA  AstraZenecas group internal audit function. two by the sales figure.
Group  AstraZeneca PLC and its subsidiaries.
GSK  GlaxoSmithKline plc.
Handa  Handa Pharmaceuticals LLC.
HealthCore  HealthCore Inc.
IAS  the International Accounting Standards.
IASB  the International Accounting Standards Board.
IFRS  the International Financial Reporting Standards or an International Financial Reporting Standard as the context requires.
IP  intellectual property.
IT  information technology.
IS  information services.
KPI  key performance indicator. krona or SEK  references to the currency of Sweden.
Lean  means enhancing value for customers with fewer resources.
MAA  a marketing authorisation application which is an application for authorisation to place medical products on the market.
This is a specific term used in the EU and European Economic Area markets.
MAb  monoclonal antibody a biologic that is specific that is it binds to and attacks one particular antigen.
MedImmune  MedImmune LLC formerly MedImmune Inc.
Merck  Merck Sharp and Dohme Corp. formerly Merck and Co.
Inc.
NDA  a new drug application to the FDA for approval to market a new medicine in the US.
NCE  new chemical entity.
NERD  nonerosive reflux disease.
NGO  nongovernmental organisation. nm  not meaningful.
Novartis  Novartis Pharma A.
Novexel  Novexel S.
The following abbreviations and expressions have the following meanings when used in this Annual Report AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 210 Glossary NSAID  a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug.
NYSE  the New York Stock Exchange. operating income.
Ordinary Share  an ordinary share of 0.25 each in the share capital of the Company.
Orphan Drug  a drug which has been approved for use in a relatively lowincidence indication an orphan indication and has been rewarded with a period of market exclusivity the period of exclusivity and the available orphan indications vary between markets.
OTC  overthecounter.
Paediatric Exclusivity  in the US a sixmonth period of exclusivity to market a drug which is awarded by the FDA in return for certain paediatric clinical studies using that drug.
This sixmonth period runs from the date of relevant patent expiry.
Analogous provisions are available in certain other territories eg European SPC paediatric extensions.
Patent Term Extension PTE  an extension of up to five years in the term of a US patent relating to a drug which compensates for delays in marketing resulting from the need to obtain FDA approval.
The analogous right in the EU is a supplementary protection certificate SPC.
PDUFA  Prescription Drug User Fee Act.
Pfizer  Pfizer Inc.
Phase I  the phase of clinical research where a new drug or treatment is tested in small groups of people 20 to 80 to check that the drug can achieve appropriate concentrations in the body determine a safe dosage range and identify side effects.
This phase includes healthy volunteer studies.
Phase II  the phase of clinical research which includes the controlled clinical activities conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of the drug in patients with the disease under study and to determine the common shortterm side effects and risks associated with the drug.
Phase II studies are typically conducted in a relatively small number of patients usually no more than several hundred.
Phase III  the phase of clinical research which is performed to gather additional information about effectiveness and safety of the drug often in a comparative setting to evaluate the overall benefitrisk profile of the drug.
Phase III studies usually include between several hundred and several thousand patients.
PhRMA  Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America. the UK.
Pozen  Pozen Inc.
Proof of Concept  data demonstrating that a candidate drug results in a clinical change on an acceptable endpoint or surrogate in patients with the disease.
PSP  AstraZeneca Performance Share Plan.
PUD  peptic ulcer disease.
QT prolongation  a biomarker of ventricular tachyarrhythmias measured by ECG.
RandD  research and development.
Redeemable Preference Share  a redeemable preference share of 1 each in the share capital of the Company.
Regulatory Data Protection  see the Intellectual Property section from page 34.
Regulatory Exclusivity  any of the IP rights arising from generation of clinical data and includes Regulatory Data Protection as explained in the Intellectual Property section from page 34 Paediatric Exclusivity and Orphan Drug status.
Responsible Business Plan  the plan described in the Responsible Business section from page 47 further details of which can be found at our websitesiteresponsible managementandmeasurementresponsiblebusinessplan.
Rigel  Rigel Pharmaceuticals Inc.
RSV  respiratory syncytial virus.
SarbanesOxley Act  the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002.
SEC  the US Securities and Exchange Commission the governmental agency that regulates the US securities industrystock market.
Seroquel  Seroquel IR and Seroquel XR unless otherwise stated.
SET  the Senior Executive Team.
SHE  Safety Health and Environment.
SFDA  State Food and Drug Administration of China.
SGandA costs  selling general and administrative costs.
Six Sigma  a rigorous and disciplined methodology that uses data and statistical analysis to measure and improve a companys operational performance by identifying and eliminating defects. for a drug already on the market.
SOP  AstraZeneca Share Option Plan.
Targacept  Targacept Inc.
Teva  Teva Pharmaceuticals USA Inc.
TKI  Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors.
TSR  total shareholder return being the total return on a share over a period of time including dividends reinvested.
UK  the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
UK Bribery Act  means the UK Bribery Act 2010.
UK Corporate Governance Code  the UK Corporate Governance Code published by the Financial Reporting Council in May 2010 that sets out standards of good practice in corporate governance for the UK.
US  the United States of America.
US dollar US USD or   references to the currency of the US.
WHO  the World Health Organization the United Nations specialised agency for health.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Additional Information Glossary 211 Index 2011 performance summary 23 Accounting policies 146 194 Acquisitions and disposals 170 Annual general meeting 112 208 Aptium Oncology 22 Articles of association 206 208 Astra Tech 22 Audit Committee 107 Biologics 16 18 19 Board 99 Branches 111 Business background and results overview 83 Capitalisation 90 Cardiovascular 58 Cash and cash equivalents 148 160 Chairmans statement 6
Chief Executive Officers review 8
Commitments and contingent liabilities 181 Company history 203 208 Competition 15 133 Compliance and Group Internal Audit 43 110 Consolidated statement of cash flows 145 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 144 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 142 Consolidated statement of financial position 143 Corporate Responsibility see Responsible Business Directors interest in shares 125 Directors remuneration 113 Directors responsibility statement 140 Dividends 6 90 170 205 Earnings per ordinary share 4 154 Emerging markets 16 36 77 80 132 209 Employee costs and share plans for employees 176 Environmental sustainability 53 Established markets 16 36 77 78 209 Ethics 50 51 Finance income and expense 152 Financial instruments 148 161 Financial position 2010 93 Financial position 2011 88 Financial risk management 93 171 Financial summary 1 Gastrointestinal 62 Glossary 209 Goodwill 88 93 96 147 157 Group financial record 198 Group financial statements 139 Growth drivers 15 Independent auditors report 141 192 Infection 64 Inflammation see Respiratory and Inflammation Intangible assets 88 93 95 96 147 158 Intellectual Property 34 131 132 133 Interestbearing loans and borrowings 148 161 173 195 Inventories 148 160 Key performance indicators 23 Leases 148 190 Managing risk 129 Market definitions 209 Medicines 3 4 10 32 35 56 Neuroscience 67 Nomination and Governance Committee 105 106 109 Oncology 70 Operating profit 1 4 23 85 91 151 Operational overview 5 Other investments 148 160 Outsourcing 21 135 Patents see Intellectual Property Patient safety 53 Political donations 112 Portfolio Investment Board PIB 110 Postretirement benefits 96 138 165 Pricing 18 37 Principal risks and uncertainties 129 Product revenue information 150 Property plant and equipment 148 156 Provisions for liabilities and charges 88 93 164 Regulatory requirements 17 Related party transactions 205 Relations with shareholders 106 Remuneration Committee 113 Research and Development 16 30 147 151 Reserves 169 Respiratory and Inflammation 73 Responsible Business 47 Rest of World 79 209 Restructuring 22 151 Results of operations 2010 91 Results of operations 2011 85 Safety health and wellbeing 54 Sales and Marketing 36 Sales by therapy area 56 Science Committee 109 Segment information 154 Senior Executive Team SET 102 110 Share capital 170 196 203 Share repurchase 90 111 170 196 Statutory and other information 190 Strategy 19 Subsidiaries 191 Supply and Manufacturing 38 Taxation information for shareholders 206 Trade and other payables 88 93 148 164 Trade and other receivables 88 93 148 160 Trade marks inside back cover Transactions with directors 124 UK corporate governance 103 UK Corporate Governance Code 103 US corporate governance 109 World pharmaceutical markets 16 AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 212 Index connectsusall Improving health is one of the toughest challenges facing the world today.
As a global biopharmaceutical company AstraZeneca has a key contribution to make by providing innovative medicines for some of the worlds most serious diseases.
We know that if we are to deliver medicines that people really need and value we cannot do it in isolation.
We work closely with all our stakeholders to understand their needs and challenges.
We are committed to acting with integrity and high ethical standards in everything we do and our goal is always to improve health for patients and bring benefit for our stakeholders our business and society.
Important information for readers of this Annual Report Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements The purpose of this Annual Report is to provide information to the members of the
The Company and its Directors employees agents and advisors do not accept or assume responsibility to any other person to whom this Annual Report is shown or into whose hands it may come and any such responsibility or liability is expressly disclaimed.
In order among other things to utilise the safe harbour provisions of the US Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and the UK Companies Act 2006 we are providing the following cautionary statement This Annual Report contains certain forwardlooking statements with respect to the operations performance and financial condition of the Group.
Forwardlooking statements are statements relating to the future which are based on information available at the time such statements are made including information relating to risks and uncertainties.
Although we believe that the forwardlooking statements in this Annual Report are based on reasonable assumptions the matters discussed in the forwardlooking statements may be influenced by factors that could cause actual outcomes and results to be materially different from those expressed or implied by these statements.
The forwardlooking statements reflect knowledge and information available at the date of the preparation of this Annual Report and the Company undertakes no obligation to update these forwardlooking statements.
We identify the forwardlooking statements by using the words anticipates believes expects intends and similar expressions in such statements.
Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in forwardlooking statements certain of which are beyond our control include among other things those factors identified in the Principal risks and uncertainties section from page 130 of this Annual Report.
Nothing in this Annual Report should be construed as a profit forecast.
Inclusion of reported performance Core financial measures and constant exchange rate growth rates AstraZenecas determination of nonGAAP measures together with our presentation of them within our financial information may differ from similarly titled nonGAAP measures of other companies.
Statements of competitive position growth rates and sales In this Annual Report except as otherwise stated market information regarding the position of our business or products relative to its or their competition is based upon published statistical sales data for the 12 months ended 30 September 2011 obtained from IMS Health a leading supplier of statistical data to the pharmaceutical industry.
For the US dispensed new or total prescription data and audited sales data are taken respectively from IMS Health National Prescription Audit and IMS National Sales Perspectives for the 12 months ended 31 December 2011 such data is not adjusted for Medicaid and similar state rebates.
Except as otherwise stated these market share and industry data from IMS Health have been derived by comparing our sales revenue to competitors and total market sales revenues for that period.
Except as otherwise stated growth rates are given at CER.
For the purposes of this Annual Report unless otherwise stated references to the world pharmaceutical market or similar phrases are to the 53 countries contained in the IMS Health MIDAS Quantum database which amounted to approximately 96% in value of the countries audited by IMS Health.
AstraZeneca websites Information on or accessible through our websitessitesitesite does not form part of and is not incorporated into this Annual Report.
Externalthird party websites Information on or accessible through any third party or external website does not form part of and is not incorporated into this Annual Report.
Figures
Figures in parentheses in tables and in the Financial Statements are used to represent negative numbers.
Trade marks Trade marks of the AstraZeneca group of companies appear throughout this Annual Report in italics.
AstraZeneca the AstraZeneca logotype and the AstraZeneca symbol are all trade marks of the AstraZeneca group of companies.
Trade marks of companies other than AstraZeneca appear with a  sign and include Abraxane a trade mark of Abraxis BioScience LLC.
Cubicin a trade mark of Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc.
CytoFab a trade mark of Protherics
Kombiglyze XR and Komboglyze
Lipitor a trade mark of Pfizer Ireland Pharmaceuticals Onglyza a trade mark of BristolMyers Squibb Company Ranmark a trade mark of Forest Laboratories Inc.
Designed and produced by Board photography Marcus Lyon Cover image by Iain Crockart Gorky Park Moscow This report is printed on Heaven 42 which is FSC certified virgin fibre.
The pulp is a mix partly bleached using an Elemental Chlorine Free ECF process and partly bleached using a Totally Chlorine Free process.
Printed in the UK by Pureprint using its alcofree and pureprint environmental printing technology and vegetable inks were used throughout.
Pureprint is a CarbonNeutral company.
Both manufacturing mill and the printer are registered to the Environmental Management System ISO14001 and are Forest Stewardship Council chainofcustody certified.
AstraZeneca Annual Report and Form 20F Information 2011 Registered office and corporate headquarters AstraZeneca PLC 2 Kingdom Street London W2 6BD
UK as above
Investor Relations AstraZeneca AB SE151 85 Sdertlje
Tel 46 0Fax 46 0US Investor Relations AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP 1800 Concord Pike PO Box 15437
DE 198505437
Tel telFax telRegistrar Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA
Tel freephone in the UKtel Tel outside the UK 44 0tel Swedish Central Securities
Euroclear Sweden AB PO Box 191 SE101 23 Stockholm
Tel 46 08 402 9000 US Depositary JPMorgan Chase and Co PO Box 64504 St Paul MN 551640504
Tel toll free in the UStel Tel outside the US telEmail jpmorgan.
