Bringing it all together
Report and Form 20F BT GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FORM 20F 2007 Filename 5138401.3d Time 151636 Date 190507
BT is one of the worlds leading providers of communications solutions and services operating in 170 countries.
Our vision is to be dedicated to helping customers thrive in a changing world.
Our mission is to be the leader in delivering converged networked services.
BT Group plc is a public limited company registered in England and Wales and listed on the London and New York stock exchanges.
It was incorporated in England and Wales on 30 March 2001 as Newgate Telecommunications Limited with the registered number .
Its registered ofce address is 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ.
The company changed its name to BT Group plc on 11 September 2001.
Following the demerger of O2 in November 2001 the continuing activities of BT were transferred to BT Group plc.
British Telecommunications plc is a whollyowned subsidiary of BT Group plc and encompasses virtually all the businesses and assets of the BT group.
The successor to the statutory corporation British Telecommunications it was incorporated in England and Wales as a public limited company wholly owned by the UK Government as a result of the Telecommunications Act 1984.
Between November 1984 and July 1993 the UK Government sold all of its shareholding in British Telecommunications plc in three public offerings.
This is the annual report for the year ended 31 March 2007.
It complies with UK regulations and is the annual report on Form 20F for the US Securities and Exchange Commission to meet US regulations.
This annual report has been sent to shareholders who have elected to receive a copy.
A separate annual review and notice of meeting including summary nancial statements for the year ended 31 March 2007 has been issued to all shareholders.
In this annual report references to BT Group BT the group the company we or our are to BT Group plc which includes the continuing activities of British Telecommunications plc and its subsidiaries and lines of business or any of them as the context may require.
References to the nancial year are to the year ended 31 March of each year eg the 2007 nancial year refers to the year ended 31 March 2007.
Unless otherwise stated all non nancial statistics are at 31 March 2007.
Please see cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 158.
A number of measures quoted in this annual report are non GAAP measures.
These include EBITDA and prot before specic items earnings per share before specic items net debt and free cash ow.
The rationale for using non GAAP measures and reconciliations to the most directly comparable IFRS indicator are provided on pages 30 3435 44 78 100 101 and 102.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F
2 BT at a glance 4 Chairmans message 6 Chief Executives statement Report of the Directors 9 Business review 30 Financial review 49 Corporate governance Financial statements 74 Statement of directors responsibility 75 Report of the independent auditors 77 Consolidated nancial statements 143 Glossary of terms and US equivalents 144 Report of the independent auditors parent company 145 Financial statements of BT Group plc 148 Subsidiary undertakings and associate 149 Quarterly analysis of revenue and prot 150 Selected nancial data 154 Financial statistics 156 Operational statistics Shareholder information 158 Additional information for shareholders 169 Cross reference to Form 20F 172 Glossary of terms 174 BT products and services mentioned in this report 175 Index Filename 5138402a.3d Time 151640 Date 190507
2 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Our principal activities include networked IT services local national and international telecommunications services highervalue broadband and internet products and services and converged xedmobile products and services.
OUR PERFORMANCE Revenue of 20223 million up 4% New wave revenue of 7374 million up 17% Prot before taxation and specic items of 2495 million up 15% Earnings per share before specic items of 22.7 pence up 16% Free cash ow of 1354 million and net debt of 7.9 billion Full year proposed dividends of 15.1 pence per share up 27% 2.5 billion allocated to a new share buy back programme OUR PEOPLE We aim to create a highperformance team of people who can really make a difference.
THE WAY WE DO BUSINESS We aim to do business in an innovative ethical and sustainable way.
BT is ranked as the top company in the telecommunications sector for the sixth year in a row.
We have ISO 9001 certication for most of our operations in the UK and around the world.
Overview
BT at a glance c c Earnings per share before specific items pence 3% 3% 1354m Free cash flow Profit before taxation and specific items earnings per share before specific items free cash flow and net debt are nonGAAP measures.
The rationale for using nonGAAP measures and reconciliations to the most directly comparable IFRS indicators are provided on pages 30 3435 44 78 100 101 and 102.
Dividends per share represents the dividend paid and proposed in respect of the 2007 financial year.
Amounts presented in respect of years ended 31 March 2004 and 2003 are presented in accordance with UK GAAP.
UK GAAP is not directly comparable with IFRS.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS The key performance indicators against which we test the success of our strategy are earnings per share before specic items free cash ow and customer satisfaction.
54%
4% Europe the Middle East and Africa 29% Asia Pacific Building a global workforce Growth by region excluding the UK where the number of employees remained substantially the same Employees worldwide including the UK Dow Jones Sustainability Indexes Member 200607 THE QUEENS AWARDS FOR ENTERPRISE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 2003 Filename 5138402a.3d Time 151642 Date 190507 Checksum tel BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 3 OUR CAPABILITIES Our capabilities range from s the provision of a single domestic telephone line to the development of an innovative network infrastructure for the twentyrst century s global networked IT services to broadband packages for the home s next generation TV to voice over IP services s innovative calls packages for homes and businesses to personal help when your PC goes wrong.
OUR VALUES The BT values capture the way we get things done.
They are at the heart of every compelling customer experience.
Our values are TRUSTWORTHY we do what we say we will HELPFUL we work as one team INSPIRING we create new possibilities STRAIGHTFORWARD we make things clear HEART we believe in what we do We are committed to contributing positively to society and a sustainable future.
This is part of the heart of BT.
SERVING OUR CUSTOMERS Our 18 million customers range from individual consumers with a single phone line to government departments and some of the worlds biggest multinationals.
With effect from 1 July 2007 a new operational structure will help us enhance our services.
We will serve our customers  consumer business wholesale and major corporate  through four lines of business BT RETAIL Ian Livingston
BT GLOBAL
Franois Barrault
BT WHOLESALE Paul Reynolds
OPENREACH
Steve Robertson
BT GROUP Ben V erwaayen
Hanif Lalani Group Finance
Two new business units will be responsible for developing and operating the platforms systems and processes that will support our services around the world BT DESIGN BT OPERATE Andy Green CEO Group Strategy and Operations Defend traditional Improved service Price innovation Reduce costsimprove margin Creative marketing Grow new wave Networked IT services Broadband services Mobility solutions consistent delivery Longterm partnerships with our customers OUR STRATEGY Global 21st Century Network platform Revenue mix by customer segment year ended 31 March 2007 Major corporate 36%
27%
25%
12% Overview Filename 5138402b.3d Time 151645 Date 190507 Checksum tel I am delighted to report that our proposed full year dividend is 15.1 pence per share 27% higher than last year moving to a twothirds pay out ratio a year earlier than we had previously announced.
We expect to increase the dividend taking into account our earnings growth cash generation and our ongoing investment needs.
In addition because of the nancial strength of the company we are introducing a new 2.5 billion share buy back programme which we expect to be completed by 31 March 2009.
BUSINESS PROGRESS We continued to implement our strategy for protable growth.
New wave revenue now accounts for 36% of our total business.
We are a major player in the global networked IT services market meeting the needs of our customers around the world.
In the UK we have around 11 million broadband lines over which we are able to offer all our customers  consumer SME corporate and wholesale  a more accessible faster and richer broadband experience.
We are committed to operating in an ethical sustainable and socially responsible way OUR WIDER RESPONSIBILITIES I am extremely proud of the fact that for the sixth consecutive year BT was the highest placed telecommunications company in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index.
We are committed to operating in an ethical sustainable and socially responsible way and to having a positive impact on all those communities whose lives we touch.
As the corporate social responsibility agenda evolves so does our strategy.
We are for example increasingly emphasising three new priorities s tackling climate change.
We are committed to cutting our effective use of communications technology.
The fact that our Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen is chairing the CBIs climate change task force indicates how seriously we take this issue. s enabling sustainable economic growth.
We are increasingly integrating sustainability in all our business processes. s helping to build a more inclusive society.
We are looking at the ways in which communications technology can help to build a fairer more inclusive society.
PENSIONS
Investment performance on assets in the BT Pension Scheme BTPS was very good with year end value at a record 38 billion.
During the year BT and the trustees of BTPS agreed the triennial funding of the scheme.
Under a new and more conservative actuarial methodology the decit at 31 December 2005 was calculated as 3.4 billion.
BT has agreed to make decit payments equivalent to 280 million a year for ten years with the rst three years instalments paid up front  840 million was paid into the scheme by 30 April 2007.
I believe this is a fair and prudent deal for pensioners and shareholders and demonstrates that your company stands fully behind its pension obligations.
YOUR BOARD I will be stepping down as Chairman in the autumn after more than six challenging and fascinating years with BT.
Sir Mike Rake will take over as your next Chairman in September.
Mike is currently chairman of KPMG International he has demonstrated outstanding leadership of this major global organisation during a time of turbulence and change.
He will bring extensive international experience to BT as it continues to position itself as a truly global company.
Overview
Chairmans message 4 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F The 2007 nancial year was a very good one for your company our results once again were excellent.
Revenue grew by 4% and earnings per share before specic items grew by 16% to 22.7 pence.
We continued to invest in technologies networks and systems that will we believe transform our customers lives and businesses along with their experience of dealing with BT.
Filename 5138402b.3d Time 151648 Date 190507 Checksum tel A number of changes to the Board have occurred since I last wrote to you.
Sir Anthony Greener stepped down as Deputy Chairman and from the Board on 30 September 2006 after six years and I would like to thank him for his very signicant contribution to the development of our strategy.
His successor is Maarten van den Bergh who has been a nonexecutive director since September 2000.
Maarten who prior to his retirement was president of the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company also chairs the Remuneration Committee and is our senior independent director.
And Id like to welcome two new directors Deborah Lathen and Franc ois Barrault.
Deborah who is president of Washingtonbased Lathen Consulting joined the Board as a nonexecutive director in February 2007.
She brings strong US business and policy experience to BT including as a previous chief of the Cable Services Bureau at the US Federal Communications Commission.
Franc ois joined the Board on 24 April 2007 as Chief Executive BT Global Services in which role he succeeds Andy Green who became CEO of Group Strategy and Operations.
As President of BT International Franc ois established a record of exceptional growth in BTs operations outside the UK.
Services that have transformed our customers idea of what is possible DELIVERING OUR PLAN I would like to thank shareholders and customers for their condence in our strategy and the loyalty they have shown in the past six years.
Id also like to thank our Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen the other members of the Board  both executive and non executive  and all BT people for their efforts and unwavering support.
If I cannot entirely resist the temptation to look back over the past six years it is because that is the best way of acknowledging what they have achieved.
Back in 2001 your companys net debt had risen to nearly 30 billion.
In response in May 2001 your Board put in place an action plan to reduce debt manage costs and enhance our abilities to serve our customers even more effectively.
That plan has been delivered.
Debt was brought under control by a combination of the largest ever rights issue in UK corporate history and the disposal of a number of businesses including Yell our international directories and ecommerce business and our interests in Japan and Spain.
O2 previously Cellnet was demerged and Concert our international joint venture with ATandT was unwound.
These structural changes have provided commercial and nancial exibility for the group and our debt in recent years has reduced to sustainable levels.
We have rigorously managed our costs taking a disciplined approach to eliminating waste and duplication wherever possible using our own technology to become more cost effective.
During that period new technologies have given customers access to a range of services  highspeed broadband xed mobile convergence and nextgeneration TV  that have transformed their idea of what is possible.
Our efforts in UK broadband and in global networked IT service have been very successful.
LOOKING FORWARD Looking ahead your company is positioned for success.
With a new Chairman and an experienced CEO at the helm and a workforce experienced in the business of transformation the signs are very positive.
It has been a privilege to be involved with BTs journey to this point I shall of course continue to follow its future progress with great interest and pleasure.
Sir Christopher Bland
16 May 2007 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 5 Overview Filename 5138402b.3d Time 151649 Date 190507 Checksum tel 6 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F KEEPING BT AHEAD OF THE GAME BT is barely recognisable as the company it was ve years ago.
Five years ago we were primarily a UK lines and calls business today we are offering communications possibilities that no one had even thought of back then to customers in 170 countries.
Possibilities that really do enable them to lead fuller lives and run more protable innovative businesses.
In a very short time weve gone from a narrowband xedline communications business to a broadband company harnessing the power of modern networks to help our customers communicate anywhere any time using whatever devices they happen to choose.
Weve brought levels of choice and control to our customers at home at work or out and about that would once have seemed impossible.
Helping some of the worlds largest companies and organisations serve their customers around the world Who would have thought ve years ago that BT would be offering nextgeneration digital TV over broadband Our BT Vision service enables customers to watch what they want when they want  without having to pay a monthly subscription.
Who would have thought that our customers would have been beneting from intelligent seamless xedmobile communications  like BT Fusion  at home at work or in between  chatting swapping data surng the internet doing business Who would have thought that we would be helping some of the worlds largest companies and organisations do business and serve their customers around the world Who would have thought that geography would be history and time irrelevant But the thing about transformation however radical and however successful is that there is no end point.
No moment at which you can sit back and think job done.
Even when we hit ve million broadband connections in 2005 more than a year ahead of schedule  there was no time to take it easy.
Today that number is around 11 million and climbing.
Our broadband success sums up the type of company BT is becoming.
A company that goes the extra mile that rallies behind its goals that nds ways of meeting its customers needs  locally nationally internationally and globally.
FROM OUR TIME TO YOUR TIME Nothing is more important than offering a great customer experience rst time every time.
It differentiates BT from the competition it is what the BT brand stands for.
Excellent customer service can only be delivered in customer time  the time that customers want.
Quite rightly customers have no interest in or patience with our time  the time it takes our systems to make it happen.
Meeting customers needs in customer time is vital to proving that we understand them share their priorities and enthusiasms and really do put them rst.
This type of realtime customer experience is best delivered by software.
In the future BTs services will increasingly be based on software  designed delivered and updated remotely by computers over broadband networks.
These services will be faster more innovative reliable and simpler to use  often delivered by the push of a button.
These softwaredriven networked IT services will be delivered over our global twentyrst century broadband network.
We have set ourselves the target of becoming number one for customer service within two years.
To ensure that we continue to think and act in customer time two measures will apply throughout the company and keep everyone focused.
First we will measure how successfully we get things right rst time.
Second we will measure the improvements we make in the cycle time  the time between the start and end of any customer experience.
Overview
Chief Executives statement BT has been capturing the imaginations of customers shareholders analysts suppliers and employees around the world.
Weve done this by embracing change.
By demonstrating not only that we can thrive on it but that we can help our customers thrive on it as well.
Weve done it by proving that when it comes to modern communications the possibilities really are endless.
And weve done it by being a company that is driven by its customers shifting power and choice to them.
Filename 5138402b.3d Time 151650 Date 190507
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 7 OPEN ORGANISATION OPEN MINDS It is vital that BT is an open business with an open mind.
We are open to new ideas and new ways of doing things.
We are working with suppliers industry partners and others with a single compelling objective  to get the best possible services to our customers around the world as quickly as possible.
Customers dont care about whether any given service was designed by W manufactured by X delivered by Y and billed for by Z.
They care about what it can do for them  whether it makes life easier or a business more protable.
CITIZENS OF A GLOBAL VILLAGE All our customers  private individuals families and large corporations  are increasingly thinking and behaving like global citizens.
They want the world on their PC laptop or hand held device.
And they want to be able to organise themselves and do business build markets and win customers as and where it suits them.
A truly global software driven services company And meeting their global needs means ensuring that we really do understand them that we really can get inside their heads.
For consumer customers global communication means being able to keep in touch and access information whether they are in York or New York Mumbai or Rome.
For modern organisations global communication means the opportunity to take advantage of the best resources and talents wherever they are located.
We aim to become a truly global softwaredriven services company with a great global brand helping our customers get the best from globalisation.
Its a fantastic opportunity and one that BT is seizing with both hands.
In recent years weve acquired a reputation for winning and delivering complex largescale networked IT services contracts.
Our extensive global network enables us to serve customers in all the worlds key commercial centres  either directly or through partnership arrangements.
Major contracts in the 2007 nancial year included a deal with Dutch electronics giant Philips to provide data voice conferencing and mobile services in Europe the Middle East and Africa and a deal with PepsiCo to manage a portfolio of advanced services covering more than 900 locations in over 60 countries.
Our services are helping organisations meet the needs of their own customers wherever they may be.
THE RIGHT PEOPLE FOR THE RIGHT JOB Strategies and plans cannot of themselves deliver the kind of transformation that BT is experiencing and that we are going to have to accelerate in the future.
Only people can do that.
Thats why its so important that our workforce is just as much a global community as our customers.
Our customers are a cross section of society  they encompass a huge range of nationalities as well as social cultural political and personal orientations.
In order to reect that diversity we are recruiting the brightest and the best from around the world.
BT people have already shown what they are capable of and theres a lot more where that came from.
The job of every person who works for BT is what it always was to ensure that everything they do every day is done for all our customers around the world.
Only now they have to do it quicker than ever before in more innovative ways than ever before and more seamlessly than ever before.
I have no doubt whatever that they will do just that.
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive 16 May 2007 Overview Filename 5138403.3d Time 151653 Date 190507
Business review
30 Financial review 49 Corporate governance The Directors consider that the Report of the Directors has been prepared in accordance with the principles in the Reporting Statement on the Operating and Financial Review issued by the Accounting Standards Board.
Business review
9 Introduction to the
Business review
9 Our operational structure 9 Our strategy 10 Outlook 11 Lines of business 11 BT Global Services 12 BT Retail 16 BT Wholesale 17 Openreach 18 Transforming our costs 18 Improving customer satisfaction and service 19 Acquisitions and disposals 20 Regulation competition and prices 22 Relationship with HM Government 22 Legal proceedings 22 Resources 22 Corporate reputation and brand strength 23 Motivating our people and living the BT values 24 Research and development 24 IT Support 24 Property 24 Our commitment to society 27 Group risk factors Please see Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 158.
Report of the Directors
Business review
We are committed to increasing shareholder value by transforming our customers experience through service excellence.
8 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138403.3d Time 151654 Date 190507 Checksum tel INTRODUCTION TO THE BUSINESS REVIEW BT is one of the worlds leading providers of communications solutions and services operating in 170 countries.
We are committed to increasing shareholder value by transforming the customer experience through service excellence by the effective management of our strong brand by exploiting our largescale networks and by delivering exciting new services to our existing customer base.
We aim to nd new and mutually rewarding ways of engaging with around 18 million customers to capitalise on the possibilities of convergence to offer global reach combined with the service values associated with local delivery and to continue to provide innovative services and solutions.
Our principal activities include r networked IT services r local national and international telecommunications services r broadband and internet products and services r converged xedmobile products and services.
We have had ISO 9001 certication the international quality management system standard for most of our operations in the UK and worldwide since 1994.
Our policy is to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity in all our operations in line with our published statement of business practice  The Way We Work  and we are committed to enhancing our positive impact on society through leadership in corporate social responsibility and by doing business in a sustainable way.
OUR OPERATIONAL STRUCTURE BT has four customerfocused lines of business BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale and Openreach.
BT Retail BT Wholesale and Openreach operate mainly within the UK where BT is the largest communications services provider to the residential and business markets supplying a wide range of communications products and services including voice data internet and multimedia services and offering a comprehensive range of managed and packaged communications solutions.
BT Global Services provides a range of products and services including communications networked IT and consultancy services to address the needs of major corporations governments and multisite global organisations.
In April 2007 we announced a new structure which includes two new business units and is designed to enable us to deliver faster more resilient and costeffective services to customers wherever they are.
With effect from 1 July 2007 BT Design will be responsible for the design and development of the platforms systems and processes which will support our services BT Operate will be responsible for their deployment and operation.
Around 20000 BT employees  from design operations IT and networks  will move into these new units.
We believe that these changes will keep BT ahead of the game.
Our customers BT GLOBAL
BT WHOLESALE OPENREACH BT GROUP BT DESIGN BT OPERATE BT RETAIL with effect from 1 July 2007 OUR STRATEGY Our strategy is to r pursue protable growth in new wave markets r defend our traditional business r transform our networks systems and services for the twentyrst century r create longterm partnerships with our customers.
The successful delivery of this strategy depends on the commitment of all BT people and our continued ability to manage their development and reward them.
For the 2007 nancial year the KPIs key performance indicators against which we measured the success of our strategy were earnings per share before specic items see Earnings per share on page 42 free cash ow see Financing on page 43 and customer satisfaction see Improving customer satisfaction and service on page 18.
From the 2008 nancial year customer service replaces customer satisfaction as a KPI.
Pursue protable growth in new wave markets In the 2007 nancial year 36% of our revenue was from new wave activities  primarily networked IT services broadband and mobility  up from 32% in the 2006 nancial year.
New wave revenue m per quarter Develop our global networked IT services capability Our networked IT services strategy is to reinforce BTs position as a global player competing alongside the worlds best in selected markets.
We continue to develop broader and deeper capabilities around the world.
Our portfolio of services includes managed network services systems integration IP infrastructure CRM customer relationship management security applications managed mobility hosting and outsourcing.
Report of the Directors
Business review
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 9 Report of the Directors Business Filename 5138403.3d Time 151658 Date 190507 Checksum tel Broadband at the heart of BT In the 2007 nancial year we continued our drive to enhance the awareness availability and attractiveness of broadband.
At
31 March 2007 we had 10.7 million broadband lines including LLU local loop unbundling.
In the highly competitive retail market our market share of consumer and business DSL digital subscriber line and LLU broadband connections in the UK was 34%.
With 3.7 million broadband connections including PlusNet we are now the UKs most popular broadband retailer including cable.
Create convergent mobility solutions In a convergent world individuals and businesses increasingly need to connect and communicate wherever they happen to be using whatever device they choose and we offer a range of mobility services in both the consumer and business markets.
In the 2007 nancial year group mobility revenues were 294 million.
The emphasis was increasingly on new services that give customers the best of xed and the best of mobile communications either combined in a single handset or bundled together in a compelling offer.
At 31 March 2007 we had a total of 314000 mobile connections in the UK both GSM and our new intelligent xedmobile service BT Fusion.
In addition we manage around 100000 connections on behalf of large enterprise customers the majority of which are outside the UK.
The number of customer minutes on BT Openzone our public wireless broadband service grew by 60% in the 2007 nancial year compared with the previous year.
Defend our traditional business Although we continue to face challenges in our traditional markets as a result of competition a shift in our customers buying patterns and a tough regulatory regime we aim to defend our traditional business  mainly calls and lines  while offering customers new nextgeneration services.
Traditional revenue trend % per quarter Revenue versus same period in prior year adjusted for the impact of mobile termination rate reductions and excluding Albacom 200506 Active voice customer lossesadditions 000 Active voice customer customers who generate voice revenue losses in the 2007 nancial year were the lowest for more than three years in spite of intense competition from other providers packaging calls with broadband.
This reduced rate of loss was driven by a range of price reductions and by encouraging customers to sign up for our innovative pricing packages.
Transform our networks systems and services for the twentyrst century Our strategy is to build innovative and versatile networks that will be a platform for rapid delivery of new services and simultaneously transform the customer experience and enable us to operate ever more cost effectively.
Our 21CN twentyrst century network for example is helping to dene communications networks for the future and we are investing in an innovative exible systems infrastructure throughout BT.
Our UK network BT has the most comprehensive xedline communications network in the UK with around 5600 exchanges more than 700 local and 100 trunk processor units more than 120 million kilometres of copper wire and more than nine million kilometres of optical bre and the most extensive IP backbone network in the UK.
The network services we provide include frame relay ATM asynchronous transfer mode and IPVPN internet protocol virtual private network.
Our global reach We have one of the broadest IPenabled networks in Europe and our networkbased services extend to and across North and South America and the Asia Pacic region.
At 31 March 2007 our agship MPLS multiprotocol label switching network service provided coverage and support to over 100 countries from more than 1300 points of presence.
Our MPLS revenue grew by 31% during the 2007 nancial year to 556 million.
Global customer service is provided via service and network management centres around the world 24 hours a day seven days a week.
Create longterm partnerships with our customers We believe that our relationships with our customers are key particularly in a market experiencing major transformation.
Understanding customers needs and responding to them exibly comprehensively and with insight is critical in helping to differentiate us from our competitors.
That is why we aim to put the customer at the heart of everything we do  strengthening that relationship and building trust and delivering what we promise.
This is encouraging customers to move from shortterm contracts based on individual transactions to longerterm arrangements under which they sign up for packages of services.
OUTLOOK
Our performance underpins our condence that we can continue to grow revenue EBITDA before specic items earnings per share before specic items and dividends over the coming year.
We are condent in our ability to improve shareholder returns and accelerate the strategic transformation of the business.
In addition taking into account the groups net debt level and strong cash ow generation we have decided to introduce a new 2.5 billion share buy back programme while increasing dividends and investing in the growth of the business.
We expect this buy back programme to be completed by 31 March 2009.
We seek to maintain a solid investment grade credit rating and will continue to invest for the future and with an efcient balance sheet further enhance shareholder value.
Report of the Directors Business review 10 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138403.3d Time 151659 Date 190507
LINES OF BUSINESS BT Global Services BT Global Services target market is the top 10000 multisite organisations both overseas and in the UK including major companies with signicant global requirements together with large organisations in target local markets.
In the 2007 nancial year BT Global Services revenue increased by 4% to 9106 million.
New wave and nonUK revenue increased by 8% and traditional revenue declined by 9%.
New wave and nonUK revenue accounted for 79% of total revenue compared with 76% in the 2006 nancial year.
The continued migration of our customers from traditional voice and data services to networked IT services and managed solutions enables us to build closer highvalue relationships with these customers helping them to manage their businesses more effectively and gain competitive advantage in their markets.
Such relationships will we believe deliver longterm protable revenue more than offsetting the decline in our traditional business revenue.
As well as local national and international communications services and highervalue broadband and internet products and services we offer a comprehensive portfolio of networked IT services focused on messaging and conferencing CRM convergence outsourcing and security.
We also offer consultancy services to help organisations understand network performance operate their networks and applications efciently and transform their businesses.
Our extensive global communications network and strong partnerships enable us to serve customers in the key commercial centres around the world using a combination of direct sales and services capabilities and strategic partners.
BT Global Services is an increasingly global operation.
Although it currently generates most of its revenue in the UK the US and Western Europe we are anticipating strong growth in the Asia Pacic region particularly in India where in the 2007 nancial year we obtained both national and international longdistance licences through our venture BT Telecom India.
Markets in Japan and China will also become increasingly important.
In the 2007 nancial year BT Global Services experienced particularly strong revenue growth of over 30% in the Asia Pacic region.
The revenue growth that we have experienced in Italy in recent years is a good illustration of the success of our global strategy.
Thanks to a mix of both organic and inorganic growth we are now one of the main competitors in the Italian business market.
Networked IT services In recent years we have developed a track record of winning and delivering complex largescale networked IT services contracts for large business customers and other organisations including the public and government sectors  around the world.
We have shown that we have the experience and expertise to help our customers succeed in a world in which business applications are increasingly being networked and networks are seen as increasingly vital to productivity and competitive advantage.
BT is proving to be a world leader in delivering networked IT services through for example our work for the NHS National Programme for Information Technology which is helping to transform the lives of doctors nurses and patients across England by delivering new computer systems and services to improve the way patient information is stored and accessed.
In January 2007 N3  the national broadband network that we are building for the NHS  reached 18000 connections in England two months ahead of schedule.
We are also more than twothirds of the way to completing the Scottish N3 network.
These networks provide NHS professionals with fast and secure access to health applications enabling them for example to obtain patient records and images rapidly and reliably at signicantly lower cost.
At the end of March 2007 the N3 network was voiceenabled which will further reduce the cost of telephony services and bring enhanced communications between NHS sites.
In London where we are implementing new IT systems for the NHS across the capital we have delivered capability to over 50% of trusts and completed our rollout of picture archiving communications systems to 21 trusts.
These systems enable images such as Xrays and scans to be stored displayed transmitted and archived electronically rather than being printed onto lm and will bring considerable benets to both patients and NHS staff.
In the 2007 nancial year we also completed the most complex and challenging software upgrades so far on the national database and messaging service known as the Spine creating the infrastructure and software to support the rollout of the NHS Summary Care Record Service which will give healthcare staff faster easier access to reliable information about patients.
In August 2006 we began the deployment of one of the worlds largest IP converged private networks for the Department for Work and Pensions DWP under an agreement signed in December 2005.
The DWP is one of BTs three largest central government clients and the contract  which runs until March 2011  is worth 740 million over its lifetime.
In the 2007 nancial year we secured networked IT services orders in the UK and around the world worth 5.2 billion.
This included the following signicant contracts Date Contract May 2006 We were awarded a threeyear extension to our existing outsourcing contract with Unilever.
The deal which is worth around an additional 270 million means that we will continue to deliver voice data and mobile services globally to Unilever until 2012.
July 2006 We reached agreement with Dutch electronics giant Philips on a veyear contract to provide a fully managed solution for data voice conferencing and mobile communications services in over 40 countries in EMEA Europe the Middle East and Africa.
We will manage Philips MPLSbased data transport services within EMEA together with voice services managed mobility and certain metropolitan area networks in addition to providing global data access services including security services and rewalls IP address management and conferencing services.
September
We signed a sevenyear managed services agreement with PepsiCo Inc to provide and manage an integrated portfolio of data LAN local area network security conferencing remote access and internet services to support the IT requirements of PepsiCos international division.
Under the terms of the contract  which covers more than 900 locations in over 60 countries  BT will migrate these services to a stateoftheart highspeed IPbased global MPLS infrastructure.
October
We announced a contract with Alliance and Leicester to transform its telecommunications infrastructure into a single fully managed converged network for both voice and data communications.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 11 Report of the Directors Business Filename 5138403.3d Time 151703 Date 190507
Date Contract
We signed a 322 million deal with Liverpool City Council for a further ve years to 2017.
We will continue to invest in new technology and new ways of working to deliver additional benets across a range of council services.
This new deal increases the lifetime value of the contract to more than 825 million.
February
We announced that we were signing a strategic agreement with Credit Suisse worth over 575 million to provide a broad package of mobile and internet technologies and advanced connectivity services which will enhance its operating efciency as an integrated global bank.
The contract is initially for ve years and will be delivered in partnership with Swisscom to address requirements across Credit Suisses enterprise and nancial trading environments with an additional focus on jointly creating service innovations.
March
With our partner Liberata we signed a deal to become the private sector strategic partner to Sandwell Metropolitan Borough Council in the West Midlands.
BTLiberata will build a new regional business centre in Sandwell to run a range of IT and core business services for the council attract new business to the borough and create jobs.
The contract is valued at almost 300 million over 15 years.
We also continue to build relationships with key industry players in order to enhance the abilities of all parties to deliver networked IT services.
Examples of such successes are
Capgemini transferred a substantial portion of its European Networking Infrastructure Services NIS operation to BT.
As part of this we have taken on approximately 250 people employed in Europe and are now responsible for providing NIS services to Capgemini customers.
The deal is for ten years.
November
We were selected as a subcontractor to Atos Origin to deliver a managed network service for the Department for Constitutional Affairs.
The contract is worth 96 million over seven years.
As the network services subcontractor we will be responsible for migrating three existing networks to a single secure resilient MPLS network.
February
HP and BT announced that they had signed sevenyear outsourcing contracts with Anglo American worth in total around US450 million.
Under the contracts BT and HP will jointly manage the companys global voice services data centre operations and enduser workplace environment.
A core part of the agreements is a transformation programme to create an integrated global IT infrastructure to support Anglo Americans strategy for growth.
Networked IT services revenue for BT Global Services for the 2007 nancial year was 4048 million an 8% increase compared with the 2006 nancial year.
We continue to feature prominently in reviews of business capabilities.
Gartner for example publishes a quarterly assessment of network service providers ranked by their ability to execute and their completeness of vision.
In the latest Gartners assessment Magic Quadrant Report of PanEuropean Network Service Providers BT Global Services is ranked top for both.
BTs broad service portfolio large presence and range of engagement models make it a candidate for most types of organisations with panEuropean networking needs.
According to specialist researchers Forrester There are only a handful of international network operators that can provide complex ICT solutions that include global WAN wide area network services.
BT stands rmly among them.
BT Retail In addition to serving consumer customers in the UK BT Retail also has responsibility for r small and mediumsized businesses in the UK r BTs activities in Ireland r a number of discrete enterprises such as BT Conferencingsite Revenue in the 2007 nancial year was 8414 million compared with 8507 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Revenue grew year on year in the nal two quarters of the 2007 nancial year  the rst time in four years.
27% 9% 9% 55% At a time when convergent new wave products and services are radically reshaping the communications industry customers of all kinds have more choice than ever before.
However more choice can also mean more complexity and more confusion and consequently the possibility of customers missing out on the benets.
BT Retail aims to offer customers straightforward and complete services that compete on value not price backed by levels of customer service that differentiate us from our competitors.
And this applies as much to traditional services such as telephone calls as it does to new broadband and mobility services.
Consumer customers At 31 March 2007 we had more than 16.2 million UK consumer customers with around 19.3 million residential customer lines voice ISDN integrated services digital network and broadband.
In the 2007 nancial year consumer revenue declined by 3% to 5124 million primarily reecting the impact of CPS carrier preselection and WLR wholesale line rental.
However the rate of revenue decline has been slowing and ARPU average revenue per user is strong.
Report of the Directors Business review 12 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138403.3d Time 151706 Date 190507 Checksum tel Consumer average revenue per user  12 month rolling average 26telIn the consumer market we aim to provide customers with a range of services that help them communicate more effectively access entertainment and manage their lives.
By increasing revenue from broadband mobility and internet services we intend to reduce further our dependence on revenue and prot from traditional xedline voice services.
We also aim to maximise the returns from our traditional business and defend market share vigorously through service offerings backed by innovative marketing and excellent quality of service.
New wave services for consumers Consumer new wave revenue grew by 34% to 858 million in the 2007 nancial year driven principally by broadband.
Residential broadband customers increased by 32% to 2.8 million.
BT offers a family of broadband packages designed to meet the diverse needs of our customers simply and cost effectively in a highly competitive market.
We believe that the broadband experience is about much more than having basic access to the internet customers want their broadband connection to offer a range of exciting content and secure robust services as standard without having to pay extra for these features.
In June 2006 we launched BT Total Broadbanda comprehensive broadband package offering download speeds of up to 8Mb and giving customers free internet voice calls free video calls and a suite of security software all brought together through the BT Home Hub.
Customers have the choice of three options and can enjoy ultrafast download speeds and free evening and weekend UK voice calls with our BT Broadband Talk service.
BT Total Broadband also includes 250 free BT Openzone WiFi minutes a month giving customers access to thousands of BT Openzone hotspots.
At 31 March 2007 2.4 million of our residential broadband customers had signed up for BT Total Broadband more than half of whom had opted for our premium packages.
Combined with the BT Home Hub  a device that connects wirelessly to PCs and other broadband devices  BT Total Broadband enables customers to experience the full range of broadband services at home or when out and about.
With the launch of BT Vision in December 2006 we are helping to dene nextgeneration television which is made possible by the convergence of digital broadcast TV and broadband technology.
Customers are now able to watch what they want when they want.
BT Vision which does not require a regular monthly subscription is the rst widely available TV service of its kind.
The service is delivered via a new settop box the Vbox  which contains a personal digital recorder able to store up to 80 hours of content and pause or rewind live TV.
In December 2006 we announced that BT Vision customers will have access to live FA Premiership and Scottish Premier League football from the beginning of the 200708 season.
Under an agreement with leading pay TV sports broadcaster Setanta BT Vision will carry 46 live Premiership games a season.
The fact that BT Vision already had the rights to 242 near live Premiership games means that 75% of all Premiership games will be shown in full.
Customers will also be able  via BT Visions replay TV service  to access a selection of terrestrial programmes released in the previous week.
Other content deals have been signed with a wide range of leading entertainment companies including Warner Brothers Disney Universal Pictures Dreamworks Channel 4 HBO BBC Worldwide Paramount Warner Music Group EMI Universal Music Sony BMG and the History Channel and the National Geographic Channel.
Convergent services for consumers We are also playing a lead role in the development of internet telephony or VolP voice over IP.
In January 2007 we achieved the milestone of one million registered consumer customers for our VoIP services  BT Broadband Talk and BT Softphone  six months ahead of schedule.
BT Broadband Talk enables customers to make and receive broadband calls using an ordinary phone BT Softphone is for users making calls over their
Both services offer highdenition sound.
At 31 March 2007 the two services had 1.4 million customers.
In the consumer mobility market our strategy is to build a foundation for the delivery of xedmobile convergent solutions.
BT Fusion launched in June 2005 is the worlds rst intelligent mobile service that switches calls to a BT broadband line when the user is at home offering customers the convenience of mobile in combination with the cost and quality advantages of a xedline phone.
BT Fusion brings with it a range of mobile services including text and picture messaging.
In
January 2007 we launched BT Fusion WiFi handsets.
Users of BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 13 The BT Home Hub an icon of convergence BT RETAIL PRODUCTS AND SERVICES BT Vision  the Vbox defining nextgeneration television BT Fusion the worlds first intelligent mobile service Report of the Directors Business Filename 5138403.3d Time 151711 Date 190507
14 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F this service can make calls at home or out and about at our BT Openzone hotspots at substantially reduced cost.
Valueadded services for consumers Because we believe that customers want hasslefree access to new services we are increasingly offering a range of valueadded services designed to make their lives easier.
Essentially these services cover three areas support security and entertainment.
BT Home IT Advisor for example is a onestop advice and support service for broadband customers giving them a single point of contact with a team of highly trained advisors dedicated to providing comprehensive support for their PCs networks applications and up to 20 devices.
The service can even create a virtual engineer in the home by enabling an advisor to access a customers computer remotely in order to troubleshoot a problem.
Customers can either choose to pay a monthly fee and use the service as often as they like or they can select a payasyougo option.
At 31 March 2007 almost 40000 customers were paying a monthly subscription to BT Home IT Advisor.
The BT Home IT Visit service takes the principle of domestic IT support a step further.
Customers are offered a house visit from a specialist BT engineer who can give advice and guidance on a range of computer matters from installing software to setting up a wireless network or connecting digital devices such as cameras and MP3 players.
Our computer security products include BT Net Protect which offers antivirus and rewall security products and BT Digital Vault an online data backup and storage facility.
Traditional services for consumers We continued to develop the services we have traditionally offered in order to make them more attractive to consumers.
In August 2006 following a widespread review of telephone tariffs we cut the prices of BT Together Options 2 and 3 by almost one third.
We also offered a years free UK evening and weekend calls to all customers who signed up to one of these options packages for 18 months.
At 31 March 2007 three million customers had signed up for BT Together Options 2 and 3 and 68% of consumer revenue was under contract.
From
October 2006 we cut the cost of calling many nongeographic numbers and since January 2007 have been offering all our customers who opt for paperless billing a reduction in their monthly rental.
BT Together customers 000 quarter end At 31 March 2007 over seven million customers had signed up for BT Privacy a caller display service which enables customers to preview incoming call numbers and lter out unwanted calls  up 90% on the 2006 nancial year.
All BT Privacy customers can be added to the Telephone Preference Service register which lters out most unsolicited marketing calls.
At 31 March 2007 we had almost 500000 customers registered on BT Text  the texttospeech service that enables users to send and receive texts on their home landline phones.
Since autumn 2005 almost three million customers have registered to have their Friends and Family calling circle automatically updated to ensure that the numbers they dial most frequently attract maximum discounts.
Business customers At 31 March 2007 in the UK we had around 1.5 million business customers with around eight million exchange lines.
In the SME small and mediumsized enterprises market typically companies with up to 500 employees our strategy is to provide customers with converged IT and communications services that help them to manage their businesses more simply and efciently.
By providing innovative communications solutions and new levels of support to our business customers we believe that we can help them to gain competitive advantage in their markets.
Overall in the SME market during the 2007 nancial year revenue grew by 1% to 2353 million.
29% of revenue was from new wave activity compared with 23% in the 2006 nancial year.
New wave and valueadded services for business and major corporate customers Broadband is increasingly critical to the success of small and mediumsized businesses and BT Business Broadband remained the leading internet service provider for SMEs in the UK.
In the 2007 nancial year broadband revenues in the business sector grew by 14% and 48% of new business broadband customers had contracts for a minimum of two years.
At the end of the 2007 nancial year we had around 700000 business broadband customers.
However businesses need more than basic broadband access over 95% of our broadband sales are now made with value added services attached.
Our BT Business Broadband Voice service is demonstrating the possibilities of VoIP for businesses.
At 31 March 2007 we were signing up around 2000 new BT Business Broadband Voice customers a week.
BT Business IT Support Manager enables business customers who want help installing BT Business Broadband to book an engineer to visit their premises andor provide aftersales support.
At 31 March 2007 more than 23000 PCs were supported in this way.
BT Business IT Manager gives SME customers the equivalent of their own IT manager at a fraction of the cost.
Customers can choose the level of service that suits their business ranging from advice over the phone or the remote running of software applications to help with installing PCs and networks and developing more complex longterm solutions.
In January 2007 we launched BT Business Total Broadband a comprehensive broadband package designed specically for
In addition to download speeds of up to 8Mb BT Business Total Broadband customers get a free BT Broadband Voice additional line offer which gives capped UK and international calls over the internet and security software including antivirus and rewall applications for all ofce PCs.
BT
Business Total Broadband offers Option 2 and 3 customers 250 free BT Openzone wireless minutes a month along with the Business Essentials package which is designed to make it easier for SMEs to run their business.
The package includes ten Business Email Lite mailboxes 20Mb of webspace and access to Report of the Directors Business review Filename 5138403.3d Time 151711 Date 190507
BT Workspace Lite which enables everyone in the business to store access and share information.
Customers also have the support of a free dedicated helpdesk 24 hours a day seven days a week.
Converged services for business and major corporate customers In the mobility market our strategy is to integrate traditional xed mobile and IP services to offer a single communications solution to our customers  through commercial packaging and through the exploitation of technological convergence.
In addition we provide a range of managed mobile services to UK and global customers who either outsource their mobile communications entirely or rely on BT to provide specic managed services.
During the 2007 nancial year we launched a number of new services designed to integrate business and corporate customers xed and mobile communications services including BT Fusion WiFi for Business  a single mobile device designed for the SME market which offers a twoway handover between WiFi and mobile telephony.
The benets include highspeed access to business applications free access to all xed and mobile messages stored in one place and cheaper call rates.
In April 2007 we launched BT Ofce Anywhere a service that gives users the functions of a Windows PC but in a smartphone small enough to t in the pocket.
Because unlike other smartphones it comes with VoIP BT Ofce Anywhere also offers free hourlong internet phone calls to UK landlines plus capped calls to UK mobiles and international landlines from BT Openzone WiFi hotspots in the UK and Ireland from home and ofce networks and from around the globe wherever users have access to a compatible wireless network.
Traditional services for business customers At 31 March 2007 BT Business Plan had almost 600000 locations up 16% on the 2006 nancial year and accounted for 57% of call revenues from business customers.
Customers of BT Business Plan excluding the lite option can also sign up to receive BT Assurance Plus free of charge.
The benets of BT Assurance Plus include the xing of any problems the next working day including Saturday a dedicated support team and a Freefone fault reporting number and the option of call diversion to a mobile phone another xed line or a personalised mailbox.
Convergent services in the wider community Increasingly we are extending the power of convergent broadband and mobile services out of the home and ofce and into the community more widely.
BT Openzone is one of the leading providers of WiFi services in the UK and Ireland.
We operate our own network of highquality sites which include hotspots at Thistle Ramada Jarvis and Hilton hotels main train stations British Airways lounges BAA airports and RoadChef and Welcome Break service stations  and offer more wholesale and roaming connections than any other UK WiFi network operator.
BT Openzone offers customers a highspeed wireless broadband connection over which they can access the internet to work talk or play.
At 31 March 2007 our BT Openzone customers had access to around 10000 hotspots in key locations in the UK and Ireland and more than 40000 globally.
We are also leading the way in building wireless cities throughout the UK in order to ensure that local residents businesses tourists and local government employees are always best connected wherever they are whatever they happen to be doing and whatever device they happen to be using.
In May 2006 we announced the creation of our wireless cities programme which committed us to WiFi enabling 12 cities by the end of March 2007.
We achieved this ahead of schedule.
In December 2006 Ofcom published a consultation document setting out its proposals for the award of available wireless spectrum at a frequency ideally suited to the provision of wireless broadband services including those outside the home and ofce.
This award will be made through an auction which could take place in late 2007.
We believe it is important for the UK that this spectrum is developed for wireless broadband services and new applications as is happening in many other parts of the world.
18%
BT Enterprises consists of six businesses  BT Conferencing BT Directories BT Payphones BT redcare monitoring and tracking facilities BT Expedite a specialist retail division offering store integration solutions and servicessite  which build on BTs existing strengths to generate innovation and growth in a range of communicationsrelated markets.
Revenues in the 2007 nancial year were 710 million up 32% on the 2006 nancial year.
BT Conferencing for example is now the number one conferencing service provider in Europe.
It has 300000 customers around the world for its comprehensive portfolio of audio video and internet conferencing services and products backed up by high quality service and support. and SME markets.
See Acquisitions and disposals in the 2007 nancial year on page 19site has a product portfolio of around 15000 lines from the worlds leading manufacturers including HP Canon Toshiba Sony Fujitsu Siemens Microsoft and BT.
During the 2007 nancial yearsite grew by 18%.
BT Ireland BT has a long track record in Ireland North and South where we have successfully run two separate operating units for a number of years.
In the 2006 nancial year we merged these two divisions to create BT Ireland  a single integrated business serving the whole of Ireland.
Our vision for this business is to become the leading provider of networked IT and converged IP services on the island of Ireland.
In the 2007 nancial year BT Ireland generated revenues of 738 million.
BT Ireland operates across four principal markets  consumer business major business and wholesale  delivering innovative broadband packages and complex IT services to customers large and small.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 15 Report of the Directors Business Filename 5138403.3d Time 151713 Date 190507 Checksum tel BT Ireland was recently named as the second largest IT services company on the island with a strong focus on managed and converged solutions.
In the nancial services sector for example it supports 13 of the 16 largest Irish and international companies.
BT Ireland also has a signicant wholesale business supporting other leading operators xed and mobile.
Further growth comes from infrastructure and transmission solutions including for example the build and management of Hutchisons 3G network in Ireland.
In the consumer and SME markets we are positioned as one of the leading players in Northern Ireland and one of the leading alternative providers in the Republic of Ireland offering competitive broadband and added value services.
BT Wholesale BT Wholesale is evolving into a leading provider of innovative business solutions.
Our 21CN programme is replacing the existing network and will provide the platform to offer a seamless customer experience.
The 21CN will provide the opportunity for our communications provider customers to develop new and compelling consumer products.
In the UK wholesale market we provide network services and solutions to over 700 communications companies including xed and mobile network operators ISPs internet service providers and other service providers.
We interconnect with more than 180 other operators as well as carrying transit trafc between telecommunications operators.
In the 2007 nancial year revenue from our wholesale activities increased by 3% to 7584 million.
New wave revenue was 1097 million up 17% on the 2006 nancial year.
This increase was driven by the continued growth of broadband as well as a strong emphasis on building innovative network solutions.
We have a long and successful tradition of delivering networkbased connectivity to the carrier and intermediate telecommunications markets throughout the UK.
We have a number of agreements with service providers and mobile operators to upgrade their IP capability.
In addition we have used our expertise and geographic reach to provide bespoke data housing solutions.
Deliver on broadband At 31 March 2007 5558 exchanges had been upgraded making broadband available to more than 99.9% of the UKs homes and businesses.
When in April 2002 we rst set targets for broadband penetration in the UK there were under 150000 DSL connections and exchanges covering just 66% of the population had been upgraded for broadband.
Including cable customers over 50% of all UK homes subscribe to broadband.
DSL broadband connections million quarter end LLU Openreach We continue to look for commercially viable ways of bringing broadband to those customers for whom availability remains an issue.
We continue for example to explore the feasibility of installing broadband equipment at locations closer to the customer than the BT exchange as well as the possibility of delivering broadband over existing bre cables.
As a demonstration of our commitment to delivering higherspeed broadband to UK consumers 74% of wholesale broadband lines were at least 2Mb at 31 March 2007 compared with 59% a year earlier.
We are now conducting inhouse trials of broadband speeds of up to 24Mb.
By continually upgrading exchanges across the UK to support this service we are providing the UK market with a stable highspeed broadband service with the widest national coverage in the world.
In addition we have enhanced broadband line stability to ensure that customers can run more bandwidthhungry applications including video gaming and music downloads at the same time as sendingreceiving emails and surng the internet.
Managed network services In September 2006 Vodafone UK signed an agreement with BT to buy DSL broadband and xedvoice capacity from us in a move which gave it immediate nationwide coverage rather than installing its equipment in our exchanges.
By opting for the BT IPStream product Vodafone UK is able to provide a broadband service to its customers without the need to invest in its own xedline network.
As part of this deal we are managing the service endtoend and incorporating functions such as customer service and billing operations.
Vodafone UKs service Vodafone at Home was launched in January 2007.
From May 2007 the charge for BT IPStream was reduced by up to 9% with a second round of price reductions planned for January 2008.
There will also be opportunities for further savings for communications providers at highdensity exchanges the current scheme which covers 561 exchanges will be extended to 1016.
BT DataStream customers will also have opportunities to benet from this enhanced rebate scheme.
Mobility for wholesale customers In the 2007 nancial year we saw continued growth in the UK wholesale mobility arena  increasing the volume and value of wirelessoriginated trafc over our network.
Report of the Directors Business review 16 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138403.3d Time 151715 Date 190507
A key element of our wholesale mobility offering is BT Movioa service that delivers digital broadcast television and radio to mobile handsets over the DAB digital audio broadcasting spectrum.
The rst mobile operator to resell the BT Movio service is Virgin Mobile.
Traditional services for wholesale customers At the same time as growing our new wave business we continued to implement our strategy of defending our traditional business  selling a wide range of capacity and call based products and services including regulated interconnect services and new nonregulated products and services.
We maintained our focus on the cost reduction opportunities that arise as our business changes.
Twentyrst century network We believe that our 21CN programme is the most ambitious business transformation programme in the global telecommunications industry today and one of the largest ever investments by a private sector company in the UKs infrastructure.
An endtoend nextgeneration IP network 21CN provides the platform to transform the customer experience by ensuring that the delivery of converged services is fast efcient and highly cost effective.
It will bring new voice data broadband and multimedia services to businesses and homes quicker than before and give customers more control over the way they use these services.
And it will enable us to rationalise and transform our services portfolio.
In November 2006 the rst customers in the village of Wick near Cardiff were moved onto the 21CN infrastructure for live running.
This was the rst stage of a rollout programme which anticipates that around 350000 voice lines and around 80000 broadband lines in South Wales will be moved onto 21CN by the end of 2007.
To achieve this milestone we designed and built the largest network testing facility in our history rebuilt around 20% of the UKs national telecommunications infrastructure installed 21CN equipment at more than 100 sites around the UK and laid more than 2300 kilometres of bre optic cable.
We also invested more than 1500 manyears in developing new IT systems to support the new network.
During the 2008 nancial year we plan to increase the pace of investment and operational activity to prepare for the national migration of customers to the new network.
The plan is that the full national rollout of 21CN will be substantially complete by the end of the 2011 nancial year.
We have also set up a 21CN global venture which will enable us to market the experience we have acquired of designing building testing and delivering networks on the scale of 21CN to other network operators around the world.
The services we offer range from consultancy to design and build.
We are committed to building open transparent and inclusive relationships with the rest of the industry and launched Consult21 in the 2005 nancial year in order to promote a shared understanding of the 21CN vision and the progress we are making towards it.
Since then many of our wholesale customers have contributed on a regular basis to this major industry consultation process.
Openreach
Openreach was established in January 2006.
Following a strategic review of the telecommunications market by Ofcom BT undertook to put responsibility for our access network in the hands of one distinct organisation within the BT group that would offer communications providers  including other BT lines of business  fair equal and open access to the crucial rst mile of network and underpin the future development of the industry.
Openreach now provides services to around 400 communications providers in the UK connecting millions of end users premises to their telecommunications networks by xed line local and backhaul connections.
At the heart of Openreachs operations are the 20000 eld engineers who install repair and upgrade lines ensuring that households ofces and other premises have reliable local access to the telephony internet and other services offered by their communications providers.
For the 2007 nancial year Openreach reported for the rst time as a separate line of business.
Revenues were 5177 million driven by strong market volume growth which more than offset the impact of a price reduction for WLR wholesale line rental.
Equivalence Management Platform The EMP equivalence management platform was established in June 2006 and is the largest IT capability of its kind in the UK telecommunications industry.
The EMP is the transactional platform that will underpin all Openreachs interactions with communications providers.
It was designed to deliver service with a greater degree of automation processing up to 100000 orders a day and with the capacity to carry out up to 60000 line checks an hour.
Products
Wholesale Line Rental WLR which enables communications providers to offer telephony services with their own brand over BTs network currently generates around twothirds of Openreachs revenue.
We anticipate that this will decline as customers increasingly migrate to LLU.
In December 2006 Openreach achieved a signicant milestone by placing the rst live order for its new WLR capability WLR3 wholesale line rental analogue on an equivalent basis via the EMP.
At 31 March 2007 Openreach was providing more than 23 million WLR lines to BT lines of business and over 4.2 million to other communications providers.
Of the lines provided to other communications providers over 3.5 million were WLR analogue lines up 46% on the 2006 nancial year and 689000 were WLR digital lines up 52% on the 2006 nancial year.
Local Loop Unbundling LLU which enables communications providers to use the Openreach lines connecting BT exchanges to end users premises and to install their own equipment in those exchanges is another key Openreach product.
There are two types of unbundled line r a fully unbundled line gives other communications providers the exclusive use of the copper line r a shared access line only gives other communications providers the use of the highfrequency channel used for broadband  the line will also be used by the customers xedline voice provider.
In February 2007 we achieved the milestone of 1.5 million nonBT communications providers unbundled lines an increase of 640% since Openreach was created.
Combined with BTs use of unbundled lines this brought the total to 10.7 million BT lines of business  8.8 million nonBT customers  1.9 million in the UK as at 31 March 2007 with 21 communications BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 17 Report of the Directors Business Filename 5138403.3d Time 151715 Date 190507 fullling more than 55000 LLU orders a week.
LLU volumes 000 quarter end The 1.5 million line milestone was critical because in Ofcoms view it represented the appropriate level of competition to enable BT to announce plans to reduce our wholesale broadband prices  offering communications providers a costeffective alternative to LLU.
Ethernet
Openreach continues to develop a comprehensive portfolio of Ethernet products to support backhaul and access services for LLU operators and a growing number of other communications providers.
Equivalence
The Undertakings completed in the 2007 nancial year included some major product deliveries  the launch of LLU and Ethernet products on an equivalent basis and the separation of management information systems were the most signicant from our customers point of view.
Further Undertakings remain to be implemented between now and 2010.
See BTs Undertakings under the Enterprise Act on page 21 Network investment and service performance Service involves more than reactive provision and repair activity it also includes reinvigorating the access network infrastructure improving the health of the network leads to improved reliability enhanced service standards and reduced cost.
In the 2007 nancial year Openreachinvestedsignicantlyin the installation of new network components focused on improving the quality of individual workmanship and concentrated on identifying and upgrading the worst performing parts of the network.
This led to a decrease in the number of access network faults while the number of highbandwidth services provided continued to increase.
Peaks in demand caused by serious weather incidents are now resolved more rapidly than they used to be.
Our rapid recovery from the extensive damage caused by the January 2007 storms is a good example of the advantages of the move to one distinct organisation managing a fully integrated engineering workforce.
During the 2007 nancial year around 150000 network joints were replaced or sealed and 9000 network blackspots were upgraded.
We also removed or replaced 25000 defective telephone poles and renewed or upgraded 32000 overhead wires.
Focusing our repair activities on some of the main causes of faults we carried out more than 40000 targeted improvements to local networks.
Overall activity levels in exchanges rose by 70% and by 31 March 2007 655 exchanges had been prepared for 21CN.
Investing in recruitment training and development There was a major focus on talent acquisition and accelerated development.
We recruited 1100 eld engineers during the 2007 nancial year and expect to recruit up to 400 modern apprentices in the 2008 nancial year.
We also invested more than 44 million in the training and development of Openreach people.
The Openreach Network Health Academy trained around 1250 managers for example.
By the end of the 2008 nancial year around 8500 engineers will be trained in fault prevention techniques and over 10000 frame engineers will be accredited to carry out frames work.
In addition to such specialist technical training Openreachs employees are required to complete mandatory training to support the BT Code of Practice.
There was a concerted drive to ensure that Openreach people fully understood the behavioural implications of compliance.
TRANSFORMING OUR COSTS We remain focused on nancial discipline and on delivering efciency programmes to generate sustainable cost savings.
We continue to benchmark ourselves against the best in the industry.
In the 2007 nancial year efciency programmes delivered savings of over 500 million enabling us to invest in growing our new wave activities and increase our prots.
A key area of focus has been enhancing the ways in which customers can deal with BT simultaneously saving costs and improving customer service.
Programmes have targeted the cost of failure by for example minimising the number of times a customer call is transferred before resolution and reducing the amount of call waiting time through better call routing. more than 90% in the 2007 nancial year.
And at 31 March 2007 we had over 2.8 million customers receiving ebills  up 22% in the nancial year  over 900000 of whom do not receive a paper bill  a 90% increase on 31 March 2006.
We have also been reducing the complexity of our systems and processes.
See IT Support on page 24 Other programmes relate to innovative procurement and sourcing and we continue to look at ways of streamlining our organisation and eliminating duplication.
We also continued to reduce overheads such as accommodation using buildings more efciently and introducing exible working practices.
In the 2007 nancial year we vacated around 40 buildings and installed an additional 1300 exible workstations which can be shared by multiple users.
IMPROVING CUSTOMER SATISFACTION AND SERVICE Improving customer satisfaction remains a signicant challenge one that we need to rise to if we are to maintain longterm mutually rewarding relationships with our customers.
This is why our aim in the 2007 nancial year was to increase the number of customers who are very or extremely satised with BT by 5% at the same time as maintaining the improvements in customer dissatisfaction levels we had achieved in previous years.
In the 2007 nancial year the average score for customers who were very or extremely satised was around 3% higher than in the 2006 nancial year levels of dissatisfaction remained the same.
Report of the Directors Business review 18 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138403.3d Time 151720 Date 190507 Checksum tel Understanding what drives satisfaction is crucial to delivering improvements that will sustain loyal relationships with our customers.
During the 2007 nancial year for example we recruited additional call centre staff and improved our repair and call handling performances.
In addition we launched a number of new services products and pricing changes designed to improve customer perception of the value for money we offer and how we account manage our relationships with them.
Much of our training and development activity remains focused on removing any barriers to the delivery of excellent customer service.
Our core people engagement initiative the my customer programme aims to enable all BT people to deliver great customer service through teamwork.
Looking forward we aim to drive further improvements through a relentless focus on customer service measures including right rst time keeping our promises and cycle time the speed at which we deliver service.
ACQUISITIONS AND DISPOSALS Acquisitions and disposals prior to the 2007 nancial year The BT of today was largely created by a radical restructuring of the company in the 2002 nancial year.
This restructuring involved the UKs largestever rights issue raising 5.9 billion the demerger of O2 comprising BTs wholly owned mobile assets in Europe the disposal of signicant noncore businesses and assets the unwinding of Concert our joint venture with ATandT and the creation of customerfocused lines of business.
Our principal acquisition in the 2005 nancial year was Infonet one of the worlds leading providers of international managed voice and data network services for 520 million including acquisition costs.
Excluding Infonets net cash balance the net value of the deal was 315 million.
We also acquired the 74% of Albacom that we did not already own for a total acquisition cost of 131 million.
Albacom now BT Italia provides data transmission voice and internet services to the Italian business communications market.
In the 2006 nancial year we acquired Radianz the leading nancial services extranet provider from Reuters for a total consideration of 143 million.
We also acquired Atlanet a Fiat subsidiary providing domestic telecommunications services to Fiat and other nonFiat business customers throughout Italy for approximatelyE80 million further reinforcing our position in the Italian market.
During July and September 2005 the conditions enabling BT to redeem the exchangeable bond over our shares in LG Telecom were fullled.
As a result virtually all the bondholders exercised their right to convert their bonds into LG Telecom shares enabling us to dispose of all our shares.
The transaction gave rise to a redemption gain of 27 million.
Acquisitions and disposals in the 2007 nancial year During the 2007 nancial year we completed a number of key transactionssite one of the UKs leading online retailers of IT and technology products.
August 2006 Tech Mahindra a company in which we now own 35% of the issued share capital was listed on the Indian national and Bombay stock exchanges following an IPO initial public offering.
We received proceeds of 25 million for the sale of a 6% stake in the IPO.
Tech Mahindra formally Mahindra BT provides endtoend IT services and solutions to the telecoms industry.
As at 31 March 2007 Tech Mahindra had a market capitalisation of around 2 billion valuing BTs holding at around 700 million.
October
We acquired Californiabased Counterpane Internet Security Inc.
Counterpane a leading provider of managed networked security services.
Counterpane monitors 550 networks worldwide for multinational and Fortune 100 customers.
November
We made a recommended cash offer for internet service provider PlusNet plc offering 210 pence per share valuing the company at approximately 67 million net of cash.
In January 2007 the offer was declared wholly unconditional and PlusNet was delisted from the Alternative Investment Market in February 2007.
Operating since 1997 PlusNet has nearly 200000 broadband customers.
February
We signed a conditional agreement to acquire i2i Enterprise Pvt Ltd a Mumbaibased enterprise services company distributing BT Infonet products and services to major Indian and multinational companies. market.
March 2007 We acquired International Network Services Inc.
NS a leading global provider of IT consulting and software solutions based in California.
The company has almost 900 employees in 12 countries and has served 75% of Fortune 500 enterprises.
March 2007 We increased our stake in i. public offer both at a price ofE52.30 per share. i. listed on the Italian stock exchange.
We also completed a number of smaller transactions in the 2007 nancial year including a joint venture with KDDI to address the growing market for the provision of global managed network services and global outsourcing services to organisations headquartered in Japan a venture with Jubilant Enpro part of the Jubilant Group an Indian conglomerate to apply for national longdistance and international longdistance licences in India and the disposal of our fulltime satellite broadcast services assets to Arqiva.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 19 Report of the Directors Business Filename 5138403.3d Time 151722 Date 190507 Checksum tel Postbalance sheet acquisition In April 2007 we entered into a conditional agreement to acquire Comsat International  a leading provider of data communication services for corporations and public sector organisations in Latin America  through its parent company CI Holding Corporation.
Comsat International employs more than 700 professionals with indepth knowledge of Latin American markets and provides services directly in 15 countries.
It has a track record in the delivery of complex projects and the management of network solutions for enterprise public sector and carrier customers.
REGULATION COMPETITION AND PRICES BT operates in an increasingly competitive and dynamic commercial environment both in the UK and around the world.
The 2006 nancial year saw the most signicant change to the UK regulatory regime since BT was privatised when in response to Ofcoms strategic review of telecommunications we proposed a number of legallybinding Undertakings under the Enterprise Act 2002 the Enterprise Act.
These Undertakings were accepted by Ofcom and came into force in September 2005.
See BTs Undertakings under the Enterprise Act on page 21 The Undertakings are intended to deliver clarity and certainty to the UK telecommunications industry with regulation focused on the bottleneck parts of the network and over time rolled back elsewhere to the benet of consumers and others in the marketplace.
This is mainly being achieved through Openreachs operations offering certain products and services to all communications providers in the same way  and through other widespread organisational and systems changes.
Since the Undertakings came into force we have made good progress in delivering our obligations.
Other regulatory highlights in the 2007 nancial year included achieving deregulation in wholesale international services markets the ending of retail price controls and the ending of our pricing commitments on wholesale calls.
Ofcom
See
Signicant market power conditions Regulation in the UK UK regulation is conducted within a framework determined by various EU European Union directives regulations and recommendations.
This framework is currently under review by the European Commission and proposals for revised EU directives are expected towards the end of the 2007 calendar year although they are unlikely to take effect in the UK before 2010.
Our policy is to comply fully with the regulatory framework in which we operate while competing fairly and vigorously within the rules.
Ofcom
The Ofce of Communications Ofcom was set up under the Ofce of Communications Act 2002 to provide a single seamless approach to regulating the entire communications market.
Its
Regulation takes the form of sets of conditions mostly laid down by Ofcom under the Communications Act 2003 Communications Act and directions under these conditions.
Some conditions apply to all providers of electronic communications networks and services others apply to individual providers which are designated as having a USO universal service obligation or following a review of relevant markets are found to have SMP signicant market power which is aligned with the competition law concept of dominance.
Other more general types of obligations are set out in the Communications Act.
Conditions applying to all providers of electronic communications networks or services General conditions The general conditions made by Ofcom under the Communications Act apply to all providers of electronic communications networks or services.
Although these conditions are concerned primarily with consumer protection they also address issues such as general access and interconnection obligations standards emergency planning and numbering.
A separate condition regulates the provision of premium rate services.
Electronic Communications Code conditions The Electronic Communications Code applies to communications providers authorised to carry out streetworks and similar activities for network provision.
Its application is subject to conditions made by the Secretary of State for Trade and
Other general obligations Other general types of obligations contained in the Communications Act include r the payment of administrative charges broadly the equivalent of licence fees under the old framework r the provision of information to Ofcom when required.
Conditions applying to BT specically Universal service obligation conditions BT is the designated supplier of universal service for the UK excluding the Hull area where Kingston Communications is the designated provider.
The services covered by the USO are dened in an order issued by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.
Our
Signicant market power conditions Ofcom is required by EU directives regularly to review relevant markets and to determine whether any communications provider has SMP in those markets.
Where Ofcom nds that a provider has SMP in a market it must impose such additional conditions as it considers appropriate as specied in the Communications
These may include obligations to meet reasonable requests to supply certain services to other communications providers not to discriminate unduly and to notify price changes and obligations relating to regulatory accounting.
In some cases extra obligations such as price controls have also been imposed.
Following a number of market reviews by Ofcom BT has been deemed to have SMP in certain xed telecommunications markets including all or parts of the markets for xed narrowband retail services xed narrowband wholesale exchange Report of the Directors Business review 20 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138403.3d Time 151722 Date 190507 access and wholesale local access.
During the 2007 nancial year Ofcom determined that we no longer have SMP in any of the wholesale international services markets and our pricing commitment on wholesale calls ended.
Ofcom is currently conducting a market review of wholesale broadband access markets and is also planning to carry out market reviews of the leased lines market and xed narrowband wholesale services and xed narrowband retail services in the 2008 nancial year.
BTs Undertakings under the Enterprise Act The key Undertakings given by BT are to r establish Openreach r deliver equivalence of input for key wholesale products and increased transparency for others r introduce new rules on access to and sharing of certain restricted information r restrict the exercise of inuence by other parts of BT on the commercial policy of both Openreach and parts of BT
Undertakings r create an Equality of Access Board to monitor report and advise on BTs compliance with the Undertakings and the code of practice.
The EAB was established on 1 November 2005.
The EAB Annual Report 2007 which does not form part of this report is available online at siteeabreport The Undertakings include a number of requirements some have specic dates for delivery and others are ongoing.
At 31 March 2007 we had met most of the relevant requirements with a few exceptions two of which the EAB reported as nontrivial.
Competition
Competition and the UK economy The growth of mobile telephony over the past decade has been a major factor in shaping the UKs telecommunications landscape and VoIP has also taken off in the past two years.
Mobile now accounts for around 41% of total UK voice minutes.
The mobile and xedline markets are currently treated as separate and regulated differently.
Market share was previously modelled using data from internal and external sources.
For consistency with the external market and compliance with our equivalence obligations we are reporting market shares based on the latest available information reported by Ofcom which is for the period ended 30 September 2006.
On this basis BTs share of the residential xedvoice calls market dened as including local national and international minutes declined to 53% for the quarter ended 30 September 2006 compared with 58% for the quarter ended 30 September 2005.
CPS carrier preselection has been the main contributor to the loss of share in the xedvoice market.
BT had 38% of the market for business xedvoice calls dened as including local national and international for the quarter ended 30 September 2006 compared with 39% for the quarter ended 30 September 2005.
We supplied around 71% of exchange lines in the UK for the quarter ended 30 September 2006 compared with 78% for the quarter ended 30 September 2005 with cable operators being the primary alternative providers.
Competition law In addition to communications industryspecic regulation BT is subject to the competition law provisions of the Competition Act 1998 the Competition Act in the UK and of the European Community Treaty.
Breach of UK or EU rules could lead to nes of up to 10% of a companys worldwide revenue in its previous nancial year andor claims for damages in national courts. company may also be ordered to cease an infringing activity.
We are also subject to national competition rules in Europe and elsewhere.
In 2004 Ofcom launched an investigation into allegations that BT had abused a dominant position in relation to its pricing of consumer broadband products.
Ofcom sent BT three statements of objection to which we responded arguing that our pricing does not amount to an abuse of dominance.
Ofcom
Pricing regulation Following a review in 2006 of retail price controls covering publicswitched telephony services Ofcom concluded that the retail price control which ended on 31 March 2006 would not be replaced.
BT is therefore no longer subject to retail price controls on these services.
Other services continue to be subject to price controls r Network charge control We operate under interconnection agreements with most other operators.
Our charges for a range of interconnect services are controlled by Ofcom under the NCC network charge control regime.
These controls are designed to ensure that our charges are reasonably derived from costs plus an appropriate return on capital employed.
Depending on the degree of competition charges are cap controlled each year by RPI minus X for services Ofcom considers unlikely to become competitive in the near future and safeguard capcontrolled ie no increases above RPI for services likely to become competitive.
X is a number specic to a particular market indicating the permitted change in controlled prices relative to the rate of ination.
The current NCC period began on 1 October 2005 and will last until 30 September 2009.
BT must notify Ofcom and other operators if it intends to amend existing charges or offer new services. operators.
On 1 October 2004 Ofcom introduced a PPC charge control to replace the annual determinations previously carried out by Oftel.
The control is a fouryear threepart RPIX formula covering low and high bandwidth services and equipment.
Ofcom is planning to carry out a review of the nancial framework of Openreach which will include looking at pricing and costs.
The review will start during 2007.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 21 Report of the Directors Business Filename 5138403.3d Time 151722 Date 190507
NonUK regulation BT must comply with the regulatory regimes in the countries in which we operate and this can have a material impact on our business.
European Union Regulation in each country within the EU is conducted within the regulatory framework determined by EU directives regulations and recommendations.
The manner and speed with which directives have been implemented vary from country to country and national regulators are working together in the European Regulators Group to introduce greater harmonisation in their approach to the assessment of SMP and the imposition of appropriate remedies.
BT does not have universal service obligations outside the UK although in certain member states we may be required to contribute towards an industry fund to pay for the cost of meeting universal service obligations in those countries.
Following the European Commissions formal investigation into the way the UK Government set BTs property rates and those paid by Kingston Communications and whether the Government complied with European Community Treaty rules on state aid the Commission concluded that no such state aid had been granted.
The Commissions decision has now been appealed but we continue to believe that any allegation of state aid is groundless and that the appeal will not succeed.
Rest of the world The vast majority of the markets in which we operate around the world are regulated and in most of these we have to meet certain conditions and obtain licences or other authorisations.
The degree to which these markets are liberalised varies widely.
Our ability to compete fully in some countries is therefore constrained.
We continue to press incumbent operators and their national regulatory authorities around the world including the EU for costrelated wholesale access to their networks where appropriate.
Other signicant changes and issues Wholesale broadband pricing We have had discussions with Ofcom about how we might ensure pricerelated protection for broadband consumers in parts of the UK where wholesale broadband competition is less likely to develop in the next few years.
The aim is to balance our need to be competitive in the wholesale broadband market while recognising that emerging LLU operators require a period of stability in order to establish a sustainable business.
As a result we have agreed a series of detailed ceiling and oor pricing commitments for certain mass market wholesale broadband products  BT IPStream and the proposed Wholesale Broadband Connect service.
The commitment on price oors ends on 1 July 2009 and on 31 December 2010 for price ceilings.
Funds for liabilities Under the terms of the Electronic Communications Code an electronic communications provider with apparatus on or in the public highway is required to make nancial provision to cover any damage caused by work it carries out and for the removal of its network in the event of liquidation or bankruptcy.
The conditions require the company to provide Ofcom annually with a certicate that in the opinion of its board of directors it has fullled its obligations to ensure the availability of the required funds.
This has been done by BT.
RELATIONSHIP WITH HM GOVERNMENT The UK Government collectively is our largest customer but the provision of services to any one of its departments or agencies does not comprise a material proportion of our revenue.
Except as described below the commercial relationship between BT as a supplier and the UK Government as customer has been on a normal customer and supplier basis.
We can however be required by law to do certain things and provide certain services for the UK Government.
General conditions made under the Communications Act require all providers of public telephone networks andor publicly available telephone services including BT at the request of and in consultation with the authorities to make and if necessary implement plans for the provision or restoration of services in connection with disasters.
The Civil Contingencies Act 2004 contains provisions enabling obligations to be imposed on providers of public electronic communications networks including BT in connection with civil contingency planning.
In addition the Secretary of State has statutory powers to require us to take certain actions in the interest of national security and international relations.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS BT does not believe that there are any pending legal proceedings which would have a material adverse effect on the nancial position or operations of the group.
There have been criminal proceedings in Italy against 21 defendants including a former BT employee in connection with the Italian UMTS universal mobile telecommunications system auction.
Blu in which BT held a minority interest participated in that auction process.
On 20 July 2005 the former BT employee was found not culpable of the fraud charge brought by the Rome Public Prosecutor.
All the other defendants were also acquitted.
The Public Prosecutor is in the process of appealing the courts decision.
If the appeal is successful BT could be held liable with others for any damages.
We have concluded that it would not be appropriate to make a provision in respect of any such claim.
RESOURCES
Corporate reputation and brand strength BT has a strong integrated brand that is widely recognised both in the UK and around the world.
According to global branding organisation Superbrands BT has the fourth strongest brand in the UK up from twenty rst a year ago.
Superbrands which publishes a list of the leading 500 brands in the UK judges companies on quality reliability and distinction.
Our brand helps to shape our relationships with all our stakeholders including shareholders customers suppliers and employees.
It is vital that they all have a clear understanding of what BT stands for and that all their interactions with us contribute to a consistently positive image of BT.
As a vital asset the BT brand needs to be developed protected and managed with the same rigour that we bring to other assets both tangible and intangible.
And as the world and the markets in which we operate change so our brand needs to reect this becoming more condent dynamic and forward looking.
Our vision for BT is to be dedicated to helping customers thrive in a changing world.
Our mission is to be the leader in delivering converged networked services.
By ensuring that the services we offer customers are consistently focused on meeting their needs straightforward and Report of the Directors Business review 22 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138403.3d Time 151723 Date 190507 business and personal lives.
We are committed to contributing positively to society and a sustainable future.
This is part of the heart of BT.
Our brand values are implicit in our new advertising strap line Bringing it all together  which captures both what we can do for customers helping them make the most of the possibilities of converged communications and our commitment to acting as a single BT team.
Motivating our people and living the BT values At 31 March 2007 BT employed 106204 people worldwide 101701 in Europe the Middle East and Africa 3688 in the Americas and 815 in the Asia Pacic region.
Our commitment to meeting our customers needs means that every one of these employees has opportunities to develop innovative solutions generate new business drive efciencies and experience personal growth.
Our aim is to create a team of highperforming engaged and motivated people who can make a difference for customers shareholders the company and themselves.
Only by living our values will we deliver our strategy keep our promises to our customers seize new opportunities in new markets and maximise the return from our traditional business.
Motivating leaders The quality of leadership in BT is key to the successful delivery of our strategy for transformation and growth.
We are focused on ensuring that leaders at all levels understand what is expected of them have access to appropriate development opportunities and are able to benchmark their performance against that of their peers.
We have for example rigorously dened the capabilities we expect our leaders to exhibit and have introduced a 360 degree feedback tool to help them measure their performance.
In the 2007 nancial year we conducted extensive research into the capabilities of our leaders to support focused investment in their development.
Engaging and motivating our people Our annual employee attitude survey was conducted most recently in February 2007 and attracted a 74% response rate over 78000 responses.
The survey generates around 5000 feedback reports for managers and their teams across the business helping to promote effective team working.
Employees are kept informed about our business through a wide range of communications channels including our online news service bimonthly newspaper regular email bulletins and senior management webchats and webcast briengs.
We have a record of stable industrial relations and enjoy generally constructive relationships with recognised unions in the UK and works councils elsewhere in Europe.
In the UK we recognise two main trade unions  the Communication Workers Union and Connect.
We hold regular meetings between management employee trade union representatives and other groups of employees in order to ensure that their views are taken into account in any decisions affecting employees interests.
We also operate a panEuropean works council the
Our Chief Executive and other senior executives have regular meetings with the BTECC and other employee representatives.
Rewarding and recognising achievement We continued to provide our employees with opportunities to acquire a stake in the company.
Under the BT Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP BT can provide free shares to employees and employees can buy shares in BT from their pretax salaries.
In the 2007 nancial year 25 million was allocated to provide free shares to employees under the ESIP.
Employees outside the UK received the same award of shares where practicable otherwise they will receive cash equivalent to the value of the shares.
This allocation of prots was linked to the achievement of corporate performance measures determined by the Board.
From the 2008 nancial year the award of free shares under the ESIP will be replaced by free BT Total Broadband Option 3 for all BT employees in the UK.
Employees can also buy shares at a discount under our savingsrelated share option plan.
More than 93% of eligible employees participate in one or more of these plans.
Learning now and in the future We believe that people particularly at the start of their careers will increasingly want to work for companies that commit to the longterm development of their employees.
Our successful companywide reaccreditation to Investors in People in February 2005 rst achieved in 1998 demonstrates our continuing commitment to the effective alignment of our communications training and development with our business strategy.
We have created a learning governance model to ensure our learning and development objectives and practice align with the key strategic objectives of the business.
Senior learning and development representatives form the Learning Council a body which provides strategic and operational guidance for the whole of BT to ensure that all learning and development activity is co ordinated across all lines of business.
R2L Route2learn our webbased groupwide learning portal is evidence of our continuing investment in lifelong learning and education for all BT people.
Providing all BT employees with an extensive range of learning programmes and facilities it is one of the largest corporate learning management systems in Europe.
In the 2007 nancial year R2L delivered over 310000 online and 21400 instructorled completed courses.
Embedding exibility and diversity The changing nature of the markets in which we operate our focus on cost leadership and our investment in new services all shape our permanent workforce.
In the UK during the 2007 nancial year 6391 people joined BT 2006 more than 6600 natural attrition was running at 4% 2006 3% and 2151 people left BT under our voluntary leaver packages 2006 2169.
The ability to support exibility and agile working practices is a key benet of many of the products and services we offer customers and is fundamental to our own employment practices.
Agile working is well established in our UK operations  where around 10400 employees work from home  and is increasingly important in our global operations.
In Budapest for example BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 23 Report of the Directors Business Filename 5138403.3d Time 151723 Date 190507 Checksum tel the introduction of exible working arrangements eliminated the need to acquire additional ofce space.
We continue to work to create an inclusive working environment in which employees can thrive regardless of their race sex religionbeliefs disability marital or civil partnership status age sexual orientation gender identity gender expression or caring responsibilities.
Pensions
Most of our employees are members of the BT Pension Scheme a dened benet scheme or the BT Retirement Plan a money purchase scheme both of which are controlled by independent trustees.
The BT Pension Scheme was closed to new members on 31 March 2001.
The majority of new employees are eligible to join the BT Retirement Plan.
See Pensions in the Financial review on page 46 Health and safety The health and safety of our people is of paramount importance and we continue to seek improvements by focusing on behavioural change.
In the 2007 nancial year we concentrated our health promotion activities on mental wellbeing  impaired mental health is our single greatest cause of lost time and productivity.
Our sickness absence rate rose slightly in the year in line with the CBI average  2.43% of calendar days were lost but is 22% lower than four years ago.
During the 2007 nancial year we reduced our accident rate by 10% to 2.4 lost time incidents per million working hours at 31 March 2007.
Research and development The GCTO Group Chief Technology Ofce sets and drives the open innovation and technology strategy for BT.
GCTO includes a global technology intelligence scouting unit teams focused on innovative new wave service opportunities an innovation strategy and media team strategic technology analysis units a network and systems architecture team and leading research and venturing facilities in Adastral Park England Malaysia and the
In the 2007 nancial year we invested 1119 million in RandD research and development to support our drive for innovation.
This investment comprised capitalised software development costs of 741 million and RandD operating costs of 378 million.
This compares with 870 million in the 2006 nancial year which comprised 544 million of capitalised software development costs and 326 million of RandD operating costs.
We continue to focus our innovation work on key areas which support our business and technology strategies ling patent applications for 162 new inventions in the 2007 nancial year and maintaining a total worldwide portfolio of 8150 patents and applications.
We have successfully launched eight innovative independent startup companies through the corporate venturing partnership unit New Venture Partners in which we are a limited partner.
Two further propositions are currently in incubation.
These start ups generate value by launching innovative solutions as high technology businesses in the global marketplace.
IT support Our dedicated IT professionals have a strong track record in the development and delivery of systems and solutions and in managing a secure and resilient infrastructure.
In addition to the work for 21CN signicant systems development effort in the 2007 nancial year was focused on providing support for Openreachs operations.
Specically our IT teams delivered the EMP equivalence management platform that is helping Openreach to serve its customers.
During the nancial year we continued the radical rationalisation of the BT systems estate through our One IT programme which aims to deliver yearonyear reductions in base costs at the same time as improving speed to market and enhancing the customer experience.
In particular the resources of the One IT programme  people processes and technology are focused on ensuring that customers have rapid access to the products and services they want.
By eliminating duplication and outmoded systems we have closed down around 700 IT systems in BT in the past two nancial years just over 500 of them in the 2007 nancial year alone.
We have invested in a threeyear plan to develop an innovative and exible systems architecture for BT based on reusable capabilities and able to support a wide range of applications.
In the rst year of the programme we launched around 60 core components of this new architecture.
During the 2007 nancial year around 3000 of our IT professionals moved to customerfacing roles working with BT Global Services 2500 people received a range of skills training to help meet future demand bringing the twoyear total to 7500.
In addition we set up nine professional communities an industrywide best practice way of organising professionals according to their skills in order to maximise organisational effectiveness and contribute to individual development.
Property
At 31 March 2007 we occupied approximately 6500 properties in the UK and approximately 1500 properties in the rest of the world.
The majority of these UK properties are owned by  and leased back from  the Telereal Group which is part of the William Pears Group.
These properties mainly house exchange equipment and are needed as part of our continuing activities.
Other general purpose properties consist chiey of ofces depots and computer centres.
We anticipate that our changing working patterns will continue to reduce property costs.
OUR COMMITMENT TO SOCIETY Corporate social responsibility Managing social ethical and environmental issues in a way that grows shareholder value builds our brand and helps us and our customers become more sustainable is very important to us.
This section together with the broad statement on social environmental and ethical matters on page 69 conforms to the Association of British Insurers disclosure guidelines on social responsibility.
More detailed information about our social ethical and environmental performance is available in our independently veried 2007 Sustainability Report at sitebetterworld We invest signicant resources in our CSR programmes and it is vital that we continue to be forward looking and responsible in our everyday operations and maintain our reputation for excellence.
For a number of years we have measured the link between customer satisfaction and CSR performance.
Customers who believe that BT takes its responsibility to society seriously are 49% more likely to be very or extremely satised with BT.
During the 2007 nancial year BT was ranked as the top telecommunications company in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index for the sixth year in a row.
The Dow Jones Sustainability Indexes rank companies for their success in managing social Report of the Directors Business review 24 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138403.3d Time 151724 Date 190507 Checksum tel ethical and environmental issues for competitive advantage.
We also hold the Queens Award for Enterprise in recognition of our contribution to sustainable development and in the 200607 Business in the Community Corporate Responsibility Environment and Community indexes BT is one of only four companies out of 100 to score over 95% on all six dimensions.
We were also named for the rst time as the leading corporate organisation for sustainability reporting in a survey published by SustainAbility in association with UNEP United Nations Environment Programme and Standard and Poors.
CSR Strategy During the 2007 nancial year the implementation of our revised CSR strategy which was discussed and agreed by the Board was a top priority.
There are four key strands to this strategy maintaining current momentum tackling climate change enabling sustainable economic growth and enabling a more inclusive society  all issues to which we believe we can make a positive contribution.
Maintaining current momentum CSR touches every part of our business  from the way we interact with our customers suppliers and partners look after our people give back to communities and support charities such as ChildLine and UNICEF right through to our practical concern for the environment.
We commit a minimum of 1% of our UK pretax prots to activities which support society.
We provided a total of 22 million designed to benet society in the 2007 nancial year of which 3 million was charitable donations.
Our key performance indicator for a number of years has been based on our contribution.
In the 2007 nancial year we added a new indicator to measure the effectiveness of our investment.
Our community investment strategy aims to help individuals and communities make a better world through improved communications skills and technology.
A key strand of this is our Better World campaign which has brought together our education programme which provides free resources for teachers pupils and parents and inschool activities with drama groups and BT volunteers both in the UK and internationally and other activities for young people.
To date we have involved over three million pupils at more than 12000 schools.
ChildLine a UK charity receives 4500 calls every day but lack of funds means that many hundreds go unanswered.
We are working with ChildLine on a campaign to ensure that every childs call for help is answered.
In the 2007 nancial year we raised 2 million for ChildLine and also raised money for There4Me an online counselling service for children run by the
We also helped Comic Relief Sport Relief and Children in Need run successful telethons which raised over 80 million for good causes around the globe.
In the 2007 nancial year as part of our Better World campaign we launched our rst global development partnership with UNICEF.
Community projects to bring education ICT information and communications technology and communications skills to disadvantaged children will initially focus on South Africa to be followed by Brazil and China in subsequent years.
BT is investing 1.5 million over three years and this will be enhanced by fundraising activities by our employees around the world.
We recognise that we have a responsibility to the environment and we continue actively to manage our waste reduction and recycling.
During the 2007 nancial year we received an income of 4.5 million from our recycling activities offset against the 5.2 million we spent managing our waste contracts recycling our waste and sending waste to landll.
Wastetel 2007 Total waste tonnes 107303 110622 102005 94928 Total waste recycled tonnes 27626 37421 42340 40007 % recycled 26% 34% 42% 42% Tackling climate change BT is currently responsible for over 0.7% of the UKs total electricity consumption so we are well placed to make a signicant contribution by actively reducing our carbon emissions.
In fact we have been actively managing our UK CO emissions for a number of years  they are currently 60% below their 1996 levels.
However given the scale of the climate change challenge we face we have committed to achieving an 80% reduction in CO emissions from our 1996 baseline by 2016.
As we transform our business and increasingly provide innovative new wave services our energy consumption could increase as a result for example of the growth in our data centres.
Consequently we have conducted an audit of the energy consumption of these data centres and are implementing BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 25 CSR  Global partnerships A student from the Mantshinga Combined School South Africa Brian Armstrong General Manager Middle East and Africa with students from the Mantshinga Combined School South Africa Working together Report of the Directors Business Filename 5138403.3d Time 151725 Date 190507 energy saving recommendations.
We will also be helping and encouraging our customers employees and suppliers to play their part and this includes encouraging our suppliers to develop products that emit lower levels of carbon.
And we have launched a website to enable people to calculate their carbon footprint  siteclimatechange The renewal of our green energy contract until 2010 means that approximately 50% of our electricity needs in the UK will be met by renewable sources and 50% from combined heat and power.
The following table shows BTs CO emissions as dened in the Greenhouse Gas Protocol and therefore includes not only the production of the electricity purchased by us.
CO emissionstel 2007 Total UK only  million tonnes 0.94 0.76 0.64 0.64 % below 1996 42% 53% 60% 60% Tonnes per 1m turnover Our Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen chairs the CBIs climate change task force which has been established to set the agenda for businesss approach to climate change and will make wide ranging recommendations to the UK Government the CBI and businesses later in 2007.
Enabling sustainable economic growth Enabling growth that benets society  in both the developed and developing worlds  within environmental limits is a new area of focus for BT.
In the 2008 nancial year we will be integrating sustainability into our business processes such as product and proposition development.
As part of this programme we are also looking at the issue of obsolescence in the ICT industry.
Enabling a more inclusive society We believe that ICT has a role to play in creating a more inclusive society helping everyone get a fair chance.
Work on this part of our CSR strategy is at an early stage but we are looking at r what we need to do to build up our digital inclusion activities in the UK to help even more people get online.
For a number of years our key performance indicator for digital inclusion related to levels of broadband penetration.
As these now stand at more than 99.9% we have introduced a new target to reduce the number of digitally excluded people in the UK from 36% to 32.4% a reduction of 10% in three years. diversity within our supply chain.
We believe that an inclusive approach to product design is good for customers and good for business.
We are proud for example of our reputation for developing products that can be used by all our customers regardless of age or ability.
For example we offer a wide range of phones with accessible features.
Our Age and Disability Action team works to raise awareness within BT of the importance of inclusive design in services ranging from billing to broadband and has been working with The Centre for Inclusive Technology and Design on the development of a toolkit to help designers and others involved in product development and to produce a general guide for inclusive design for businesses.
CSR Risks For a number of years we have maintained a CSR risk register.
During the 2007 nancial year we continued to develop our knowledge and understanding of our CSR risks.
Our most signicant CSR risks continue to be r breach of the code of business ethics r climate change r diversity r health and safety r outsourcing r privacy r supply chain working conditions.
Each of these risks has an owner and a mitigation strategy in place.
These risks are not regarded as material in relation to the group and consequently are not included in Group risk factors.
CSR opportunities The increasing importance of sustainability issues both inside and outside BT is leading to a much greater focus on the opportunities that CSR provides as well as the risks that need to be managed.
This is not only in relation to building competitive advantage by growing our brand and reputation for CSR but also in terms of commercial marketplace opportunities.
We believe that ICT has a positive role to play as part of the solution as individuals and organisations look for more sustainable ways of communicating working and living.
We are planning to offer our business customers a carbon audit which will measure their carbon footprint and explore ways in which the use of ICT can reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Products such as remote working and teleconferencing for example play an important part in creating sustainable businesses.
Report of the Directors Business review 26 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138403.3d Time 151726 Date 190507
GROUP RISK FACTORS In common with all businesses BT is affected by a number of risk factors not all of which are wholly within our control.
Although many of the risk factors inuencing our performance are macroeconomic and likely to affect the performance of businesses generally others are particular to our operations.
This section highlights some of those particular risks but it is not intended to be an extensive analysis of all risks affecting the business.
Some risks may be unknown to us and other risks currently regarded as immaterial could turn out to be material.
All of them have the potential to impact our business revenue prots assets liquidity and capital resources adversely.
They should also be considered in connection with the statement on Internal control and risk management on page 71 the forwardlooking statements in this document and the Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 158.
Regulatory controls If our activities are subject to signicant price and other regulatory controls our market share competitive position and future protability may be affected.
Most of BTs wholesale xednetwork activities in the UK are subject to signicant regulatory controls.
The controls regulate among other things the prices we may charge for many of our services and the extent to which we have to provide services to our competitors.
In recent years the effect of these controls has been to cause us to reduce our prices.
We cannot assure our shareholders that the regulatory authorities will not increase the severity of the price controls nor extend the services to which controls apply including any new services that we may offer in the future nor extend the services which we have to provide to our competitors.
These controls may adversely affect our market share the severity of competition and our future protability.
In response to Ofcoms strategic review of telecommunications we proposed a number of legally binding Undertakings under the Enterprise Act 2002.
These Undertakings were accepted by Ofcom and came into force in September 2005.
In the case of a breach of the Undertakings Ofcom has the right to seek an injunction through the courts or issue a direction.
Third parties who suffer losses as a result of the breach may also take action against BT in the courts for damages.
The timescales for achievement of a number of the milestones in the Undertakings are very challenging.
Further details on the regulatory framework in which BT operates can be found in Regulation competition and prices on page 20.
Competition in UK xednetwork services We face strong competition in UK xednetwork services.
Ofcom
In these areas Ofcom can enforce obligations to meet reasonable requests to supply services to other communications providers not to discriminate unduly to notify price changes and in some cases it can also impose extra obligations such as price controls.
Ofcom has promoted competition in the xednetwork area by measures including local loop unbundling carrier preselection making it easier for BT customers to route some or all of their calls over our competitors networks and the introduction of wholesale access products.
Reduction in our share of the xednetwork market may lead to a fall in our revenue and an adverse effect on protability.
Unlike our competitors we continue to be obliged by the current regulatory regime to provide certain services to customers in the UK whether or not such provision of service is economic.
There is also competition for voice and data trafc volumes between xednetwork operators and those operators offering VoIP and mobile services.
The impact of all these factors may be to accelerate the diversion of our more protable customers without being able to reduce our costs commensurately which may cause adverse effects on our business results of operations nancial condition and prospects.
Technological advances Our continued success depends on our ability to exploit new technology rapidly.
We operate in an industry with a recent history of rapid technological changes and we expect this to continue  new technologies and products will emerge and existing technologies and products will develop further.
We need continually to exploit nextgeneration technologies in order to develop our existing and future services and products.
However we cannot predict the actual impact of these future technological changes on our business or our ability to provide competitive services.
For example there is evidence of substitution by customers using mobile phones for daytoday voice calls in place of making such calls over the xed network and of calls being routed over the internet in place of the traditional switched network.
If these trends accelerate our xednetwork assets may be used uneconomically and our investment in these assets may not be recovered through prots on xednetwork calls and line rentals.
The complexity of the 21CN programme and the risk that our major suppliers fail to meet their obligations may result in delays to the delivery of the expected benets.
Impairment
Transformation strategy Our strategy for transformation includes the targeting of signicant growth in new wave business areas.
This may result in changes to our products services markets and culture.
If this transformation strategy is unsuccessful there is a risk that future revenue and protability will decline.
In particular we have targeted signicant growth in new business areas such as networked IT services broadband and mobility.
In view of the likely level of competition and uncertainties regarding the level of economic activity there can be no certainty that we will meet our growth targets in these areas with a consequential impact on future revenue and protability.
We have announced a new organisational structure to help deliver faster more resilient and more costeffective services to all our customers wherever they are.
Failure to complete this programme of organisational change may reduce our competitiveness with a consequential impact on our future revenue and protability.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 27 Report of the Directors Business Filename 5138403.3d Time 151726 Date 190507
Major contracts Our business may be adversely affected if we fail to perform on major contracts.
We have entered into a number of complex and highvalue networked IT services contracts with customers.
Our pricing cost and protability estimates for major contracts generally include anticipated longterm cost savings that we expect to achieve over the life of the contract.
These estimates are based on our best judgment of the efciencies we plan to deploy.
Any increased costs delays or failures to achieve the anticipated savings could make these contracts less protable or loss making adversely impacting our prot margins.
In some cases our products and services incorporate software or system requirements from other suppliers or service providers.
Our ability to meet our commitments in a timely manner may depend on the ability of these suppliers and service providers to meet their obligations.
Failure to manage and meet our commitments under these contracts may lead to a reduction in our future revenue protability and cash generation.
Networks and systems failures Our business depends on our ability to transfer substantial volumes of data speedily and without interruption.
Any signicant failure or interruption of such data transfer as a result of factors outside our control could have a material adverse effect on the business and our results from operations including the deployment of 21CN.
We have a business continuity strategy in place designed to deal with such catastrophic events including for example major terrorist action industrial action extreme computer virus attack hurricane or ooding.
A failure to deliver that strategy may result in a material loss and there can be no assurance that material adverse events will not occur.
Pensions
Declining investment returns and longer life expectancy may result in the cost of funding BTs dened benet pension scheme becoming a signicant burden on our nancial resources.
As a result of the triennial actuarial valuation of the BTPS at 31 December 2005 BT agreed to make annual deciency payments of 280 million over ten years.
The rst three instalments have been paid up front with 520 million paid in the 2007 nancial year and a further 320 million was paid in April 2007.
The results of future scheme valuations will be impacted by the future performance of investment markets interest and ination rates and the general trend towards longer life expectancy as well as regulatory changes all of which are outside our control.
Report of the Directors Business review 28 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138404.3d Time 151733 Date 190507
9 Business review
Financial review
49 Corporate governance
Financial review
30 Introduction to the
Financial review
31 Summarised group income statement 32 Group results 33 Line of business results for 2007 and 2006 34 BT Global Services 35 BT Retail 36 BT Wholesale 37 Openreach 38 Line of business results for 2006 and 2005 38 BT Global Services 38 BT Retail 39 BT Wholesale 40 Other operating income 40 Operating costs 40 Specic items 41 Operating prot 41 Net nance expense 42 Associates and joint ventures 42 Prot before taxation 42 Taxation 42 Earnings per share 42 Dividends 42 Share buyback 42 Business transformation 43 Financing 44 Treasury policy 44 Offbalance sheet arrangements 44 Capital resources 45 Financial risk management 45 Capital expenditure 46 Acquisitions 46 Balance sheet 46 Return on capital employed 46 Pensions 47 Geographical information 47 Critical accounting policies 47 US GAAP 47 US GAAP developments Please see Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 158.
Report of the Directors
Financial review
The nancial results for the 2007 2006 and 2005 nancial years reect the continued strong growth in new wave services as we drive value from transforming the business.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 29 Filename 5138404.3d Time 151733 Date 190507
30 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F INTRODUCTION TO THE FINANCIAL REVIEW The nancial results for the 2007 2006 and 2005 nancial years reect the continued strong growth in new wave services as we drive value from transforming the business.
Our results reect the continuing transformation of our business operations and markets in an environment where the pace of change is accelerating.
We are driving the change by providing our customers with new technology and services with greater capabilities and lower cost.
The focus on delivering the strategy continued and the groups performance beneted from the growth in new wave activities such as networked IT services and broadband and our continued cost efciency programmes.
Our
Radianz and Atlanet in the 2006 nancial year and Infonet and Albacom in the 2005 nancial year. provide our customers with the most that broadband can offer.
In this Financial review the commentary is focused principally on the trading results of BT Group before specic items a non GAAP measure.
This is consistent with the way that nancial performance is measured by management and we believe allows a meaningful comparison to be made of the trading results of the group during the period under review.
The directors believe that the presentation of the groups results in this way is relevant to an understanding of the groups nancial performance as specic items are signicant oneoff or unusual in nature and have little predictive value.
Specic items are therefore analysed and discussed separately from the line of business results in this Financial review.
The commentary in this Financial review also discusses trading results including and excluding the impact of acquisitions.
In discussing underlying performance excluding the impact of acquisitions we exclude the results of the Albacom and Infonet acquisitions made in the 2005 nancial year.
The acquisitions made in the 2007 and 2006 nancial years do not have a signicant impact on the group results for the year and hence are not excluded.
The following table shows the summarised income statement and includes a reconciliation of the key nancial performance measures before and after specic items and is discussed further in this Financial review.
The operating results by line of business are discussed in addition to the overall group results as we believe the activities and markets they serve are distinct and this analysis provides a greater degree of insight to investors.
Report of the Directors Report of the Directors Financial review Filename 5138404.3d Time 151734 Date 190507 Checksum tel BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 31 SUMMARISED GROUP INCOME STATEMENTtel Year ended 31 March m m m Revenue 20223 19514 18429 Other operating income Operating costs 17915 17246 15988 Operating prot Before specic items 2713 2633 2693 Specic items 172 138 299 2541 2495 2992 Net nance expense Finance expense before specic items 2604 2740 2773 Finance income before specic items 2371 2268 2174 Specic items 139 Share of post tax prots losses of associates and joint ventures Before specic items 15 16 14 Specic items   25 Prot on disposal of associates and joint ventures Before specic items Specic items 22 1 Prot before taxation Before specic items 2495 2177 2080 Specic items 11 137 274 2484 2040 2354
Before specic items 611 533 541 Specic items 492 525 Prot for the year Before specic items 1884 1644 1539 Specic items 968 96 290 2852 1548 1829 Attributable to Equity shareholders 2850 1547 1830 Minority interests 2 1 1 Basic earnings per share Before specic items 22.7p 19.5p 18.1p Specic items 11.7p 1.1p 3.4p Total basic earnings per share 34.4p 18.4p 21.5p Includes specific items Report of the Directors Financial Filename 5138404.3d Time 151734 Date 190507
GROUP RESULTS Whilst driving the transformation of the business the group has continued to make progress in growing earnings per share before specic items which at 22.7 pence was 16% higher than the 2006 nancial year and 25% higher than the 2005 nancial year.
Strong growth in new wave revenue continued and at 7374 million new wave revenue was 17% higher than the 2006 nancial year.
New wave revenue in the 2006 nancial year was 6282 million 38% higher than the 2005 nancial year.
Excluding the impact of the acquisitions of Albacom and Infonet in the 2005 nancial year organic growth in new wave revenue was 26% in the 2006 nancial year.
New wave revenue represented 36% of revenue in the 2007 nancial year compared to 32% and 25% in the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
New wave revenue is mainly generated from networked IT services broadband and mobility.
New wave
Revenue m year ended 31 March 2007 2006 68% 75% 64% 36% 32% 25% In the 2007 nancial year the growth in new wave revenue of 17% more than offset the 3% decline in traditional revenue to 12849 million.
The continued decline in traditional revenue reects regulatory intervention competition and also technological changes that we are using to drive customers from traditional services to new wave services such as broadband and
In the 2006 nancial year the growth in new wave revenue of 38% more than offset the 5% decline in traditional revenue.
Given the nature of our new wave activities and their relative immaturity the prot margins generated from these activities are currently lower than those from the groups mature traditional products and service offerings.
The adverse impact on the groups overall protability has been mitigated by the overall growth in revenues and our cost efciency programmes which achieved savings of over 500 million in the 2007 nancial year.
We expect to continue to pursue protable growth in new wave markets defend our traditional business and generate sustainable cost savings.
The table below analyses revenue by customer segment.
Major corporate includes the external revenue of BT Global Services major corporate customers.
Business includes the external revenue of BT Retail from small and medium sized enterprises SME customers.
Consumer includes the external revenue of BT Retail from consumer customers.
Wholesale includes the external revenue of Openreach BT Wholesale and BT Global Services global carrier business.
Revenue by customer segment Major corporate 7244 6880 5936 Business 2353 2324 2442 Consumer 5124 5296 5599 Wholesale 5485 4996 4427 Other 17 18 25 20223 19514 18429 Major corporate UK and international revenue increased by 5% to 7244 million in the 2007 nancial year driven by the growth in new wave revenue.
This reects the continued migration from traditional voice only services to networked IT services contracts and broadband.
New wave revenue increased by 9% to 4433 million and represented 61% of all major corporate revenue compared to 59% and 51% in the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
Networked IT services contract wins in the 2007 nancial year were 5.2 billion.
We believe these wins in the 2007 nancial year combined with the 5.4 billion of contracts won in the 2006 nancial year and the 7.2 billion of contracts won in the 2005 nancial year are building the foundation for future revenue growth as we increase the level of networked IT services provided to major corporate customers.
Revenue from Business smaller and medium sized enterprise customers in the 2007 nancial year increased by 1% to 2353 million which compares with a decline of 5% in the 2006 nancial year.
This improvement reects the continued focus on innovative pricing plans and propositions that are designed to deliver value to our customer base by bringing together IT broadband and communication services.
New wave revenue in this segment increased by 24% to 677 million driven mainly by the 20% growth during the year in the number of BT Business Broadband customers to 579000 at 31 March 2007.
The expansion of the BT Business Plan portfolio continued during the year with the number of locations increasing by 16% to 598000 offsetting some of the decline in traditional revenue.
Consumer revenue in the 2007 nancial year was 3% lower at 5124 million which compares with a 5% decline in the 2006 nancial year.
New wave consumer revenue increased by 34% to 858 million driven primarily by growth in broadband.
Residential broadband connections increased by 32% to 2758000 at 31 March 2007.
Traditional consumer revenue declined by 8% in the year reecting the shift towards new wave products.
After a period of sustained growth the proportion of consumer revenue under contract was 68% 2006  67% and 2005  64% as a result of the reductions in package prices made during the year.
There are now 15.1 million BT Together customers with more than 3 million customers choosing higher value packages BT Together Options 2 and 3.
The underlying 12 months rolling average revenue per customer household net of mobile termination charges of 262 in the 2007 nancial year was 4% higher than the 2006 nancial year and 3% higher than the 2005 nancial year.
Increased penetration of broadband and the growth of value added propositions have more than offset the lower call revenues.
Wholesale UK and global carrier revenue in the 2007 nancial year increased by 10% to 5485 million driven by WLR and LLU.
New wave revenue increased by 36% driven by the Report of the Directors Financial review 32 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138404.3d Time 151734 Date 190507 Checksum tel continuing growth in broadband.
Global carrier revenue decreased by 3% in the 2007 nancial year.
In the UK BT had 10.7 million wholesale broadband DSL and LLU connections including 1.9 million LLU lines at 31 March 2007 an increase of 2.6 million connections in the year.
Group operating costs before specic items increased by 4% to 17746 million in the 2007 nancial year.
Our cost efciency programmes achieved savings of over 500 million in the 2007 nancial year which enabled us to invest in growing our new wave activities and increase our prots.
Total operating costs of 17915 million including specic items increased by 4% and 12% compared to the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
Staff costs excluding leaver costs increased by 243 million to 5076 million in the 2007 nancial year due to the additional staff required to grow the networked IT services business and to service increased levels of activity in the network.
Leaver costs of 147 million in the 2007 nancial year compared to 133 million and 166 million in the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
Payments to other telecommunications operators in the 2007 nancial year were 4162 million an increase of 3% mainly reecting the impact of higher volumes.
Other operating costs before specic items in the 2007 nancial year increased by 5% to 6159 million.
This reects the cost of investing in new wave activities and supporting new networked IT services contracts.
BTs share of associates and joint ventures post tax prot before specic items was 15 million in the 2007 nancial year compared with prots of 16 million in the 2006 nancial year and losses of 14 million in the 2005 nancial year.
During the 2005 nancial year Albacom contributed post tax losses of 22 million prior to becoming a subsidiary.
Net nance expense before specic items was 233 million for the 2007 nancial year an improvement of 239 million against the 2006 nancial year following an improvement of 127 million against the 2005 nancial year.
This improvement in both years was due to a number of factors including the net nance income associated with the groups dened benet pension obligation of 420 million which was 166 million higher than the 2006 nancial year which in turn was 56 million higher than the 2005 nancial year.
The repayment of maturing debt in the 2006 nancial year has also reduced net nance expense in the 2007 nancial year.
The reduction was offset by a gain of 27 million in the 2006 nancial year on redemption of the groups US dollar convertible bond.
As well as this gain in the 2006 nancial year the improvement on the 2005 nancial year was due to the reduction in the level of net debt.
The above factors resulted in the group achieving a prot before specic items and taxation of 2495 million in the 2007 nancial year an increase of 15%.
In the 2006 nancial year the prot before specic items and taxation of 2177 million was 5% higher than the 2005 nancial year.
The improvement in the 2007 nancial year reects revenue growth cost efciency savings and lower net nance expenses.
The taxation expense on the prot before specic items for the 2007 nancial year was 611 million an effective rate of 24.5% compared to 24.5% and 26.0% in the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
The effective tax rate reects the continued focus on tax efciency within the group.
Basic earnings per share before specic items were 22.7 pence for the 2007 nancial year an increase of 16% from 19.5 pence in the 2006 nancial year which compares to 18.1 pence in the 2005 nancial year.
LINE OF BUSINESS RESULTS FOR 2007 AND 2006 The following section provides a summary of the operating results of the group for the 2007 and the 2006 nancial years in relation to each line of business.
Impact of Openreach on segmental disclosure Prior to the 2007 nancial year the group was organised into three primary segments BT Global Services BT Retail and BT
On 22 September 2005 BT entered into the Undertakings with Ofcom as a result of which BT was required to establish a new line of business and primary segment called
Openreach was launched operationally on 21 January 2006 and is separately reported within BTs results for the rst time in the 2007 nancial year.
In accordance with the timetable set out in the Undertakings the group was required to facilitate the reporting of Openreach as a separate line of business by the end of July 2006.
This was achieved and discrete nancial information has been presented to senior management on the new business structure with respect to periods from 1 April 2006 onwards.
Both IFRSs and US GAAP require segmental information to be presented on a consistent basis for all years reported.
In the event of a restructuring of business segments comparative information is therefore required to be restated unless this is impracticable.
The results for the 2006 nancial year have been restated to reect the separate reporting of Openreach as a new business segment.
These restatements also reect the impact of the new internal trading arrangements which have been implemented due to the creation of Openreach.
The results for the 2005 nancial year however have not been restated as it is impracticable to do so.
Some of the products and services that Openreach now sell were previously provided by BT Wholesale but in a different form.
As a result of the Undertakings new equivalent products which did not previously exist had to be created for both external and internal customers.
The changes required to capture the separate reporting of these new products and services were introduced during the 2006 nancial year and therefore actual data was available to support the estimates and assumptions required to restate the results for that year.
The equivalent products and services did not exist in the 2005 nancial year and therefore the level of estimation and extrapolation required to restate the results for that year would have been too signicant to provide sufciently objective and reliable information.
Furthermore the fundamental level of reorganisation and restructuring which occurred combined with the fact that the products previously sold by BT Wholesale no longer exist mean it is also impracticable to report the results for the current nancial year on the old business segment structure.
In order to assist the reader in understanding the year on year performance additional disclosures have been included below showing the previously reported segmental data for the 2006 and 2005 nancial years in respect of the groups three primary businesses prior to the creation of Openreach.
There is extensive trading between the lines of business and their protability is dependent on the transfer price levels.
For regulated products and services those transfer prices are based on market prices whilst for other products and services the transfer prices are agreed between the relevant lines of business on an arms length basis.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 33 Report of the Directors Financial Filename 5138404.3d Time 151736 Date 190507
The table below analyses the trading relationships between each of the lines of business for the 2007 nancial year.
The majority of the internal trading is Openreach selling calls access lines broadband connections and other network products to BT Wholesale BT Retail and BT Global Services.
This trading relationship also reects the pass through of termination charges on other telecommunication operators networks and the sale of wholesale broadband ISP products.
BT Retail also trades with BT Wholesale selling apparatus operator assistance and directory enquiries services and conferencing for onward sale to other telecommunication operators.
BT Global Services revenue with BT Retail mainly reects the sales of BT Global Services products in the UK.
BT Global Services trades with BT Wholesale mainly for use of the IPATM network International Direct Dial trafc and certain dial IP arrangements.
BT Wholesales revenue with BT Global Services reects the use of the UK network infrastructure for BT Global Services products.
Internal cost recorded by BT Global
BT
Retail
BT
Wholesale
Openreach
Other
Total
Internal revenue recorded by BT Global Services  639 BT Retail 156  BT Wholesale 1115 1105  1307  3527 Openreach 441 2517 1499  35 4492 Total 1712 4218 2664 1391 90 10075 The line of business results are presented and discussed before specic items for the reasons set out above to provide a meaningful comparison of the trading results between the nancial years under review.
Specic items are discussed separately in a group context in this Financial review.
In addition to measuring nancial performance of the lines of business based on the operating prot before specic items management also measure the operating nancial performance of the lines of business based upon the EBITDA before specic items.
EBITDA is dened as the group prot loss before depreciation amortisation nance expense and taxation.
This is a non GAAP measure and therefore may not be directly comparable to the EBITDA of other companies as they may dene it differently.
EBITDA excludes nance expense taxation depreciation and amortisation the latter two being non cash items from group operating prot and is a common measure particularly in the telecommunications sector used by investors and analysts in evaluating the operating nancial performance of companies.
EBITDA before specic items is considered to be a useful measure of the groups operating performance because it reects the underlying operating cash costs by eliminating depreciation and amortisation and excludes signicant one off or unusual items which have little predictive value.
EBITDA is not a direct measure of the groups liquidity which is shown by the groups cash ow statement and needs to be considered in the context of the groups nancial commitments.
A reconciliation of EBITDA before specic items to group operating prot loss by line of business and for the group is provided in the table across the page below.
Trends in EBITDA before specic items are discussed for each line of business in the following commentary.
BT Global Services 2007 2006 m m Revenue 9106 8772 EBITDA 968 926 Operating prot 293 288 Capital expenditure 695 702 Restated to reflect the creation of Openreach.
BT Global Services supplies managed services and solutions to multisite organisations worldwide  our core target market is 10000 multisite organisations including major companies with signicant global requirements together with large organisations in target local markets.
We aim to provide them with networked IT services and a complete range of managed solutions.
Our extensive global communications network and strong partnerships enable us to serve customers in the key commercial centres around the world using a combination of direct sales and services capabilities and strategic partners.
As well as local national and international communications services together with highervalue broadband and internet products and services BT Global Services also offer customers a comprehensive portfolio of networked IT services focused around messaging and conferencing customer relationship management CRM convergence outsourcing and security services.
Consultancy services are also provided to help organisations understand network performance operate their networks and applications efciently and transform their business to gain advantage in the digital networked economy.
In the 2007 nancial year BT Global Services revenue was 9106 million 4% higher than the 2006 nancial year.
Revenue arising from services provided outside the UK continued to increase during the 2007 nancial year further supporting BTs transformation into a global networked IT services company serving multisite organisations.
Report of the Directors Financial review 34 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Line of business summary Revenue Operating prot loss Specic items BT Global Services 9106 8772 293 288 BT Retail 8414 8507 674 569 BT Wholesale 7584 7343 724 759 Openreach 5177 5142 1177 1183 Intragroup 10075 10268 Group totals 20223 19514 2541 2495 172 138 A reconciliation from total operating profit to profit after tax net income is given on page 86.
Restated to reflect the creation of Openreach.
Filename 5138404.3d Time 151737 Date 190507
New wave external revenue grew in the 2007 nancial year driven primarily by networked IT services contracts which generated revenue of 4048 million in the 2007 nancial year an increase of 8%.
Networked IT services contract wins were 5.2 billion in the 2007 nancial year.
We believe that these wins coupled with the 5.4 billion contracts won in the 2006 nancial year continue to build the foundation for future revenue growth.
New wave revenue growth in BT Global Services is underpinned by the strong order intake for networked IT services contracts over recent years.
Many of these contracts are transformational for our customers and extend over a number of years often ve years or more.
Whilst we expect new wave protability will improve and the prots generated from traditional products and services declines our continued cost efciency programmes should underpin the overall growth in protability.
Traditional external revenue which includes the global carrier business as well as voice and data revenue from major corporates declined by 40 million compared to the 2006 nancial year to 3161 million.
This reects the migration to IPVPNs sold to major corporate customers in the UK and further reductions in dial IP due to broadband substitution in the UK.
However the decline in traditional revenue was partly offset by a 31% increase in Multi Protocol Label Switching MPLS revenue to 556 million.
The increase in new wave revenue together with lower network and sales general and administrative costs has resulted in an increase in EBITDA in the 2007 nancial year of 5% to 968 million.
Driving the cost reductions are initiatives such as the sourcing of roles globally and the streamlining of customer processes.
Leaver costs of 52 million were incurred in the 2007 nancial year compared with 49 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Depreciation and amortisation costs were 37 million higher compared to the 2006 nancial year reecting the increased investment in our global infrastructure and bringing NHS London assets into use.
Together these factors have contributed to an increase in operating prot of 2% to 293 million.
Capital expenditure for the 2007 nancial year was 695 million broadly at compared with the 2006 nancial year reecting the continued investment in global infrastructure to expand our global reach capabilities and support our customers.
BT Retail 2007 2006 m m Revenue 8414 8507 Gross margin 2350 2229 Sales general and administration costs 1481 1491 EBITDA 845 716 Operating prot 674 569 Capital expenditure 166 153 Restated to reflect the creation of Openreach.
BT Retails results reect the strategic shift towards growing new wave products and services while defending traditional revenue streams.
Revenue from networked IT services broadband products and other new wave services all increased whilst traditional revenue was successfully defended through changes in pricing structure introduction of packages that benet frequent and high value users and marketing campaigns aimed at delivering key customer service promises.
Following the relaxation of the regulatory environment we introduced our biggest ever cuts to all inclusive call packages.
In the consumer market the prices of BT Together Options 2 and 3 were reduced by almost one third.
As at 31 March 2007 15.1 million consumer customers were on BT Together packages.
In the SME UK business market the focus remains on placing customers on commitment packages whereby lower call prices are received for annual committed spend.
By 31 March 2007 there were 598000 Business Plan sites up 16% in the year.
Cost transformation programmes continued to successfully reduce the cost base of the traditional business allowing investment in new wave products and services.
BT Retails revenue declined by 1% in the 2007 nancial year to 8414 million an improvement on 2006.
Growth in new wave revenue of 31% in the 2007 nancial year continued to reduce our dependence on traditional revenue.
This decline was driven by substitution to new wave services and competition.
Revenue for the two years is summarised as follows 2007 2006 m m BT Retail revenue Traditional 6630 7143 Networked IT services 375 363 Broadband 946 730 Mobility and other 463 271 New wave 1784 1364 Total 8414 8507 Restated to reflect the creation of Openreach.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 35 Operating prot loss before specic items Depreciation Amortisation of intangible assets EBITDA before specic items 2007 2006 2007 2006 2007 2006 2007 2006 m m m m m m m m 29telBT Global Services 67telBT Retail 724 759 1102 1008 96 94 1922 1861 BT Wholesale 1177 1 1884 1983 Openreach 155 166 Other
2713 2633 2536 2634 384 250 5633 5517 Group totals Report of the Directors Financial Filename 5138404.3d Time 151737 Date 190507
Traditional revenue comprises calls made by customers on the BT xed line network in the UK analogue lines equipment sales rentals and other voice products.
Traditional revenue was 7% lower in the 2007 nancial year driven by high levels of migration to broadband which is reected in a 15% fall in dial up minutes over the year a reduction in the overall xed to xed calls market and general competitive pressure.
New wave revenue grew by 31% to 1784 million in the 2007 nancial year driven primarily by broadband networked IT services and other new wave services.
New wave revenue comprised 21% of BT Retails revenue in the 2007 nancial year compared to 16% in the 2006 nancial year.
Broadband revenue grew by 30% to 946 million in the 2007 nancial year.
The growth of broadband continues to accelerate with net additions of 796000 connections a 30% market share of total broadband DSL net additions.
In addition the acquisition of PlusNet in January 2007 added 195000 connections at 31 March 2007 giving BT 3659000 retail broadband connections overtaking Virgin Media to become the UKs leading broadband provider by market share.
Broadband is increasingly critical to the success of SMEs and BT Business broadband revenue continues to grow.
Revenue from networked IT services at 375 million increased by 3% in the 2007 nancial year despite the closure of our Home Computing business following the removal of the tax relief available to our customers under this Government backed initiative.
Excluding Home Computing the underlying growth in networked IT services was 15% in the 2007 nancial year.
As
SMEs become increasingly aware of the benets they can achieve by converging their voice and data into one network BT Business has responded by developing tools packages and services that offer a simple and complete solution.
The portfolio includes IP infrastructure  WANLAN and IP telephony and also Data Centre Services Security Applications and outsourcing.
We launched BT Business One Plan which combines xed mobile and broadband communications in October 2006 and over 18000 plans had been sold as at 31 March 2007.
Mobility and other new wave revenues grew to 463 million from 271 million in the 2007 nancial yearsite and advertising revenues from Payphones and Directories.
18% since acquisition despite a very competitive PC market.
We have moved from focusing on pure mobile to converged services and bundles of products.
In January 2007 we launched BT Fusion WiFi handsets and we have recently set up WiFi zones in 12 UK city centres and are already seeing a signicant increase in local authority support to expand further with mobility applications and services that will benet businesses consumers and community services.
BT Openzone our public wireless broadband service grew usage by 60% compared to the 2006 nancial year.
BT Retails future new wave growth will come predominantly from the mass market roll out of broadband converged services BT Vision and networked IT services to SME customers.
New sales are generally bundled with free or subsidised hardware and include upfront investment in marketing and customer acquisitions.
During the initial stages of rollout protability is impacted by these costs.
Within BT Retail the potential impact of growing new wave revenue on reported protability has been more than offset by the defence of more protable traditional revenues through the combination of service and value and cost management programmes.
BT Retails gross margin percentage increased by 1.7 percentage points in the 2007 nancial year reecting an increased focus on margin management.
Gross margin is revenue less costs directly attributable to the provision of the products and services reected in revenue in the period.
Selling general and administration costs are those costs that are ancillary to the business processes of providing products and services and are the general business operating costs.
BT
Retail analyses its costs in this manner for management purposes in common with other retail organisations and it has set target savings for selling general and administration expenses.
Cost transformation programmes in the 2007 nancial year generated selling general and administration cost savings of 223 million.
These savings were driven by cost reduction programmes focused on elimination of failure channel effectiveness overheads and removal of inefciencies and duplication.
The majority of these initiatives were targeted at people related costs with signicant savings in billing IT operations and other support functions.
BT Retails EBITDA increased by 18% to 845 million in the 2007 nancial year a signicant improvement compared to last year.
The benets from the investment in new products and value added services have contributed to an improved EBITDA performance in the current year.
This was also reected in the 18% improvement in operating prot to 674 million in the 2007 nancial year.
Capital expenditure for the 2007 nancial year was 8% higher at 166 million due to extra expenditure on implementation of the systems development required under the Undertakings.
BT Wholesale 2007 2006 m m Revenue 7584 7343 Gross variable prot 3736 3623 EBITDA 1922 1861 Operating prot 724 759 Capital expenditure 1017 975 Restated to reflect the creation of Openreach.
BT Wholesale is the line of business within BT that provides network services and solutions within the UK.
Its customers include communications companies xed and mobile network operators internet and other service providers interconnecting with BTs UK xed line network.
The customer base also includes BTs other lines of business BT Retail BT Global Services and Openreach.
A signicant amount of BT Wholesales revenue is internal 2007 47% 2006 47%.
In the 2007 nancial year revenue was 7584 million an increase of 3%.
External revenue increased by 4% to 4057 million in the 2007 nancial year.
The increase reects particularly strong growth in new wave revenues mainly broadband.
External revenue from traditional products remained at in the 2007 nancial year at 2960 million.
The performance in the traditional businesses was mainly driven by growth in transit revenues offset by continued migration from lower bandwidth products to less expensive alternatives such as PPCs and broadband.
Substitution to broadband has resulted in the continued declining trend in Flat Rate Internet Access Call Origination revenues which have more than halved to 9 million in the 2007 nancial year.
New wave revenue including broadband and managed services grew by 17% to 1097 million in the 2007 nancial Report of the Directors Financial review 36 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138404.3d Time 151737 Date 190507 year with broadband revenue growing by 26% year on year.
Wholesale broadband connections including LLU lines increased to 10.7 million at 31 March 2007 an increase of 2.6 million compared to the prior year.
Internal revenue increased by 3% to 3527 million in the 2007 nancial year.
The growth was driven mainly by increased broadband sales through internal channels.
This was offset by the impact of lower volumes of calls and private circuits and lower regulatory prices being reected in internal charges.
The prot margins generated by certain new wave activities are currently lower than those from the BT Wholesales traditional product and service offerings.
Any negative impact in Wholesales overall protability has been offset by the overall growth in revenues and our cost efciency programmes which achieved savings of over 80 million in the 2007 nancial year.
We expect to continue to pursue protable growth in new wave markets defend our traditional business and generate sustainable cost savings.
Gross variable prot increased by 3% to 3736 million in the 2007 nancial year reecting volume changes and changes in the mix towards more protable products.
In the 2007 nancial year network selling general and administration costs excluding leaver costs were 3% higher at 1775 million.
Leaver costs were 39 million in the 2007 nancial year compared with 31 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Activity levels in the network mainly driven by broadband and LLU volumes have increased.
In addition there has been increased 21CN related activity in the 2007 nancial year.
The nancial impact of this increased activity has been mitigated by a series of cost reduction programmes focusing on efciency discretionary cost management and process improvements.
EBITDA at 1922 million in the 2007 nancial year was 3% higher.
EBITDA margins were maintained at 25% across both nancial years.
Depreciation and amortisation increased by 9% in the 2007 nancial year to 1198 million due to the shortening of the useful economic lives of legacy transmission assets to be replaced by 21CN assets.
Operating prot at 724 million decreased by 5% in the 2007 nancial year mainly as a result of the increase in depreciation.
The operating prot margin remained at year on year at 10%.
Capital expenditure on property plant and equipment and computer software at 1017 million increased by 4% in the 2007 nancial year.
This reects increased capital expenditure to prepare for the 21CN and investment in new systems to ensure compliance with the Undertakings.
Investment in legacy network technologies continues to be lower year on year as the 21CN activity expands and legacy networks are replaced.
Openreach 2007 2006 m m Revenue 5177 5142 EBITDA 1884 1983 Operating prot 1177 1183 Capital expenditure 1108 1038 Openreach is a new line of business created within BT following Ofcoms strategic review of telecommunications.
It was launched operationally on 21 January 2006 and was separately reported within BTs results for the rst time in the 2007 nancial year.
Openreach manages the rst mile of the UK access network on behalf of the telecommunications industry.
It operates and delivers ubiquitous services on an open and evenhanded basis to any and all communications providers including to BTs own downstream divisions.
It also strives not just to provide maintain and repair the access infrastructure but to continually improve both service and reliability.
In the 2007 nancial year revenue was 5177 million an increase of 1%.
This increase is despite 170 million of regulatory price cuts on WLR and LLU made in March 2005 and August 2006.
External revenue increased by 115% to 685 million in the 2007 nancial year.
This reects the strong growth of the broadband market and active competition among communications providers.
External LLU lines were 1.9 million at 31 March 2007 an increase of 1.6 million in the year.
External
WLR lines and channels have increased by 1.4 million to 4.2 million at 31 March 2007.
Revenue from other BT lines of businesses decreased by 7% to 4492 million in the 2007 nancial year.
This reduction is mainly driven by the WLR regulatory price reductions and the shift of the WLR volumes from other BT lines of businesses to external communications providers.
In the 2007 nancial year operating costs excluding leaver costs were 4% higher at 3289 million.
Activity levels in the network driven by broadband and LLU volumes have increased in 2007 along with the investment in improving service levels.
There have also been new ongoing infrastructure costs of supporting Openreach and the Equivalent Management Platform EMP which enables Openreach to manage all communication providers orders both external and from other BT lines of business on an equivalent basis.
These increases have been partially offset by cost efciencies made within the business.
The investment in service and equivalence has resulted in the headcount increasing by around 2000 in the year to 33265.
EBITDA at 1884 million in the 2007 nancial year was 5% lower as a result of the higher operating costs.
This includes leaver costs of 4 million in the 2007 nancial year an increase of 1 million.
Depreciation and amortisation was 707 million in the 2007 nancial year 12% lower than 2006.
The decrease which is mainly driven by the extension to the asset life of copper and duct consistent with Ofcoms review partially offset increased LLU depreciation.
Operating prot at 1177 million in the 2007 nancial year was broadly at year on year with operating prot margins level at 23% for both years.
Capital expenditure on property plant and equipment and computer software was 1108 million an increase of 7% in the 2007 nancial year.
This reects signicant investment in new systems to ensure compliance with the Undertakings and increased spend to meet LLU demand.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 37 Report of the Directors Financial Filename 5138404.3d Time 151737 Date 190507
38 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F LINE OF BUSINESS RESULTS FOR 2006 AND 2005 In the following commentary we discuss the operating results of the group for the 2006 and 2005 nancial years in relation to the lines of business.
Prior to the 2007 nancial year the group was organised into three primary segments BT Global Services BT Retail and BT
In order to assist the reader in understanding the year on year performance additional disclosures have been included below showing the previously reported segmental data for the 2006 and 2005 nancial years in respect of the groups three primary businesses BT Global Services BT Retail and BT Wholesale prior to the creation of Openreach.
As noted above the 2005 results have not been restated to reect the creation of Openreach because it is impracticable to do so.
BT Global Services 2006 2005 m m Revenue 8632 7488 EBITDA 1001 961 Operating prot 363 411 Capital expenditure 702 605 In the 2006 nancial year BT Global Services revenue was 8632 million 15% higher than the 2005 nancial year.
This includes revenue of 795 million from the acquisitions of AIbacom and Infonet which strengthened our global networked IT services business.
Revenue arising from services provided outside the UK increased during the 2006 nancial year demonstrating BTs continued transformation into a global networked IT services company serving multisite organisations.
Excluding the impact of the Albacom and Infonet acquisitions BT Global Services revenue was 5% higher than the 2005 nancial year.
New wave external revenue grew in the 2006 nancial year fuelled by networked IT services contracts which generated revenue of 3732 million in the 2006 nancial year an increase of 34%.
Networked IT services contract wins were 5.4 billion in the 2006 nancial year.
We believe these wins coupled with the 7.7 billion contracts won in the 2005 nancial year are building the foundation for future revenue growth.
Included in the contract wins for the 2006 nancial year was aE450 million ve year contract with Fiat as well as a realigned and extended contract with the Department for Work and Pensions.
Traditional external revenue which includes the global carrier business as well as voice and data revenue from major corporates declined by 44 million compared to the 2005 nancial year to 3184 million.
This reects the migration to IPVPNS sold to major corporate customers in the UK and further reductions in dial IP due to broadband substitution.
However the decline in traditional revenue was partly offset by a 34% increase in Multi Protocol Label Switching MPLS revenue which exceeded 400 million.
The increase in new wave revenue together with lower network and sales general and administrative costs coupled with the positive impact of the acquisitions has resulted in an increase in EBITDA in the 2006 nancial year of 4% to 1001 million.
The 2006 nancial year includes leaver costs of 49 million compared to 59 million in the 2005 nancial year.
Depreciation and amortisation costs were 88 million higher compared to the 2005 nancial year.
This reects the acquisitions and increased investment in our global infrastructure.
These factors have contributed to a decrease in operating prot of 12% to 363 million.
Capital expenditure for the 2006 nancial year was 702 million an increase of 16% from the 2005 nancial year mainly due to the investment in acquisitions and our global infrastructure.
BT Retail 2006 Revenue 8452 8698 Gross margin 2354 2354 Sales general and administration costs 1563 1600 EBITDA 791 754 Operating prot 644 607 Capital expenditure 153 170 BT Retails results demonstrated a continued strategic shift towards new wave products with growth in broadband networked IT services and mobility revenues.
Despite the substitution by new wave products traditional revenue was defended by changes in pricing structure and packages to benet frequent users and marketing campaigns focusing on key customer service promises.
BT Privacy a service to address the problem of unwanted calls by giving customers greater control over the calls they receive was launched on 1 July 2005 with 3.7 million customers registered by 31 March 2006.
As at 31 March 2006 16.2 million customers were on BT Together packages.
In the SME UK business market the focus remains on placing customers on commitment packages whereby lower call prices are received for annual committed spend.
By 31 March 2006 there were 513000 Business Plan sites up 15% in the year.
Cost transformation programmes continued to successfully reduce the cost base of the traditional business allowing investment in new wave products and services.
BT Retails revenue decreased by 3% in the 2006 nancial year to 8452 million.
The growth in new wave revenue of 38% in the 2006 nancial year continued to reduce our dependence on traditional revenue the decline in which was driven by the impact of regulation and competition.
After adjusting for the regulatory impact of the reduction in mobile termination rates revenue declined by 2% in the 2006 nancial year.
Revenue for the two years is summarised as follows 2006 2005 m m BT Retail revenue Traditional 7088 7712 Networked IT services 363 304 Broadband 730 502 Mobility and other 271 180 New wave 1364 986 Total 8452 8698 Traditional revenue comprises calls made by customers on the BT xed line network in the UK analogue lines equipment sales rentals and other voice products.
Overall revenue was 8% lower in the 2006 nancial year.
The reduction includes the effect of continued high levels of migration to broadband which is reected in a 46% fall in dial up minutes over the year a reduction of 10% in ISDN lines and general competitive pressure.
The decline in private circuits and ISDN reects customers migrating to new wave products and services including broadband and IPVPN.
New wave revenue grew by 38% to 1364 million in the 2006 nancial year driven primarily by broadband mobility and networked IT services.
New wave revenue comprised 16% of Report of the Directors Financial review Filename 5138404.3d Time 151737 Date 190507 Checksum tel BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 39 BT Retails revenue in the 2006 nancial year compared to 11% in the 2005 nancial year.
Broadband revenue grew by 45% to 730 million in the 2006 nancial year.
The growth of broadband continues to accelerate with 2584000 BT Retail connections at 31 March 2006 an increase of 47% over last year.
BT Retail had net additions of 832000 broadband customers in the year a 31% market share of the broadband DSL net additions.
Broadband is increasingly critical to the success of SMEs and BT Business Broadband revenue continues to grow.
Revenue from mobility and other new wave services increased by 49% to 268 million in the 2006 nancial year.
During the year we launched BT Fusion the worlds rst seamless combined xed and mobile communications services on a single handset.
The consumer launch was in June 2005 and the business market launch was in February 2006.
Networked IT services revenue increased by 19% to 363 million in the 2006 nancial year.
SMEs have become increasingly interested in the benets they can achieve by converging their voice and data into one network and BT Business networked IT services are integrating and simplifying the way customers are unifying their organisations voice and data services.
The portfolio includes IP infrastructure  WANLAN and IP telephony and also Data Centre Services Security Applications and outsourcing.
BT Retails gross margin percentage increased by 0.8 percentage points in the 2006 nancial year reecting improved margin management and greater efciency in managing the service provider network.
Gross margin is revenue less costs directly attributable to the provision of the products and services reected in revenue in the period.
Selling general and administration costs are those costs that are ancillary to the business processes of providing products and services and are the general business operating costs.
Cost transformation programmes in the 2006 nancial year generated selling general and administration cost savings of 206 million.
These savings were driven by cost reduction programmes focused on elimination of failure channel effectiveness overheads and removal of inefciencies and duplication.
The majority of these initiatives were targeted at people related costs with signicant savings in billing IT operations and other support functions.
BT Retails EBITDA increased by 5% to 791 million in the 2006 nancial year.
This is a signicant improvement compared to last year which experienced EBITDA decline.
The benets from the investment in new products and value added services have contributed to an improved EBITDA performance in the current year.
This was also reected in the 6% improvement in operating prot to 644 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Capital expenditure for the 2006 nancial year was 153 million a decrease of 10% resulting from tight controls over expenditure.
BT Wholesale 2006 2005 m m Revenue 9232 9095 Gross variable prot 7031 6933 EBITDA 3894 3864 Operating prot 1992 1950 Capital expenditure 2013 1981 In the 2006 nancial year revenue totalled 9232 million an increase of 2%.
External revenue increased by 11% to 4226 million in the 2006 nancial year an increase of 15% excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates.
The increase reects particularly strong growth in new wave revenues mainly broadband.
The regulatory price reductions on mobile termination rates have no impact on protability.
External revenue from traditional products increased by 1% in the 2006 nancial year.
Excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates external traditional revenue was up 6% in the 2006 nancial year.
The increase in traditional revenue was mainly driven by growth in Partial Private Circuits PPCs and Wholesale Access.
Customers continued to migrate from lower bandwidth products to less expensive alternatives such as PPCs and broadband and this is reected in revenue from PPCs which increased by 18% to 225 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Substitution to broadband has resulted in the continued declining trend in Flat Rate Internet Access Call Origination revenues which have more than halved to 26 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Wholesale access revenues have increased by 142 million in the 2006 nancial year as a result of increased volumes from other service providers.
New wave revenue including broadband and managed services grew by 56% to 1033 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Broadband revenues grew by 74% year on year.
Wholesale broadband connections including LLU lines increased to 7.9 million at 31 March 2006 an increase of 2.9 million compared to prior year.
Internal revenue decreased by 5% to 5006 million in the 2006 nancial year.
The reduction reects both the impact of lower volumes of calls lines and private circuits and lower regulatory prices being reected in internal charges.
Gross variable prot increased by 1% to 7031 million for the 2006 nancial year reecting volume changes and changes in the mix towards more protable products.
In the 2006 nancial year network and selling general and administration costs excluding leaver costs were 3% higher at 3103 million.
Leaver costs were 34 million in the 2006 nancial year and 62 million in the 2005 nancial year.
Activity levels in the network driven by broadband and LLU volumes have increased in the 2006 nancial year.
The nancial impact of this increased activity has been mitigated by a series of cost reduction programmes focusing on efciency discretionary cost management and process improvements.
EBITDA at 3894 million in the 2006 nancial year was 1% higher.
EBITDA margins were maintained at 42% across both nancial years.
Depreciation and amortisation were at in the 2006 nancial year at 1902 million.
Operating prot at 1992 million increased by 2% in the 2006 nancial year.
The operating prot margin increased to 22% compared to 21% in the 2005 nancial year.
Capital expenditure on property plant and equipment and computer software at 2013 million increased by 2% in the 2006 nancial year.
This reects increased capital expenditure to prepare for the 21st Century Network and to invest in new systems to ensure compliance with the Undertakings agreed with
Investment in legacy network technologies continues to be lower than last year.
Report of the Directors Financial Filename 5138404.3d Time 151738 Date 190507 Checksum tel 40 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F OTHER OPERATING INCOME Other operating income increased by 6 million to 233 million in the 2007 nancial year and decreased by 324 million to 227 million in the 2006 nancial year due to the one off impact of the 358 million prot on disposal of non current asset investments in the 2005 nancial year.
OPERATING COSTS Total operating costs before specic items increased by 4% in the 2007 nancial year to 17746 million which is in line with the 4% increase in revenue.
Our cost efciency programmes achieved savings of over 500 million in the 2007 nancial year which enabled us to invest in further growth of our new wave activities.
As a percentage of revenue operating costs excluding specic items were 88% in the 2007 nancial year 2006 88% 2005 86%.
In all three nancial years net specic item operating costs were incurred amounting to 169 million 138 million and 59 million in the 2007 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
These specic costs are considered separately in the discussion which follows.
Operating costs Staff costs 5223 4966 4554 Own work capitalised 718 674 620 Depreciation 2536 2634 2694 Amortisation 384 250 150 Payments to telecommunications operators 4162 4045 3725 Other operating costs 6159 5887 5426 Total operating costs before specic items 17746 17108 15929 Specic items 169 138 59 Total operating costs 17915 17246 15988 In the 2007 nancial year the number of staff employed increased by 1800 to 106200 compared with increases of 2300 and 2200 in the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
The increases have been mainly due to the additional staff required to service networked IT contracts increased levels of network activity and in the 2007 nancial year the investment in service and meeting the Undertakings.
Early leaver costs of 147 million were incurred in the 2007 nancial year compared with 133 million and 166 million in the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
This reects the groups continued focus on improving operational efciencies.
The groups pension expense for 2007 was 643 million an increase of 40 million from the 2006 nancial year compared to an increase of 63 million from the 2005 nancial year.
The increase in headcount pay rates and pension costs have contributed to a 5% increase in staff costs which were 5223 million in the 2007 nancial year following a 9% increase to 4966 million in the 2006 nancial year.
The increase in pension costs in the 2007 nancial year included the adverse impact of using longer life expectancy assumptions.
The increase in pension costs in the 2006 nancial year included a switch between wages and salaries and pension costs as a result of the introduction of Smart Pensions a salary sacrice scheme.
The depreciation and amortisation charge increased by 1% in both the 2007 and 2006 nancial years to 2920 million.
Payments to other telecommunications operators increased by 3% in the 2007 nancial year to 4162 million due to increased volumes after increasing by 9% in the 2006 nancial year.
Other operating costs before specic items increased by 5% in the 2007 nancial year to 6159 million after increasing by 8% in the 2006 nancial year.
This reects not only the cost of supporting new networked IT services contracts but also increased levels of activity in the network and investment in service levels.
Other operating costs include the maintenance and support of our networks accommodation sales and marketing costs research and development and general overheads.
SPECIFIC ITEMS Specic items for the 2007 2006 and 2005 nancial years are shown in the table below.
Operating costs Property rationalisation costs 64 68 59 Write off of circuit inventory and other working capital balances 65 Creation of Openreach 30 70 Costs associated with settlement of open tax years 10 Other operating income Net loss on sale of group undertakings 5 Prot on sale of non current asset investments 2  358 Finance income Interest on settlement of open tax years 139 Associates and joint ventures Prot on sale of joint venture  1 Prot on sale of associate 22 Impairment of assets in joint ventures  25 Net specic items loss prot before tax 11 137 274 Tax credit in respect of settlement of open tax years 938 Tax credit on specic items 41 41 16 Net specic items loss prot after In the 2007 nancial year specic operating costs included 64 million of property rationalisation charges in relation to the groups provincial property portfolio.
A further 30 million was recognised for the incremental costs associated with the creation of Openreach and complying with the Undertakings agreed with
A charge of 65 million was recognised as a result of a review of circuit inventory and other working capital balances.
During the year the group agreed the settlement of substantially all open UK tax matters relating to ten tax years up to and including 200405 with HM Revenue and Customs.
The total impact of this settlement was a net credit of 1067 million comprising a tax credit of 938 million representing those Report of the Directors Financial review Filename 5138404.3d Time 151738 Date 190507 Checksum tel elements of the tax charges previously recognised which were in excess of the nal agreed liability interest income of 139 million and operating costs of 10 million representing the costs associated with reaching this agreement.
The group also disposed of 6% of its equity interest in its associate Tech Mahindra Limited resulting in a prot on disposal of 22 million in addition the group disposed of a number of non core businesses in the 2007 nancial year resulting in a total loss on disposal of 5 million.
This principally comprised a loss on disposal of 7 million relating to the sale of satellite broadcast assets.
In the 2006 nancial year specic operating costs included 68 million of property rationalisation charges in relation to the groups provincial property portfolio.
In addition a provision of 70 million was recognised relating to the incremental and directly attributable costs to create Openreach arising from the Undertakings agreed with Ofcom.
In the 2005 nancial year the prot on disposal of non current asset investments included within other operating income totalled 358 million.
This mainly comprised the sale of BTs 15.8% interest in Eutelsat SA for net proceeds of 356 million resulting in a prot on disposal of 236 million the sale of BTs 4% interest in Intelsat for net proceeds of 64 million which resulted in a prot on disposal of 46 million and the sale of BTs 11.9% interest in StarHub Pte Ltd for net proceeds of 77 million resulting in a prot on disposal of 38 million.
In addition BT incurred an impairment charge of 25 million being BTs share of a write down of Albacoms assets prior to becoming a subsidiary.
OPERATING PROFIT In the 2007 nancial year operating prot before specic items of 2713 million was 3% higher than the 2006 nancial year.
The increase in the 2007 nancial year reects the revenue growth of 4% offset by increased operating costs described above.
Operating prot of 2633 million in the 2006 nancial year was 2% lower than the 2005 nancial year due to the higher operating costs.
Total operating prot after specic items for the 2007 nancial year was 2541 million compared to 2495 million in the 2006 nancial year and 2992 million in the 2005 nancial year.
NET FINANCE EXPENSE Interest on borrowings 728 916 1053 Loss arising on derivatives not in a designated hedge relationship 4 8 Interest on pension scheme liabilities 1872 1816 1720 Total nance expense 2604 2740 2773 Income from listed investments 7 44 47 Other interest and similar income 72 154 209 Expected return on pension scheme assets 2292 2070 1918 Total nance income 2371 2268 2174 Analysed as Net nance expense before specic items and pensions 653 726 797 Interest associated with pensions 420 254 198 Net nance expense before specic Specic items 139 Net nance expense 94 472 599 In the 2007 nancial year the net nance expense before specic items of 233 million was 239 million lower than the 2006 nancial year which in turn was 127 million lower than in the 2005 nancial year.
The net nance income associated with the groups dened benet pension obligation of 420 million was 166 million higher than the 2006 nancial year which in turn was 56 million higher than the 2005 nancial year as a result of the increase in the value of the scheme assets over the period.
The interest on pension scheme liabilities and expected return on pension scheme assets for the 2007 nancial year reects the IAS 19 assumptions and valuation as at 31 March 2006.
Interest on borrowings of 728 million in the 2007 nancial year was 188 million lower than the 2006 nancial year which in turn was 137 million lower than the 2005 nancial year.
Both reductions mainly reect the reduction in gross debt through the repayment of bonds on maturity in particular the 2005 dollar bond and 2006 euro bond.
Interest income arising from listed investments and other interest and similar income of 79 million in the 2007 nancial year was 119 million lower than the 2006 nancial year which in turn was 58 million lower than the 2005 nancial year.
The reduction in interest income mainly reects the lower level of investment holdings following their utilisation to fund bond maturities.
In the 2006 nancial year the reduction in nance income was offset by a gain of 27 million on the redemption of groups US dollar convertible 2008 bond.
Interest cover before specic items in the 2007 nancial year excluding the net nance income associated with the groups dened benet pension obligation and specic items represented 4.2 times total operating prot before specic items which compares with interest cover of 3.6 times in the 2006 nancial year and 3.4 in the 2005 nancial year.
The improvement in cover was due to the improvement in operating prot and reduction in net nance expense before pensions and specic items.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 41 Report of the Directors Financial Filename 5138404.3d Time 151739 Date 190507
ASSOCIATES AND JOINT VENTURES The results of associates and joint ventures before specic items are shown below Share of post tax prot loss of associates and joint ventures 15 16 14 The groups share of post tax prots losses from associates and joint ventures before specic items was a prot of 15 million in the 2007 nancial year.
This compares with a prot of 16 million in the 2006 nancial year and a loss of 14 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The principal contributor to prot before taxation in the 2007 nancial year was the groups associate Tech Mahindra which contributed 21 million 2006 13 million 2005 6 million.
In the 2006 and 2005 nancial years the joint venture LG Telecom in Korea also contributed a prot of 7 million and 6 million respectively.
In the 2005 nancial year Albacom in Italy contributed a loss of 22 million prior to becoming a subsidiary.
PROFIT BEFORE TAXATION The groups prot before taxation for the 2007 nancial year was 2484 million compared with prots of 2040 million and 2354 million in the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
The groups prot before taxation before specic items for the 2007 nancial year was 2495 million compared with 2177 million in the 2006 nancial year and 2080 million in the 2005 nancial year.
Operating prot was maintained in line with the increase in revenue with the improvement in prot before taxation mainly due to lower net nance charges.
TAXATION
The tax benet for the 2007 nancial year was a net credit of 368 million and comprised a charge of 611 million on the prot before taxation and specic items offset by a tax credit of 41 million on certain specic items and a further specic items tax credit of 938 million arising from the settlement of substantially all open UK tax matters relating to ten tax years up to and including the 200405 tax year.
The tax charge on the prot before taxation and specic items was at an effective rate of 24.5% compared with 24.5% and 26.0% in the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively and reects the continued focus on tax efciency in the group.
The tax charge for the 2006 nancial year was 492 million and comprised a charge of 533 million on the prot before taxation and specic items offset by a tax credit of 41 million on certain specic items.
The tax charge for the 2005 nancial year was 525 million and comprised a 541 million charge on the prot before taxation and specic items offset by a tax credit of 16 million on certain specic items.
EARNINGS PER SHARE The basic earnings per share of 34.4 pence per share for the 2007 nancial year compared with 18.4 pence per share for the 2006 nancial year and 21.5 pence for the 2005 nancial year.
The following table illustrates the impact of specic items on the basic earnings per share.
Basic earnings per share before specic items of 22.7 pence for the 2007 nancial year compare with 19.5 pence and 18.1 pence for the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
Basic earnings per share before specic items 22.7 19.5 18.1 Specic items 11.7 1.1 3.4 Total basic earnings per share 34.4 18.4 21.5 Diluted earnings per share were not materially different in either year from basic earnings per share.
DIVIDENDS
The Board recommends a nal dividend of 10.0 pence per share 2006 7.6 pence per share 2005 6.5 pence per share to shareholders amounting to 825 million 2006 631 million 2005 551 million.
This will be paid subject to shareholder approval on 17 September 2007 to shareholders on the register on 24 August 2007.
When combined with the 2007 interim dividend of 5.1 pence per share the total dividend proposed for the 2007 nancial year is 15.1 pence per share totalling 1247 million 2006 993 million 2005 883 million.
This compares to 11.9 pence in the 2006 nancial year and 10.4 pence in the 2005 nancial year an increase of 27% and 14% respectively.
This represents a two thirds payout ratio which has been achieved a year earlier than previously announced.
Dividends paid in the 2007 nancial year were 1053 million 2006 912 million 2005 786 million and have been presented as a deduction in shareholders equity.
SHARE BUY BACK During the 2007 nancial year the share buy back programme continued with the group repurchasing 148 million shares for consideration of 401 million.
During 2006 and 2005 the group repurchased 166 million and 101 million shares for consideration of 360 million and 195 million respectively.
Taking into account the groups net debt level and the strong cash ow generation we have decided to introduce a new 2.5 billion share buy back programme whilst increasing dividends and continuing to invest in the growth of the business.
The buy back programme is expected to be completed by 31 March 2009.
BT seeks to maintain a solid investment grade credit rating whilst continuing to invest for the future and with an efcient balance sheet further enhance shareholder value.
BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION In April 2007 we announced a new structure that will deliver faster more resilient and cost effective services to customers wherever they are.
With effect from 1 July 2007 BT Design will be responsible for the design and development of the platforms systems and processes which will support our services BT Operate will be responsible for their deployment and operation.
Around 20000 employees  from design operations IT and networks  will move into these new units.
We estimate that the reorganisation and transformation activities will result in restructuring costs of around 450 million which is expected to generate a payback within two to three years.
These activities will include developing new processes and systems reskilling and leaver costs which will be accommodated within existing policies and by voluntary means.
We expect the majority of these costs to be incurred in the 2008 nancial year and to be classied as a specic item in our 2008 results.
Report of the Directors Financial review 42 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138404.3d Time 151740 Date 190507
FINANCING
Summarised cash ow statement 2007 Cash generated from operations 5245 5777 5906 Income taxes paid 35 390 332 Net cash inow from operating activities 5210 5387 5574 Net purchase of property plant equipment and software 3209 2874 2945 Net acquisition of subsidiaries associates joint ventures and group undertakings 237 167 418 Net sale of current and non current asset investments 258 3220 1247 Dividends received from associates and joint ventures 6 12 Interest received 147 185 374 Net cash used received in investing activities 3035 365 1740 Net repayment of borrowings 765 2946 1292 Equity dividends paid 1057 907 784 Repurchase of shares 279 339 193 Interest paid 797 1086 1260 Net cash used in nancing activities 2898 5278 3529 Effect of exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents 37 Net decrease increase in cash and cash equivalents 760 474 305 Increase decrease in net debt resulting from cash ows 219 199 887 The cash inow from operations of 5245 million in the 2007 nancial year compares with 5777 million in the 2006 nancial year and 5906 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The reduction of 532 million in the 2007 nancial year compared to the 2006 nancial year is mainly due to the pension deciency payment of 520 million in the 2007 nancial year 2006 54 million 2005 nil.
The reduction in the 2006 nancial year when compared to the 2005 nancial year was primarily as a result of lower working capital inows of 120 million compared with 253 million in the 2005 nancial year.
Net tax paid in the 2007 nancial year was 35 million compared with 390 million in the 2006 nancial year and 332 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The reduction in net tax payments in the 2007 nancial year when compared to the 2006 nancial year mainly reects the initial net cash receipt of 376 million in relation to the settlement with HM Revenue and Customs discussed in the specic items section of this Financial review.
The increase in tax payments in the 2006 nancial year when compared with the 2005 nancial year was primarily as a result of normalisation of tax payments following low tax payments in the 2005 nancial year.
Net cash outow from investing activities of 3035 million in the 2007 nancial year compared with a net cash inow of 365 million in the 2006 nancial year and net cash outow of 1740 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The 2006 nancial year includes a net cash inow of 3220 million on the sale of investments which was used to partly fund the repayment of maturing debt in the 2006 nancial year compared to a net cash inow of 258 million from the sale of investments in the 2007 nancial year.
Net cash outow for the purchase of property plant and equipment and computer software was 3209 million in the 2007 nancial year compared to 2874 million in the 2006 nancial year and 2945 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The increase in the 2007 nancial year reects the preparations for 21CN and the systems developments required by the Undertakings agreed with Ofcom.
The net cash outow for acquisitions in the 2007 nancial year totalled 237 million and mainly related to the acquisition of INS PlusNetsite and Counterpane.
In the 2006 nancial year the net cash outow for acquisitions was 167 million and mainly related to the acquisitions of Radianz and Atlanet.
In the 2005 nancial year the net cash outow for acquisitions of 418 million mainly related to the acquisitions of Infonet and
Interest received was 147 million in the 2007 nancial year compared to 185 million in the 2006 nancial year and 374 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The interest receipts in the 2007 nancial year include an initial cash settlement of 74 million from HM Revenue and Customs discussed in the specic items section of this Financial review.
Excluding this receipt interest received was 112 million lower than the 2006 nancial year reecting the lower level of investments held by the group.
The 2005 nancial year included receipts of 153 million on restructuring the groups swap portfolio.
Net cash outow from nancing activities of 2898 million in the 2007 nancial year compares with 5278 million in the 2006 nancial year and 3529 million in the 2005 nancial year.
In the 2007 nancial year the full and part maturity of notes and leases resulted in a cash outow of 1085 million mainly offset by the net issue of commercial paper of 309 million.
Included in the 2006 nancial year net cash outow is a repayment of 4432 million for maturing debt.
In addition the group raised new sterling oating rate borrowing of 1000 million and issued commercial paper raising net proceeds of 464 million.
Equity dividends paid in the 2007 nancial year were 1057 million compared with 907 million and 784 million in the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
Interest paid in the 2007 nancial year was 797 million compared to 1086 million and 1260 million in the 2006 and 2005 years respectively.
The reduction in the 2007 nancial year mainly reects the impact of debt maturities noted above.
The reduction between the 2005 and 2006 nancial years reects payments of 139 million made in the 2005 nancial year associated with restructuring the groups swap portfolio.
During the 2007 nancial year the share buyback programme continued with the group repurchasing 148 million shares for consideration of 401 million and issued 67 million shares for a consideration of 123 million.
During the 2006 and 2005 nancial years the group repurchased 166 million and 101 million shares for a consideration of 360 million and 195 million respectively.
At 31 March 2007 net debt was 7914 million compared with 7534 million at 31 March 2006 and 7893 million at 31 March 2005.
Net debt consists of loans and other borrowings current and non current less current asset investments and cash and cash equivalents.
Loans and other borrowings are measured at the net proceeds raised adjusted to amortise any discount over the term of the debt.
For the purpose of this analysis current asset investments and cash and cash equivalents are measured at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 43 Report of the Directors Financial Filename 5138404.3d Time 151741 Date 190507 Checksum tel Currency denominated balances within net debt are translated to sterling at swapped rates where hedged.
This denition of net debt measures balances at the expected value of future cash ows due to arise on maturity of nancial instruments and removes the balance sheet adjustments made from the remeasurement of hedged risks under fair value hedges and the use of the amortised cost method as required by IAS 39.
In addition the gross balances are adjusted to take account of netting arrangements.
Net debt is a non GAAP measure since it is not dened in
The most directly comparable IFRS measure is the aggregate of loans and other borrowings current and non current current asset investments and cash and cash equivalents which is reconciled to net debt in note 10 to the consolidated nancial statements.
In 2001 BTs net debt reached 27.9 billion and as part of the groups transformation strategy the group went through a major restructuring to reduce the level of net debt and improve the groups nancial strength.
Therefore management believe it is both useful and necessary to continue to disclose net debt as it is a key measure against which the groups performance against its strategy is measured.
Management believe it is a measure of net indebtedness that provides an indicator of our overall balance sheet strength and also facilitates an evaluation of the groups cash position and indebtedness in a single performance measure.
There are material limitations in the use of non GAAP measures and the use of the term net debt does not necessarily mean that the cash included in the net debt calculation is available to settle the liabilities included in this measure.
The groups denition of net debt may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Free cash ow Reconciliation of free cash ow Net cash inow from operating activities 5210 5387 5574 Net purchase of property plant equipment and software 3209 2874 2945 Net purchase sale of non current asset investments 3 1 537 Dividends from associates and joint ventures 6 12 Interest received 147 185 374 Interest paid 797 1086 1260 Free cash ow 1354 1612 2282 The components of free cash ow which is a non GAAP measure are presented in the table above and reconciled to net cash inow from operating activities the most directly comparable IFRS measure.
Management believe it is both useful and necessary to disclose free cash ow as it is one of the groups key performance indicators with which the groups performance against the groups strategy is measured.
Whilst free cash ow is primarily a liquidity measure management also believe that it is an important indicator of overall operational performance of the group as it reects the cash generated from operations after reecting capital expenditure and nancing costs which are both signicant ongoing cash outows associated with investing in infrastructure and nancing operations.
In addition free cash ow excludes cash ows that are determined at a corporate level independently of ongoing trading operations such as dividends share buy backs acquisitions and disposals and repayment of debt.
There are material limitations in the use of non GAAP measures and managements use of the term free cash ow does not mean that this is a measure of the funds that are available for distribution to shareholders.
The groups denition of free cash ow may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Free cash ow was 1354 million in the 2007 nancial year compared to 1612 million in the 2006 nancial year and 2282 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The reduction in free cash ow in the 2007 nancial year compared to the 2006 nancial year was mainly due to the pension deciency payment of 520 million and an increase in net expenditure of property plant equipment and software of 335 million offset by lower income taxes paid following the initial cash receipt in relation to the settlement of 376 million from HM Revenue and Customs and lower net interest paid of 251 million.
The reduction in free cash ow in 2006 compared to the 2005 nancial year was mainly due to the impact of proceeds of 537 million from the disposal of noncurrent asset investments in the 2005 nancial year mainly in respect of the disposal of interests in Eutelsat Starhub and Intelsat.
Other factors contributing to the decrease were lower working capital inows and higher normalised tax payments following low tax payments in the 2005 nancial year.
This was partly offset by lower cash payments on purchase of property plant and equipment and software in the 2006 nancial year although capital additions and accruals were higher at the end of the 2006 nancial year.
TREASURY POLICY The group has a centralised treasury operation whose primary role is to manage liquidity funding investment and the groups nancial risk including risk from volatility in currency and interest rates and counterparty credit risk.
The treasury operation is not a prot centre and the objective is to manage risk at optimum cost.
The Board sets the policy for the centralised treasury operation and its activities are subject to a set of controls commensurate with the magnitude of the borrowings and investments under its management.
Counterparty credit risk is closely monitored and managed within controls set by the
The group does not hold or issue derivative nancial instruments for trading purposes.
All transactions in nancial instruments are undertaken to manage the risks arising from underlying business activities.
We have set out further details on this topic in note 33 to the consolidated nancial statements.
OFFBALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS As disclosed in the nancial statements there are no offbalance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on the groups nancial condition changes in nancial condition revenues or expenses results of operations liquidity capital expenditure or capital resources with the exception of the following Operating leases note 27 Capital commitments and guarantees note 27 CAPITAL RESOURCES During the period under review the group has increased its level of net debt to 7.9 billion at 31 March 2007 compared with 7.5 billion at 31 March 2006 and 7.9 billion at 31 March 2005 based on BTs denition of net debt as set out in note Report of the Directors Financial review 44 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138404.3d Time 151743 Date 190507
The directors have a reasonable expectation that the group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and therefore they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the nancial statements.
There has been no signicant change in the nancial or trading position of the group since 31 March 2007.
The following table sets out the groups contractual obligations and commitments as they fall due for payment as at 31 March 2007.
Payments due by period Contractual obligations and commitments
Less than 1 year years years
Loans and other borrowings 8022 1900 637 2239 3246 Finance lease obligations Operating lease obligations 955tel7367 Pension deciency obligations 228tel1120 Capital commitments Total 21205 3618 1950 3680 11957 At 31 March 2007 the group had cash cash equivalents and current asset investments of 1078 million.
At that date 2071 million of debt fell due for repayment in the 2008 nancial year.
The group had unused shortterm bank facilities amounting to approximately 3535 million at 31 March 2007.
These resources will allow the group to settle its obligations as they fall due.
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
Most of the groups current revenue is invoiced in pounds sterling and most of its operations and costs arise within the
The groups foreign currency borrowings which totalled 5.3 billion at 31 March 2007 are used to nance its operations.
These borrowings have been predominantly swapped into sterling.
Cross currency swaps and forward currency contracts have been entered into to reduce the foreign currency exposure on the groups operations and the groups net assets.
The group also enters into forward currency contracts to hedge foreign currency investments interest expense capital purchases and purchase and sale commitments on a selective basis.
The commitments hedged are principally US dollar and euro denominated.
As a result of these policies the groups exposure to foreign currency arises mainly on the residual currency exposure on its nonUK investments in its subsidiaries and on any imbalances between the value of outgoing and incoming international calls.
A 10% strengthening in sterling against major currencies would cause the groups net assets at 31 March 2007 to fall by less than 220 million with an insignicant effect on the groups prots.
This compares to a fall of less than 150 million for the year ended 31 March 2006.
The majority of the groups longterm borrowings have been and are subject to sterling xed interest rates after applying the impact of hedging instruments.
The group has entered into interest rate swap agreements with commercial banks and other institutions to vary the amounts and period for which interest rates are xed.
The group had outstanding interest rate swap agreements with notional principal amounts totalling 5.1 billion at 31 March 2007 and 31 March 2006 and 5.3 billion at 31 March 2005.
The longterm debt instruments which BT issued in December 2000 and February 2001 both contained covenants providing that if the BT group credit rating were downgraded below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of Standard and Poors SandP additional interest would accrue from the next interest coupon period at the rate of 0.25 percentage points for each ratings category adjustment by each ratings agency.
In July 2006 SandP downgraded BTs credit rating to BBB plus which will increase BTs annual nance expense by approximately 11 million in the 2008 nancial year.
Moodys currently apply a credit rating of Baa1 on BT following a downgrade in May 2001.
Based upon the total amount of debt of 4.4 billion outstanding on these instruments at 31 March 2007 BTs annual nance expense would increase by approximately 22 million if BTs credit rating were to be downgraded by one credit rating category by both agencies below a longterm debt rating of Baa1BBB plus.
If BTs credit rating with each of Moodys and SandP were to be upgraded by one credit rating category the annual nance expense would be reduced by approximately 22 million.
Based upon the composition of net debt at 31 March 2007 a one percentage point increase in interest rates would increase the groups annual net nance expense by around 11 million which compares to 10 million for the 2006 and 2005 nancial years.
The group considers that it is not exposed to major concentrations of credit risk.
The group however is exposed to creditrelated losses in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to nancial instruments but does not expect any counterparties to fail to meet their obligations.
The group limits the amount of credit exposure to any one counterparty.
Where multiple transactions are undertaken with a single counterparty or group of related counterparties the group may enter into a netting arrangement to reduce the groups exposure to credit risk.
Currently the group makes use of standard International Swaps and Derivative Association ISDA documentation.
In addition where the group has a legal right of set off and the ability and intention to settle net the relevant asset and liabilities are netted within the balance sheet.
The group seeks collateral or other security where it is considered necessary.
The group ensures its liquidity is maintained by entering into long and short term nancial instruments to support operational and other funding requirements.
The groups liquidity and funding management process includes projecting cash ows and considering the level of liquid assets in relation thereto monitoring balance sheet liquidity and maintaining a diverse range of funding sources and backup facilities.
Liquid assets surplus to immediate operating requirements of the group are generally invested and managed by the centralised treasury function.
Requirements of group companies for operating nance are met whenever possible from central resources.
The group manages liquidity risk by maintaining adequate committed borrowing facilities.
Renancing risk is managed by limiting the amount of borrowing that matures within any specic period.
The group has limited exposure to equity securities price risk on investments held by the group.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE Capital expenditure on property plant and equipment and computer software excluding the movement on capital accruals totalled 3247 million in the 2007 nancial year compared with 3142 million and 3011 million in the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
Capital expenditure is expected to remain at around 3.2 billion in the 2008 nancial year as the group continues to invest in its 21st century network 21CN programme.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 45 Report of the Directors Financial Filename 5138404.3d Time 151743 Date 190507
Of the capital expenditure 296 million was in Europe outside of the UK the Americas and Asia Pacic in the 2007 nancial year compared to 270 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Contracts placed for ongoing capital expenditure totalled 779 million at 31 March 2007.
21CN is being developed using stringent capital return criteria and a rigorous approach to any investment in the narrowband network.
21CN aims to deliver long term structural cost reduction as we progressively migrate onto a simpler lower cost network architecture.
BT expects that future capital expenditure will be funded from net cash inows from operating activities and if required by external nancing.
ACQUISITIONS
The total amount invested in acquisitions in the 2007 nancial year net of cash acquired was 268 million relating primarily to the acquisitions of INS and PlusNet.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions made in the year was 282 million.
The acquisition of INS completed in February 2007 for a total consideration of 133 million.
Net of deferred consideration and cash acquired the net cash outow was 129 million.
The provisional fair value of INSs net assets at the date of acquisition was 12 million giving rise to goodwill of 121 million.
The acquisition of PlusNet completed in January 2007 for a total consideration of 66 million.
Net of consideration outstanding at 31 March 2007 and cash acquired the net cash outow was 59 million.
The provisional fair value of PlusNets net assets at the date of acquisition was 9 million giving rise to goodwill of 57 million. ite Counterpane LLC and I3IT Limited.
The total consideration in respect of these acquisitions was 144 million and goodwill of 104 million has been recognised.
The total amount invested in the 2006 nancial year was 165 million mainly due to the acquisitions of Radianz and Atlanet which was 286 million lower than the 453 million invested in the 2005 nancial year which was mainly due to the acquisitions of Infonet and Albacom.
BALANCE SHEET Net assets at 31 March 2007 amounted to 4272 million compared to 1607 million at 31 March 2006 with the increase of 2665 million mainly due to the retained prots for the year of 2850 million and actuarial gains of 985 million net of deferred tax offset by dividends paid of 1053 million losses on cash ow hedges of 201 million and the net purchase of treasury shares of 284 million.
BTs non current assets totalled 18340 million at 31 March 2007 of which 14997 million were property plant and equipment principally forming the UK xed network.
At
31 March 2006 non current assets were 18283 million and property plant and equipment were 15222 million.
BT Group plc the parent company whose nancial statements are prepared in accordance with UK GAAP had prot and loss reserves of 9713 million at 31 March 2007 compared with 9499 million at 31 March 2006.
RETURN ON CAPITAL EMPLOYED The return before specic items on the average capital employed was 17.6% for the 2007 nancial year.
In the 2006 and 2005 nancial years the group made a return before specic items of 18.1% and 18.2% respectively.
PENSIONS
The groups total pension operating charges for the 2007 2006 and 2005 nancial years were 643 million 603 million and 540 million respectively.
This includes 594 million 552 million and 507 million respectively in relation to the BTPS the groups main dened benet scheme.
The increase in the pension charge in the 2007 nancial year includes the effect of increased life expectancy assumptions and pay ination.
The increase in the pension charge in the 2006 nancial year partly reects the introduction of Smart Pensions a salary sacrice scheme part way through the 2005 nancial year as a result of which there is a switch between wages and salaries and pension charges as well as increases in pensionable pay.
Detailed pensions disclosures are provided in note 29 to the consolidated nancial statements.
At 31 March 2007 the IAS 19 accounting decit was 0.3 billion net of tax being a 1.5 billion reduction from 1.8 billion at 31 March 2006.
The reduction reects the increase in value of equity investments during the year and the increase in the AA bond rates used to discount the future liabilities.
The number of retired members and other current beneciaries in the BTPS pension fund has been increasing in recent years.
Consequently BTs future pension costs and contributions will depend on the investment returns of the pension fund and life expectancy of members and could uctuate in the medium term.
The BTPS was closed to new entrants on 31 March 2001 and we launched a new dened contribution pension scheme for people joining BT after that date which is to provide benets based on the employees and the employing companys contributions.
This change is in line with the practice increasingly adopted by major UK groups and is designed to be more exible for employees and enable the group to determine its pension costs more precisely than is the case for dened benet schemes.
The most recently completed triennial actuarial valuation of the BTPS performed by the BTPS independent actuary for the trustees of the scheme was carried out as at 31 December 2005.
This valuation showed the fund to be in decit to an amount of 3.4 billion.
Assets of the fund of 34.4 billion at that date covered 90.9 % of the funds liabilities.
The previous valuation was carried out as at 31 December 2002 which showed the fund was in decit by 2.1 billion.
The funding valuation uses conservative assumptions whereas had the valuation been based on the actuarys view of the median estimate basis the funding valuation would have shown a surplus.
The market value of the equity investments had increased and the investment income and contributions received by the scheme exceeded the benets paid in the three years ended 31 December 2005.
However longer life expectancy assumptions and a lower discount rate used to calculate the present value of the liabilities meant the decit had not improved by the same amount.
As a result of the triennial valuation the group agreed to increase the contribution rate to 19.5% of pensionable pay of which 6% is payable by employees from 1 January 2007.
In addition the group will make deciency payments equivalent to 280 million per annum for ten years.
The rst three instalments were paid upfront with 520 million paid in the 2007 nancial year and a further 320 million paid in April 2007.
This compares to the previous contribution rate of 18.2% of which 6% was payable by employees and annual deciency payments of 232 million that were agreed as a result of the 2002 funding valuation.
Report of the Directors Financial review 46 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138404.3d Time 151743 Date 190507
GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION In the 2007 nancial year approximately 85% of the groups revenue was generated by operations in the UK compared with 87% in the 2006 nancial year and 92% in the 2005 nancial year.
The groups operating prots have been derived from its UK operations with losses being incurred outside the UK in the each of the last three nancial years.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES The groups principal accounting policies are set out on pages 78 to 85 of the consolidated nancial statements and conform with IFRS.
These policies and applicable estimation techniques have been reviewed by the directors who have conrmed them to be appropriate for the preparation of the 2007 nancial statements.
We in common with virtually all other companies need to use estimates in the preparation of our nancial statements.
The most sensitive estimates affecting our nancial statements are in the areas of assessing the level of interconnect income with and payments to other telecommunications operators providing for doubtful debts establishing asset lives of property plant and equipment for depreciation purposes assessing the stage of completion and likely outcome under long term contracts making appropriate longterm assumptions in calculating pension liabilities and costs making appropriate mediumterm assumptions on asset impairment reviews and calculating current and deferred tax liabilities.
Details of critical accounting estimates and key judgements are provided in the accounting policies on page 84 to 85.
US GAAP The groups net income and earnings per share for the three nancial years ended 31 March 2007 and shareholders equity at 31 March 2007 and 2006 under US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles US GAAP are shown in the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in note 35.
Differences between IFRS and US GAAP include the treatment of leasing transactions pension costs redundancy costs deferred taxation capitalisation of interest and nancial instruments.
US GAAP DEVELOPMENTS In February 2006 the FASB issued SFAS No 155 Accounting for Certain Hybrid Instruments  an amendment to FASB statements No 133 and 140  FAS 155  that amends SFAS No 133 Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishments of Liabilities  FAS 133 .
This statement resolves issues addressed in FAS 133 Implementation Issue No.
D1 Application of Statement 133 to Benecial Interests in Securitised Financial Assets.
The statement permits fair value remeasurement for any hybrid nancial instrument that contains an embedded derivative that otherwise would require bifurcation.
Additionally it claries which interestonly strips and principalonly strips are not subject to the requirements of FAS FAS 155 also establishes a requirement to evaluate interests in securitised nancial assets to identify interests that are freestanding derivatives or that are hybrid nancial instruments that contain an embedded derivative requiring bifurcation.
It claries that concentrations of credit risk in the form of subordination are not embedded derivatives.
Also FAS 155 amends FAS 140 to eliminate the prohibition on a qualifying special purpose entity from holding a derivative nancial instrument that pertains to a benecial interest other than another derivative nancial instrument.
FAS 155 is effective for BT for all nancial instruments acquired or issued after 31 March 2007.
The group does not expect this to have a material impact on the consolidated nancial statements.
In March 2006 the FASB issued SFAS No 156 Accounting for Servicing of Financial Assets an amendment of FASB No 140 FAS 156  that amends SFAS No 140 Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishment of Liabilities  FAS 140  with respect to the accounting for separately recognised servicing assets and servicing liabilities.
FAS 156 is effective for BT from 1 April 2007.
The group does not anticipate that the adoption of this new statement at the required effective date will have a material impact on the consolidated nancial statements.
In September 2006 the FASB issued SFAS No 157 Fair Value Measurements  FAS 157 .
FAS 157 denes fair value establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles and expands disclosures about fair value measurements.
The provisions of this standard apply to other accounting pronouncements that require or permit fair value measurements.
FAS 157 applies for the groups nancial year beginning 1 April 2008.
The group is currently evaluating the impact if any that the adoption of FAS 157 will have on the consolidated nancial statements.
In February 2007 the FASB issued SFAS No 159 The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities FAS 159 .
FAS 159 permits entities to choose to measure on an item by item basis specied nancial instruments and certain other items at fair value.
Unrealised gains and losses on items for which the fair value option has been elected are required to be reported in earnings at each reporting date.
FAS 159 is effective for the 2009 nancial year the provisions of which are required to be applied prospectively.
The group is currently evaluating the impact if any that the adoption of FAS 159 will have on the consolidated nancial statements.
In July 2006 the FASB issued Interpretation No 48 Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes  An Interpretation of FASB Statement No 109  FIN 48 .
FIN 48 requires tax benets from uncertain positions to be recognised only if it is more likely than not  that the position is sustainable based on its technical merits.
The interpretation also requires qualitative and quantitative disclosures including discussion of reasonably possible changes that might occur in unrecognised tax benets over the next 12 months a description of open tax years by major jurisdiction and a rollforward of all unrecognised tax benets.
FIN 48 applies to the groups 2008 nancial.
The group is currently in the process of evaluating the impact if any that the adoption of FIN 48 will have on the consolidated nancial statements.
In September 2006 the FASB ratied Emerging Issues Task Force No 0601 Accounting for Consideration Given by a Service Provider to Manufactures or Resellers of Equipment Necessary for an EndCustomer to Receive Service from the Service Provider  EITF 0601 .
This guidance requires the application of EITF 0109 Accounting for Consideration Given by a Vendor to a Service providers end customer  EITF 01 09  when consideration is given to a reseller or manufacturer for benet to the service providers end customer.
EITF 0109 requires the consideration given to be recorded as a liability at the time of the sale of the equipment and also provides guidance for the classication of the expense.
EITF 0601 is effective for the groups 2008 nancial year.
The group is currently in the process of quantifying the impact if any that the adoption of EITF 0109 will have on the consolidated nancial statements.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 47 Report of the Directors Financial Filename 5138405.3d Time 151750 Date 190507
9 Business review 30 Financial review Corporate governance Corporate governance 49 Board of Directors and Operating Committee 52 Board composition and role 52 BTs nonexecutive directors 52 Principal Board committees 53 New York Stock Exchange 54 Report of the Audit Committee 54 Introduction 54 Committee role 54 Committee activities 55 Report of the Nominating Committee 55 Introduction 55 Committee role and activities 55 Chairman succession 55 Board evaluation 56 Report on directors remuneration 56 Remuneration policy not audited 63 Remuneration review audited 69 Directors information 69 Election and reelection 69 Meetings attendance 69 Service agreements 69 Training and information 69 Independent advice 69 Directors and ofcers liability insurance and indemnity 69 Interest of management in certain transactions 70 Business policies 70 Responsible business 70 Political donations 70 Pension funds 70 Payment of suppliers 70 Financial statements 70 Financial instruments 71 Internal control and risk management 71 US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 71 Disclosure controls and procedures 71 Internal control over nancial reporting 72 Shareholders and Annual General Meeting 72 Relations with shareholders 72 Substantial shareholdings 72 AGM resolutions 72 Authority to purchase shares Report of the Directors Corporate governance We are committed to operating in accordance with best practice in business integrity maintaining the highest standards of financial reporting corporate governance and ethics.
The directors consider that BT has throughout the year complied with the provisions set out in Section 1 of the 2003 Combined Code on Corporate Governance.
48 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138405.3d Time 151751 Date 190507
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 49 BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND OPERATING COMMITTEE Board of Directors Sir Christopher Bland
Sir Christopher Bland was appointed to the Board as Chairman on 1 May 2001.
He chairs the Nominating and Community Support committees.
He was chairman of the BBC Board of Governors from 1 April 1996 until 30 September 2001.
From 1972 to 1979 Sir Christopher was deputy chairman of the Independent Broadcasting Authority and chairman of its Complaints Review
In 1982 he became a nonexecutive director of LWT Holdings and was chairman from 1983 to 1994 when LWT was acquired by Granada Group.
From December 1994 to May 2000 he was chairman of NFC.
From 1977 to 1985 he was chairman of Sir Joseph Causton and Sons.
Sir Christopher who was chairman of the Hammersmith and Queen Charlottes Hospitals Special Health Authority from 1982 to 1994 and of Hammersmith Hospitals NHS Trust from 1994 to February 1997 was knighted for his work in the NHS in 1993.
He was chairman of the Private Finance Panel from 1995 to 1996 and a member of the Prime Ministers Advisory Panel on the Citizens Charter.
He is a senior advisor at Warburg Pincus and chairman of the Royal Shakespeare Company.
Aged 68.
Executive directors Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002 and became Chief Executive on 1 February 2002.
He chairs the Operating Committee.
Ben was formerly vice chairman of the management board of Lucent Technologies in the USA from October 1999.
He joined Lucent in September 1997 as executive vice president international and became chief operating ofcer the following month.
Prior to joining Lucent Ben worked for KPN in the Netherlands for nine years as president and managing director of its telecoms subsidiary PTT Telecom.
From 1975 to 1988 he worked for ITT in Europe.
He was created an Ofcer of the Order of OrangeNassau in April 2006 and appointed a Chevalier de la Le gion dHonneur in June 2006.
He is a nonexecutive director of UPS a US corporation.
A Dutch national he is aged 55.
Franc ois Barrault Chief Executive BT Global Services Franc ois Barrault was appointed to the Board and became Chief Executive BT Global Services on 24 April 2007.
He joined BT in April 2004 as President BT International BT Global Services.
Franc ois was formerly president Lucent Technologies and previously held other roles within Lucent including president and CEO Mobility International and president and CEO Europe Middle East and Africa EMEA.
Before this Franc ois worked for Ascend Communications where he held the position of senior vice president EMEA and International until its acquisition by Lucent.
He previously held executive positions with IBM Computervision Prime and Stratus.
He is a nonexecutive director of eServGlobal an Australian corporation.
A French national he is aged 46.
Andy Green Chief Executive Group Strategy and Operations Andy Green was appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
He was appointed Chief Executive Group Strategy and Operations on 24 April 2007.
Since joining BT in 1986 he has held a number of positions including Chief Executive of Global Services Chief Executive of BT Openworld and Group Director of Strategy and Development.
Andy was a member of the former Executive Committee from February 1995.
He is a board member of eskills UK and ABESU a charity with the objective of making poverty history and a nonexecutive director of NAVTEQ Corporation a US corporation.
Aged 51.
Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director af Hanif Lalani was appointed to the Board on 7 February 2005 as Group Finance Director.
He was formerly Chief Financial Ofcer for BT Wholesale.
Since joining BT in 1983 he has held a number of positions including Chief Executive of BT Northern Ireland and Managing Director BT Regions.
Hanif was also chairman of OCEAN Communications BTs subsidiary in the Republic of Ireland.
He was awarded the OBE in January 2003 for services to business in Northern Ireland.
He is a Chartered Management Accountant.
Aged 45.
Report of the Directors Corporate governance Report of the Directors Governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151756 Date 190507 Checksum tel Ian Livingston Chief Executive BT Retail Ian Livingston was appointed as Chief Executive of BT Retail on 7 February 2005.
He was formerly Group Finance Director from April 2002.
Prior to joining BT he was group nance director of Dixons Group from 1997.
He joined Dixons in 1991 after working for 3i Group and Bank of America International.
His experience at Dixons spanned a number of operational and nancial roles both in the UK and overseas.
He was also a nonexecutive director of Ladbrokes formerly Hilton Group and a director of Freeserve from its inception.
He is a Chartered
Aged 42.
Dr Paul Reynolds Chief Executive BT Wholesale Paul Reynolds was appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
In April 2000 he was appointed as Chief Executive of BT
He joined BT in 1983 and has held a number of roles including Director of the Ofce of the Chairman Director of Multimedia and from 1999 Managing Director of Networks and Information Services.
He is a nonexecutive director of EAccess a Japanese corporation.
Aged 50.
NonExecutive directors Maarten van den Bergh Deputy Chairman bcdf Maarten van den Bergh was appointed to the Board on 1 September 2000.
He was appointed Deputy Chairman on 1 October 2006.
He chairs the Remuneration Committee and the Pension Scheme Performance Review Group.
He is the senior independent director.
He is chairman of Akzo Nobel Supervisory Board and a nonexecutive director of British Airways and Royal Dutch Shell and former chairman of Lloyds TSB Group.
Prior to his retirement in July 2000 Maarten was president of the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company and vice chairman of its committee of managing directors from July 1998 having been appointed a managing director of the Royal Dutch Shell Group of companies in July 1992.
A Dutch national he is aged 65.
Matti Alahuhta Matti Alahuhta was appointed to the Board on 1 February 2006.
He has been president of Kone Corporation since 2005 president and CEO since 2006 and a director since 2003.
He was formerly at Nokia Corporation for more than 20 years where his most recent roles were executive vice president and chief strategy ofcer president mobile phones and president telecommunications.
Matti is foundation board chairman of the International Institute for Management Development IMD and chairman of Technology Industries of Finland Centennial Foundation.
A Finnish national he is aged 54.
Clayton Brendish be Clay Brendish was appointed to the Board on 1 September 2002.
He is nonexecutive chairman of Anite Close Beacon Investment Fund and Echo Research Limited and a nonexecutive director of Herald Investment Trust.
He is also a trustee of Economist Newspapers and the Foundation for Liver
Prior to his retirement in May 2001 Clay was executive deputy chairman of CMG having joined the board when it acquired Admiral.
Clay was cofounder and executive chairman of Admiral incorporated in 1979.
He also acted as an adviser to the Government on the efciency of the Civil Service.
Aged 60.
Phil Hodkinson bde Phil Hodkinson was appointed to the Board on 1 February 2006.
He was appointed chairman of the Audit Committee on 1 October 2006.
He is group nance director of HBOS.
A Fellow of the Institute of Actuaries he was formerly chairman of Insight Investment Clerical Medical Investment Group and Halifax Financial Services and previously chief executive of Zurich Life and Eagle Star Life.
Phil is a nonexecutive director of Business in the Community and chairman of the HBOS Foundation.
Aged 49.
Report of the Directors Corporate governance 50 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138405.3d Time 151801 Date 190507 Checksum tel The Rt Hon Baroness Jay of Paddington PC ce Baroness Margaret Jay was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
She was formerly Lord Privy Seal Leader of the House of Lords and Minister for Women.
Previously she was Minister of State at the Department of Health.
Baroness Jay has held nonexecutive positions with Scottish Power Carlton Television and LBC.
She has been a member of the Central Research and Development Committee for the NHS was a founding director of the National AIDS Trust and a governor of South Bank University.
She is currently chairman of the Overseas Development Institute and a nonexecutive director of Independent News and Media and a member of its International Advisory Board.
Aged 67.
Deborah Lathen Deborah Lathen was appointed to the Board on 1 February 2007.
She is a US attorney and has been president of Lathen Consulting which provides strategic legal and management advice on policy and regulatory matters to senior executives of major US companies since 2001.
From 1998 to 2001 she worked at the Federal Communications Commission FCC as chief of the Cable Services Bureau where she was responsible for policy and regulation covering the cable satellite TV and broadcast industries.
Prior to joining the FCC she held roles as Director of National Consumer Affairs and Managing Counsel at Nissan Motor Corporation USA and legal positions at TRW Financial Systems and the Quaker Oats Company.
A US national she is aged 54.
John Nelson bdf John Nelson was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
Chartered Accountant he retired as chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston Europe CSFB on 31 January 2002.
He was a member of the executive board and chairman of the European executive committee of CSFB.
Prior to joining CSFB in January 1999 John spent 13 years with Lazard Brothers.
He was appointed vice chairman of Lazard Brothers in 1990.
He was also chairman of Lazard S. and a managing director of Lazard Freres New York.
He was a nonexecutive director of Woolwich until it was taken over by Barclays Bank in 2000.
He is chairman of Hammerson deputy chairman of Kingsher a member of the Board of English National Opera and a senior advisor to Charterhouse Capital Partners.
Aged 59.
Carl G Symon bcg Carl Symon was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002 and was appointed chairman of the Equality of Access Board when it became operational on 1 November 2005.
He retired from IBM in May 2001 after a 32year career during which he held senior executive positions in the USA Canada Latin America Asia and Europe including chairman and chief executive ofcer of IBM UK.
Carl is chairman of HMV Group and Clearswift Systems and a nonexecutive director of RollsRoyce and Rexam and an advisory board member of Cross Atlantic Capital Partners.
A US national he is aged 61.
Operating Committee Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Franc ois Barrault Chief Executive BT Global Services Andy Green Chief Executive Group Strategy and Operations Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director Ian Livingston Chief Executive BT Retail Dr Paul Reynolds Chief Executive BT Wholesale Larry Stone Larry Stone formerly Corporate Governance Director from 1 June 2000 was appointed Company Secretary on 27 March 2002.
He previously held external relations and regulatory roles with BT in Tokyo and Brussels and with BT Cellnet now 02.
He is a trustee of the BT Pension Scheme and a member of the Primary Markets Group of the London Stock Exchange and of the UK Social Investment Forums Sustainable Pensions Advisory Board.
He is Honorary Colonel of 81 Signal Squadron Volunteers.
Aged 49.
Key to membership of Board committees
Audit
Remuneration
Nominating
Community Support Pension Scheme Performance Review Group Equality of Access Board All the nonexecutive directors are considered independent of the management of the company.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 51 Report of the Directors Governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151807 Date 190507 Checksum tel BOARD COMPOSITION AND ROLE The names and biographical details of the directors are given on pages 49 to 51 in Board of Directors and Operating
All served throughout the nancial year with the exception of Deborah Lathen who was appointed to the Board on 1 February 2007 and Franc ois Barrault who was appointed to the Board on 24 April 2007.
Sir Anthony Greener served as a director until 30 September 2006.
The Board which operates as a single team is currently made up of the parttime Chairman the Chief Executive ve other executive directors and eight nonexecutive directors.
All of the nonexecutive directors during the 2007 nancial year met and continue to meet the criteria for independence set out in the Combined Code and are therefore considered by the Board to be independent.
In line with BTs policy the Board comprised a majority of independent nonexecutive directors throughout the 2007 nancial year.
The Boards principal focus is the overall strategic direction development and control of the group.
In support of this the Board approves the groups values business practice policies strategic plans annual budget capital expenditure and investments budgets larger capital expenditure proposals and the groups overall system of internal controls governance and compliance authorities.
It also has oversight and control of the groups operating and nancial performance and reviews the risk register.
These responsibilities are set out in a formal statement of the Boards role which is available on the companys website.
The Board has agreed the groups corporate governance framework including empowering the companys key management committee the Operating Committee to make decisions on operational and other matters.
The roles and powers of this committee are set out below.
A statement of their powers and the authorities delegated to individual members of the Operating Committee is available on the groups intranet site.
Historically the Board met every month except in August.
The standard Board cycle changed in the 2006 nancial year to nine meetings each year.
The Board met eleven times during the 2007 nancial year including two ad hoc meetings to consider timecritical matters.
The roles of the Chairman and the Chief Executive are separate.
They are set out in written job descriptions approved by the Nominating Committee.
In addition to chairing the Board the Chairman is responsible for consulting the nonexecutive directors particularly the Deputy Chairman on corporate governance issues matters considered by the Nominating Committee which the Chairman chairs and the individual performance of the nonexecutive directors.
The Chairman and the nonexecutive directors hold regular dinners at which they discuss matters without the executive directors being present.
With the Chief Executive and the Secretary the Chairman ensures the Board is kept properly informed is consulted on all issues reserved to it and that its decisions are made in a timely and considered way that enables the directors to full their duciary duties.
The Chairman ensures that the views of the shareholders are known to the Board and considered appropriately.
He represents the company in specied strategic and Government relationships as agreed with the Chief Executive and generally acts as the bridge between the Board and the companys executive team particularly on the groups broad strategic direction.
The Chairmans other current signicant commitments are shown in Board of Directors and Operating Committee above.
The Chief Executive has nal executive responsibility reporting to the Board for the success of the group.
The Secretary manages the provision of timely accurate and considered information to the Board for its meetings and in consultation with the Chairman and Chief Executive at other appropriate times.
He recommends to the Chairman and the Chief Executive for Board consideration where appropriate the companys corporate governance policies and practices and is responsible for their communication and implementation.
He advises the Board on appropriate procedures for the management of its meetings and duties and the meetings of the companys principal committees as well as the implementation of corporate governance and compliance within the group.
The appointment and removal of the Secretary is a matter for the whole Board.
BTs nonexecutive directors The Nominating Committee has agreed and periodically reviews the combination of experience skills and other attributes which the nonexecutive directors as a whole should bring to the
This prole is used by the Committee when the appointment of a nonexecutive director is being considered to assess the suitability of candidates put forward by the directors and outside consultants.
Shortlisted candidates meet the Committee which then recommends to the Board candidates for appointment.
The nonexecutive directors provide a strong independent element on the Board.
Between them they bring experience and independent judgment gained at the most senior levels of international business operations and strategy nance marketing technology communications and political and international affairs.
Maarten van den Bergh the Deputy Chairman is the senior independent director.
In this capacity and his capacity as the chairman of the Remuneration Committee he meets with BTs major institutional shareholders.
He is available to discuss matters with institutional shareholders where it would be inappropriate for those discussions to take place with either the Chairman or the Chief Executive.
Nonexecutive directors are appointed initially for three years subject to three months termination notice from either BT or the director.
At the end of the rst three years the appointment may be continued by mutual agreement.
Each nonexecutive director is provided upon appointment with a letter setting out the terms of his or her appointment including membership of Board committees the fees to be paid and the time commitment expected from the director.
The letter also covers such matters as the condentiality of information and the companys share dealing code.
Principal Board committees The Operating Committee the companys key management committee meets weekly and is chaired by the Chief Executive.
The other members are the Group Finance Director and the Chief Executives of BT Retail BT Wholesale BT Global Services and Group Strategy and Operations.
The Secretary attends all meetings and the Group HR Director normally attends meetings.
The Committee has collective responsibility for running the groups business endtoend.
To do that it develops the groups strategy and budget for Board approval recommends to the Board the groups capital expenditure and investments budgets monitors the nancial operational and customer quality of service performance of the whole group reviews the groups risk register allocates resources across the group within plans agreed by the Board plans and delivers major crossbusiness programmes and reviews the senior talent base and succession plans of the group.
Within the groups corporate governance Report of the Directors Corporate governance 52 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138405.3d Time 151808 Date 190507 assets the making of investments by the group and divestments.
It is authorised to delegate these approvals up to its own limits to senior executives.
To meet best corporate governance practice the Audit Committee the Remuneration Committee and the Nominating Committee have long been an established part of BTs system of governance.
Each committee has written terms of reference which are available on the companys website.
The Report of the Audit Committee the Report of the Nominating Committee and the Report on directors remuneration are on pages 54 to The Equality of Access Board EAB was established on 1 November 2005 as part of the Undertakings given by BT to Ofcom following Ofcoms Strategic Review of Telecommunications to monitor report and advise BT on BTs compliance with these Undertakings.
The EAB is a committee of the BT Group plc Board which formally approved the formation of the EAB and its terms of reference.
As required by the Undertakings the EAB comprises ve members Carl Symon a BT Group plc nonexecutive director and chairman of the EAB a BT senior executive Sally Davis Chief Portfolio Ofcer and three independent members Sir Bryan Carsberg Stephen Pettit and Dr Peter Radley.
The EAB reports regularly to the Board.
Its
The Board also has a Community Support Committee and a Pension Scheme Performance Review Group.
New York Stock Exchange The company as a foreign issuer with American Depositary Shares listed on the New York Stock Exchange NYSE is obliged to disclose any signicant ways in which its corporate governance practices differ from the corporate governance listing standards of the NYSE.
The company has reviewed the NYSEs new listing standards and believes that its corporate governance practices are consistent with them with the following exception where the company does not meet the strict requirements set out in the standards.
The standards state that companies must have a nominatingcorporate governance committee composed entirely of independent directors and with written terms of reference which in addition to identifying individuals qualied to become board members develops and recommends to the Board a set of corporate governance principles applicable to the company.
BT has a Nominating Committee chaired by the Chairman Sir Christopher Bland.
It does not develop corporate governance principles for the Boards approval.
The Board approves the groups overall system of internal controls governance and compliance authorities.
The Board and the Nominating Committee are made up of a majority of independent non executive directors.
The SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC and NYSE introduced rules on 31 July 2005 requiring the company to comply with certain provisions relating to the Audit Committee.
These include the independence of Audit Committee members and procedures for the treatment of complaints regarding accounting or auditing matters.
The company is fully compliant with these requirements.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 53 Report of the Directors Governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151808 Date 190507 Checksum tel REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE
The Audit Committee is chaired by Phil Hodkinson.
The other members are Maarten van den Bergh Clay Brendish John Nelson and Carl Symon.
They are all independent nonexecutive directors.
They were members of the Committee throughout the 2007 nancial year.
Sir Anthony Greener stepped down as chairman and a member of the Committee on 30 September 2006 when he retired from the Board and Phil Hodkinson was appointed chairman of the Committee on 1 October 2006.
The
Board considers that the Committees members have broad commercial knowledge and extensive business leadership experience having held various roles in accountancy nancial management and supervision treasury and corporate nance and that there is a broad and suitable mix of business nancial and IT experience on the Committee.
The Board has reviewed membership of the Committee and is satised that several of the Committees members have the recent and relevant nancial experience required for the provisions of the Combined Code.
It is the opinion of the Board that the Audit Committee includes a member in the person of Phil Hodkinson who is an audit committee nancial expert for the purposes of the US SarbanesOxley Act.
Committee role The Committee recommends the appointment and reappointment of the companys external auditors and considers their resignation or dismissal recommending to the Board appropriate action to appoint new auditors.
It ensures that key partners are rotated at appropriate intervals.
It discusses with the auditors the scope of their audits before they commence reviews the results and considers the formal reports of the auditors and reports the results of those reviews to the Board.
It reviews the auditors performance including the scope of the audit and recommends to the Board appropriate remuneration.
As a result of regulatory or similar requirements it may be necessary to employ the companys external auditors for certain nonaudit work.
In order to safeguard the independence and objectivity of the external auditors the Board has determined policies as to what nonaudit services can be provided by the companys external auditors and the approval processes related to them.
Under those policies work of a consultancy nature will not be offered to the external auditors unless there are clear efciencies and value added benets to the company.
The overall policies and the processes to implement them were reviewed and appropriately modied in the light of the provisions of the SarbanesOxley Act relating to nonaudit services that external auditors may not perform.
The Audit Committee monitors the extent of nonaudit work being performed by the companys auditors and approves any substantive work before it is undertaken.
It also monitors the level of nonaudit fees paid to the external auditors.
The Audit Committee reviews the companys published nancial results the Annual Report and Form 20F and other published information for statutory and regulatory compliance.
It reports its views to the Board to assist it in its approval of the results announcements and the Annual Report and Form 20F.
The Committee also reviews the disclosure made by the Chief Executive and Group Finance Director during the certication process for the annual report about the design and operation of internal controls or material weaknesses in the controls including any fraud involving management or other employees who have a signicant role in the companys nancial controls.
The Board as required by UK law takes responsibility for all disclosures in the annual report.
Committee activities During the year the Audit Committee monitored and reviewed the standards of risk management and internal control including the processes and procedures for ensuring that material business risks including risks relating to IT security fraud and related matters are properly identied and managed the effectiveness of internal control nancial reporting accounting policies and procedures and the companys statements on internal controls before they were agreed by the Board for the annual report.
It also reviewed the companys internal audit function and its relationship with the external auditors including internal audits plans and performance.
It reviewed the arrangements for dealing in condence with complaints from employees and others about accounting or nancial management impropriety fraud poor business practices and other matters ensuring that arrangements are in place for the proportionate and independent investigation and appropriate follow up action.
At each of its meetings it reviewed with the group chief internal auditor and appropriate executives the implementation and effectiveness of key operational and functional change and remedial programmes including major contracts and IT programmes.
The Committee also set aside time at every meeting to seek the views of the companys internal and external auditors in the absence of executives.
In addition to carrying out those regular tasks described above under the Committees terms of reference which are posted on the companys website at sitemittees the Committee also carried out its annual consideration of the groups risk register process and reviewed the companys system of internal control its accounting systems IT security and fraud and related matters.
Additionally the Committee has reviewed at each of its meetings during the 2007 nancial year the steps being taken within the group with regard to the application of the SarbanesOxley Act dealing with internal control over nancial reporting.
It also specically evaluated its performance and processes by again inviting Committee members and several executives and the external auditors to complete questionnaires.
This process formed part of the annual Board and Committee evaluation.
Committee members and those others consulted regard the Committee as effective on both behaviours and processes.
There is a similar view too of the external audit process which is regarded as effective.
The Committee also reviewed the experience skills and succession planning within the Groups nance function.
The Group Finance Director the Secretary the groups chief internal auditor and the companys external auditors attend the Committees meetings.
The Committee met four times during the 2007 nancial year.
The papers and minutes of Audit Committee meetings are sent to directors who are not members of the
Report of the Directors Corporate governance 54 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138405.3d Time 151808 Date 190507 Checksum tel REPORT OF THE NOMINATING COMMITTEE
The Nominating Committee is chaired by the Chairman.
The other members are the Deputy Chairman Phil Hodkinson and John Nelson.
Sir Anthony Greener stepped down as a member of the Committee on 30 September 2006 when he retired from the Board and was succeeded on 1 October 2006 by Phil Hodkinson.
Three of its four members are independent nonexecutive directors.
The Secretary and where appropriate at the invitation of the Chairman the Chief Executive attend the Committees meetings.
Committee role and activities The Nominating Committee ensures an appropriate balance of experience and abilities on the Board using this evaluation to review the size and composition of the Board and to recommend any proposed changes to the Board.
It keeps under review the need for appointments to the Board prepares a description of the specic experience and skills needed for an appointment considers candidates who are put forward by the directors and external consultants and recommends to the Board the appointments of all directors after having met shortlisted candidates.
It also reviews the time required from the Deputy Chairman and other nonexecutive directors to carry out their duties and advises the Board on succession planning for the positions of the Chairman Deputy Chairman Chief Executive and all other Board appointments.
The Committee met eight times during the 2007 nancial year.
It reviewed Board succession the size prole and composition of the Board and the Board and Board committee evaluation questionnaire and process.
Under the leadership of the Deputy Chairman the Committee identied candidates for the position of Chairman and recommended to the Board the appointment of Sir Mike Rake.
The candidates on the short list drawn up by the Committees appointed search consultants MWM were considered and interviewed by the Committee and met with the Chief Executive.
The Committee also reviewed and recommended to the Board the continued appointments of nonexecutive directors including the threeyear extension for Maarten van den Bergh linked to his appointment as Deputy Chairman and senior independent director and the new appointments of Deborah Lathen and Franc ois Barrault.
The terms of reference of the Nominating Committee are posted on the companys website at sitemittees The minutes of Nominating Committee meetings are sent at their request to directors who are not members of the Committee where appropriate to do so.
Chairman succession The Board approved the recommendation of the Nominating Committee to appoint Sir Mike Rake as Chairman in succession to Sir Christopher Bland as announced on 19 February 2007.
Sir Mike will join the Board on 26 September 2007 and Sir Christopher steps down as Chairman on 25 September 2007 and as a director on 30 September 2007.
A full programme of induction and familiarisation is in hand.
Board evaluation During summer 2006 the Board carried out through a questionnaire and discussion with directors its fourth formal evaluation of Board and Board committee performance and effectiveness.
The individual performance of directors was also evaluated at onetoone sessions with the Chairman.
The previous Deputy Chairman and senior independent director Sir Anthony Greener led the review of the Chairmans performance in consultation with the nonexecutive and executive directors.
The results of that evaluation were considered by the Board in July 2006.
The directors considered BTs Board processes and effectiveness to be good.
Key areas highlighted were the need for continued attention to Board diversity more focused brieng on technology matters and the continuing need to pay attention to the amount of paperwork.
These matters are being addressed.
The previous years concerns on maintaining visibility of major capital projects including post project reviews and the amount of time available at Board meetings for freeranging strategic discussion did not feature strongly this year as it was felt steps taken during the year had adequately dealt with them via process and Board agenda changes.
Further evaluations will be carried out annually.
Separate questionnaires about Audit Committee effectiveness were also completed and the results are reviewed in the Report of the Audit Committee.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 55 Report of the Directors Governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151808 Date 190507
REPORT ON DIRECTORS REMUNERATION
The Report on directors remuneration is divided into the following sections r Remuneration policy not audited i Constitution and process ii Packages and nancial year 200607 operation iii Annual package  nancial year 200708 iv Other matters Executive share ownership
Other benets Service agreements Outside appointments Nonexecutive directors letters of appointment Nonexecutive directors remuneration Directors service agreements and contracts of appointment Directors interests Performance graph r Remuneration review audited Directors emoluments Former directors
Pensions
Share options Share awards under longterm incentive plans Vesting of outstanding share awards and options Deferred Bonus Plan Share awards under the Employee Share Investment
REMUNERATION POLICY This part of the Report on directors remuneration is not subject to audit.
The directors consider that BT has throughout the year complied with the provisions set out in Section 1 of the 2003 Combined Code on Corporate Governance.
Shareholders will be invited to approve this report at the companys 2007 AGM.
The
Board is ultimately responsible for both the structure and amount of executive remuneration but it has delegated prime responsibility for executive remuneration to the Remuneration
The Committee is made up wholly of independent nonexecutive directors.
The terms of reference of the Committee are available on the companys website at sitemittees The Committees role is to set the remuneration policy and individual remuneration packages for the Chairman and the executive directors.
The Committee also reviews the remuneration of other senior executives reporting to the Chief Executive.
This includes approving changes to the companys longterm incentive plans recommending to the Board those plans which require shareholder approval and overseeing their operation.
In this role the Committee also monitors the structure of reward for executives reporting to the senior management team and determines the basis on which awards are granted under the companys executive share plans.
The Committee met ve times during the nancial year 200607.
Sir Anthony Greener chaired the Committee from 18 July 2001 until he retired as a director on 30 September 2006.
From 1 October 2006 Maarten van den Bergh has been chairman of the Committee.
Other members of the Committee who served during the nancial years 200506 and 200607 were r Matti Alahuhta appointed 7 February 2006 r Lou Hughes retired 31 March 2006 r Baroness Jay r Deborah Lathen appointed 1 February 2007 r Carl Symon.
The Chairman and Chief Executive are invited to attend meetings.
They are not present when matters affecting their own remuneration arrangements are considered.
No director or executive is involved in any decision relating to his or her remuneration.
Nonexecutive directors who are not members of the Committee are entitled to receive papers and minutes of the Committee.
The Committee had access during the year to professional advisers both from within the company and externally Kepler Associates remuneration consultants who were appointed by the company Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director Alex Wilson Group HR Director and Larry Stone Company Secretary.
They provided advice that materially assisted the Committee in relation to directors remuneration in the nancial year 200607.
Remuneration consultants provide a range of data and advisory services covering all aspects of executive pay bonus arrangements shares and benets.
The Committee agreed that Kepler Associates may advise both the Committee and BT and should be invited to attend meetings when major remuneration policy issues were discussed.
BTs policy is to reward its senior executives competitively taking account of the performance of individual lines of business and the company as a whole comparison with other FTSE 30 companies and the competitive pressures in the information and communications technology industry.
This has been crucial as BTs revenues from traditional business have fallen and new Report of the Directors Corporate governance 56 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138405.3d Time 151809 Date 190507 broadband have been developed to provide revenue growth.
To ensure that key people are both recruited and retained base salaries are positioned within a range consistent with prevailing market rates with the potential for total direct compensation basic salary annual bonus  cash and deferred shares  and the expected value of any longterm incentives to deliver upper quartile remuneration for sustained and excellent performance.
A signicant proportion of the total executive remuneration package is variable and is linked to corporate performance.
Remuneration arrangements and performance targets are kept under regular review to achieve this.
As members of the Board all Committee members receive and review an annual corporate social responsibility report detailing the way in which the company manages social ethical and environmental issues.
The Committee is satised that the structure for the remuneration of the executive directors and senior executives does not raise environmental social and governance risks by inadvertently motivating irresponsible behaviour.
The remuneration package is made up of some or all of the following Basic salary Salaries are reviewed annually but increases are made only where the Committee believes that adjustments are appropriate to reect contribution increased responsibilities andor market pressures.
No base pay changes were proposed or made for executive directors in 200607 save that the Committee agreed increases in annual base salary effective from 1 June 2006 for Ben Verwaayen and Hanif Lalani to bring their remuneration more into line with the market.
Performancerelated remuneration Annual bonus The annual bonus plan is designed to reward the achievement of results against set objectives.
For the nancial year 200607 ontarget and maximum requiring truly exceptional performance bonus levels for executive directors as a percentage of salary were set at 60% and 110% respectively.
In addition executive directors are entitled to a bonus in the form of deferred shares with a value of 75% of the cash bonus.
The Chief Executive has a target cash bonus of 85% of salary and a maximum cash bonus for exceptional performance of 130% of salary.
He is also entitled to an award of deferred shares equal to twotimes his cash bonus subject to an overall cap of threetimes salary cash plus deferred shares in any one year.
Under his contract the Chairman is not entitled to a bonus.
Corporate performance targets set at the beginning of the nancial year 200607 were weighted such that 40% of the bonus potential was based on EPS earnings per share 40% on free cash ow and 20% on customer satisfaction.
Delivery against these operational targets is a key determinant of success and supports BTs strategy for transformation and growth.
The
Committee agreed that in calculating earnings per share for purposes of the annual bonus volatile items which would be reported under IFRS should be excluded.
The impact of market movements in foreign exchange and nancial instruments plus the net nance income relating to the groups pension liabilities were excluded from the target.
For the executive directors and other relevant senior executives but not Openreach executives see Openreach on page 59 the importance of meeting these operational targets is recognised by linking 100% of their potential bonus to BTs corporate performance.
The Committee retains the exibility to enhance or reduce bonus awards in exceptional circumstances.
Payment against corporate targets in the nancial year 200607 Earnings per share weighting 40% of target Free cash ow weighting 40% of target
20% of target Total % of target Note  threshold reflects 50% of target target is 100% and stretch is 200% The deferred share element of the annual bonus is paid under the DBP Deferred Bonus Plan.
The shares vest and are transferred to the executive after three years if still employed by the company.
There are no additional performance measures for the vesting of deferred share awards.
The Committee considers that deferring a part of the annual bonus in this way also acts as a retention measure and contributes to aligning management with longterm shareholder interests.
The deferred awards for Ben Verwaayen Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds at the end of the nancial year 200607 and for Franc ois Barrault on 24 April 2007 when he was appointed as a director are contained in the table on page 67.
The initial values of the awards to be granted in respect of the nancial year 200607 are given in the table on page 63.
Longterm incentives The BT Equity Incentive Portfolio the Portfolio is designed to ensure that equity participation is an important part of total remuneration and that overall directors remuneration is aligned with shareholders interests.
It comprises three elements share options incentive shares and retention shares.
Incentive shares were used for equity participation in the nancial year 200607.
Retention shares are used principally as a recruitment or retention tool.
No options were granted in the nancial year 200607.
Under his service agreement the Chairman is not entitled to receive annual grants of incentive awards or options.
Normally awards vest and options become exercisable only if a predetermined performance target has been achieved.
The performance measure for outstanding awards and options is total shareholder return TSR calculated on a common currency basis and compared with a relevant basket of companies.
TSR for these purposes was calculated by the law rm Allen and
TSR links the reward given to directors with the performance of BT against the shares of other major companies.
For grants in the nancial years 200203 and 200304 the comparator group was the FTSE 100 at 1 April in each year.
For grants in the nancial year 200405 200506 and 200607 TSR was measured against a group of companies from the European Telecom Sector.
This comparator group was chosen because the companies face similar market sector challenges to BT and are within the sector in which BT competes for capital.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 57 Report of the Directors Governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151811 Date 190507 Checksum tel At 1 April 2006 the group contained the following companies BT Group
Cosmote Mobile Telecommunications Deutsche Telekom France Telecom Hellenic Telecom Portugal Telecom Royal KPN
Telecom Italia Telecom Italia Mobile
Telecom Moviles Telekom Austria
TeliaSonera
Vodafone Group All the above companies with the exception of Telecom Moviles were members of the comparator group at 1 April 2005 Cable and Wireless 02 and TDC were also members of the group.
At 1 April 2004 Belgacom was not a member of the group but Mobistar and Tele2 were members.
The TSR for a company is calculated by comparing the return index RI at the beginning of the performance period to the RI at the end of the period.
The RI is the TSR value of a company measured on a daily basis as tracked by independent analysts
It uses the ofcial closing prices for a companys shares adjusted for all capital actions and dividends paid.
The initial RI is determined by calculating the average RI value taken daily over the six months prior to the beginning of the performance period the end value is determined by calculating the average RI over the six months up to the end of the performance period.
This mitigates the effects of share price volatility.
A positive change between the initial and end values indicates TSR growth.
Incentive shares For the nancial year 200607 the Committee granted incentive shares to executive directors senior executives key managers and professionals.
Awards of incentive shares vest after a performance period of three years if the participant is still employed by BT and a performance measure has been met.
Dividends paid on the shares during the threeyear period are reinvested in further shares and added to the awards.
For awards of incentive shares granted in the nancial years 200405 200506 and 200607 TSR at the end of the three year period must be in the upper quartile relative to the comparator group for all of the shares to vest.
At median 25% of the shares under award will vest.
Below that point none of the shares under award will vest.
The proportion of shares that vests reduces on a straightline basis between the upper quartile and median positions.
There will be no retesting and no matching shares are being offered to any executive on vesting of the incentive shares.
At 31 March 2007 the TSR for the 200405 awards was at 8th position against the comparator group of 20 companies.
As a result 55% of the awards will vest in May 2007.
The details of incentive share awards held by Ben Verwaayen Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds at the end of the nancial year 200607 and by Franc ois Barrault on 24 April 2007 when he was appointed as a director are contained in the table on page 66.
Share options No share options were granted in 200607.
The last grant of share options was in the nancial year 200405.
The price at which shares may be acquired under the Global Share Option Plan GSOP is the market price at the date of grant.
Options are exercisable after three years subject to a performance target being met.
For options granted subject to a TSR measure BTs TSR at the end of the threeyear period must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to be exercisable.
At median 30% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
The proportion of options that are exercisable reduces on a straightline basis between upper quartile and median performance.
Options were granted in the 200203 200304 and 200405 nancial years.
The options granted in the 200203 nancial year did not after retesting meet the TSR target at the end of the performance period on 31 March 2007 and lapsed on that date.
For options granted in the nancial year 200304 TSR had reached 85th position at the rst measurement relative to the FTSE 100 and performance will be retested in the nancial year 200708.
If the performance measure is not met the options will lapse.
For options granted in the nancial year 200405 there were no retesting provisions and the policy of the Committee is for there to be no retesting for future equity awards.
At 31 March 2007 TSR for these options was at 8th position against the comparator group of 20 companies and as a result 58% of the options will become exercisable from June 2007.
The option granted to Sir Christopher Bland on 22 June 2001 as part of his recruitment package is not subject to a performance measure as it matched a personal investment in BT shares of 1 million.
The details of the options held by Sir Christopher Bland Ben Verwaayen Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds at the end of the nancial year 200607 and by Franc ois Barrault on 24 April 2007 when he was appointed as a director are contained in the table on page 65.
Retention shares Retention shares are granted under the RSP Retention Share Plan to individuals with critical skills as a recruitment or retention tool.
In some cases they are granted to key employees who have contributed to good corporate performance to assist retention.
As a result shares currently under award are not generally linked to a corporate performance target.
The length of the retention period before awards vest is exible although this would normally be three years unless the Committee agreed otherwise.
The shares are transferred at the end of the specied period if the individual is still employed by BT.
Retention shares are used in special circumstances and in the nancial year 200607 seven awards were granted of which three awards were made for recruitment purposes.
As a retention measure in his role as Chief Executive BT Global Services Andy Green receives awards of retention shares linked to BT Global Services nancial performance in 200506 and 200607.
The target award was equivalent to 100% of salary with a maximum of 150% of salary.
The rst award with a value of 750000 was granted in June 2006.
The second award with a value of 217000 will be granted in June 2007.
The awards vest three years after the date of grant subject to continued employment.
In recognition of the leading role which Andy Green will take in delivering the next phase of transformation of the company over the next two years a further retention share award with a value of 535000 will be granted to him in June 2007.
The vesting of the award will be after two years and will not be subject to performance conditions.
The awards under the RSP held by Sir Christopher Bland and Ian Livingston at the end of the nancial year 200607 and by Franc ois Barrault on 24 April 2007 when he was appointed as a director or which vested during the year are contained in the table on page 66.
Report of the Directors Corporate governance 58 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138405.3d Time 151812 Date 190507
Other share plans The executive directors and the Chairman may participate in BTs HM Revenue and Customs HMRC approved allemployee share plans the Employee Sharesave Scheme and Employee Share Investment Plan on the same basis as other employees.
There are further details of these plans in note 31 to the accounts.
Dilution
Treasury shares are generally used to satisfy the exercise of share options the grant of share awards and for the allemployee share plans.
At the end of the 200607 nancial year treasury shares equivalent to 6.2% of the issued share capital would be required for these purposes.
It is estimated that treasury shares equivalent to approximately 1% of the issued share capital will be required for all the employee share plans in 200708.
The Remuneration Committee has carried out a review of executive remuneration and as a result resolved to place a greater emphasis on longterm reward.
Longterm reward To provide appropriate incentives to recognise good performance in recent years and to help rebalance overall remuneration to longterm reward incentive share awards with an initial face value in the range of 100% to 200% of salary will be awarded.
Awards will have a fair market value in the range of 44.5% to 89% of salary respectively.
Salaries
Salaries have been increased in order to bring the overall packages more into line with the market.
Annual bonus plan The Remuneration Committee has reviewed the structure of the corporate scorecard for the annual bonus plan.
The annual bonus will continue to reward performance against EPS free cash ow and a customerrelated measure.
Given the importance of excellent customer service to the company the weighting of the customerrelated element will be increased to 30% the EPS and cash ow elements will each be reduced to 35%.
In addition the existing customerrelated element of the scorecard customer satisfaction will be changed to customer service to reect the drive to improve the efciency of the service provided to customers.
This is in line with programmes in the business designed to reect new quality assurance and efciency measures.
As in the previous two nancial years for purposes of calculating EPS for the scorecard volatile items reported under IFRS have been excluded from the target.
The bonus levels for the Chief Executive and the executive directors will continue unchanged.
For the Chief Executive at target two thirds of any bonus will continue to be payable in deferred shares.
The Committee believes that the group performance targets for the nancial year 200708 are more challenging than the outturn for 200607.
Proportion of xed and variable remuneration The targeted composition of each executive directors performancerelated remuneration excluding pension for the nancial year 200708 comprising annual and longterm incentives will be
Base Pay Variable Total B Verwaayen 23% 77% 100% F Barrault 37% 63% 100% A Green 34% 66% 100% H Lalani 37% 63% 100% I Livingston 34% 66% 100% P Reynolds 40% 60% 100% Total remuneration comprises base salary annual bonus  cash and deferred shares  and the expected value of awards under BTs longterm incentive plans excluding retention shares.
Openreach
In the Undertakings given to Ofcom on 22 September 2005 BT agreed that the incentive elements of the remuneration of executives within Openreach should be linked to Openreach performance rather than BT targets or share price.
These incentives cannot be provided by way of BT shares.
As a result special arrangements were put in place for Openreach executives in 200506.
The annual bonus is linked to all Openreach targets and longterm incentives are paid in cash instead of shares.
Openreach executives participate in the BT HMRCapproved allemployee share plans on the same terms as other BT employees.
In addition there were no changes to the pension arrangements of these executives.
None of the executive directors participates in the Openreach incentive plans.
Executive share ownership A mandatory shareholding programme was introduced for the nancial year 200506 onwards.
This is to encourage executive directors and certain other executives to build up a shareholding in the company over time by retaining shares received either as a result of participating in a BT employee share plan other than the shares sold to pay a National Insurance or income tax liability or from onmarket purchases.
The Chief Executive is required to build up a shareholding of 2 x salary and the remaining executive directors 1.5 x salary.
Given that a large part of an executives remuneration is already variable the requirement excludes the need to make a further personal investment to build up the shareholding should share plan awards not vest.
Current shareholdings are set out on page 62.
Progress towards meeting these targets has been made during the nancial year 200607.
Pensions
Those directors and other employees who joined the company prior to 1 April 2001 are eligible for membership of the BT Pension Scheme which is a dened benet scheme.
The benets of the executive directors who are members of the scheme are set out on page 64.
The executive directors who have opted out of future pensionable service accrual following the pension simplication legislation which came into force on 6 April 2006 receive as an alternative a cash allowance annually.
The benets for executive directors who are covered by this are set out on page 64.
This is broadly cash neutral for the company.
BT closed the BT Pension Scheme to new members from 1 April 2001.
From this date provision is generally made on a dened contribution basis.
The company agrees to pay a xed percentage of the executives salary each year which can be put towards the provision of retirement benets.
Additionally a BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 59 Report of the Directors Governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151813 Date 190507 Checksum tel 60 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F lump sum equal to four times salary is payable on death in service.
The benets for the executive directors who are covered by this are set out on page 64.
Pension provision for all executives is based on salary alone bonuses other elements of pay and longterm incentives are excluded.
Other benets Other benets for the Chairman and the senior management team include some or all of the following company car fuel or driver personal telecommunications facilities and home security medical and dental cover for the director and immediate family special life cover professional subscriptions and personal tax planning and nancial counselling.
The company has a permanent health insurance policy to provide cover for the Chairman and certain executive directors who may become permanently incapacitated.
Service agreements It is the policy for the Chairman and executive directors to have service agreements providing for one years notice.
It may be necessary on recruitment to offer longer initial periods to new directors from outside BT or circumstances may make it appropriate to offer a longer xed term.
All of the service agreements contain provisions dealing with the removal of a director through poor performance including in the event of early termination of the contract by BT.
During the nancial year 200607 Sir Christopher Blands service agreement was extended to provide for his resignation as Chairman on 25 September 2007 and his resignation as a director on 30 September 2007 instead of at the conclusion of the 2007
On termination of his contract by BT before 30 September 2007 he is entitled to payment of salary and the value of any benets until that date.
Sir Mike Rake who will replace Sir Christopher Bland as Chairman entered into a service agreement as a director and Chairman to take effect from 26 September 2007.
Ben Verwaayens contract entitles him on termination of his contract by BT to payment of 700000.
The contracts of Franc ois Barrault Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds entitle them on termination of their contract by BT to payment of salary and the value of benets until the earlier of 12 months from notice of termination or the director obtaining fulltime employment.
If the contract of an executive director other than that of the Chairman Franc ois Barrault and Hanif Lalani is terminated by BT within one year of BT entering into a scheme of arrangement or becoming a subsidiary of another company he will be entitled to receive the higher of that current years ontarget bonus or the previous years bonus the market value of shares awarded under an employee share ownership plan or deferred bonus plan that have not vested together with a years salary and the value of any benets.
The Committee has reviewed contracts taking into account the joint statement of best practice on executive contracts and severance by the Association of British Insurers and the National Association of Pension Funds and other relevant guidelines and believes that contract terms are generally in line with best practice.
The clause described above dealing with termination following BT entering into a scheme of arrangement or becoming a subsidiary of another company will be excluded from contracts for new appointments.
This clause was not included in the contracts of Franc ois Barrault and Hanif Lalani.
Outside appointments The Committee believes that there are signicant benets to both the company and the individual from executive directors accepting nonexecutive directorships of companies outside BT.
The Committee will consider up to two external appointments of which only one may be to the Board of a major company for which a director may retain the fees.
Ben Verwaayen as a nonexecutive director of United Parcel Service UPS receives an annual fee of US75000.
On 1 May 2006 he was granted 1051 shares of restricted UPS common stock amounting to US85000 and on 8 February 2007 he was granted 1501 shares of UPS restricted common stock amounting to
Ian Livingston received an annual fee of 45000 as a nonexecutive director of Ladbrokes plc until he resigned as a director on 31 October 2006.
Paul Reynolds as a non executive director of EAccess in Japan receives an annual fee of 3200000 approximately 14000.
Andy Green is a non executive director of NAVTEQ in the US.
He is entitled to receive an annual fee of US60000 and an annual grant of restricted stock units to the value of US125000.
Franc ois Barrault as a director of eServGlobal in Australia receives an annual fee of
In 2003 he was granted 500000 options over eServGlobal shares 50% have an exercise price of A0.15 per option and 50% have an exercise price of A0.40 per option.
Nonexecutive directors letters of appointment Nonexecutive directors have letters of appointment.
They are appointed for an initial period of three years.
During that period either party can give the other at least three months notice.
At the end of the period the appointment may be continued by mutual agreement.
Further details of appointment arrangements for nonexecutive directors are set out in the Report of the
The letters of appointment of nonexecutive directors are terminable on notice by the company without compensation.
Nonexecutive directors remuneration Eight of the directors on the Board are nonexecutive directors who in accordance with BTs articles of association cannot individually vote on their own remuneration.
Nonexecutive remuneration is reviewed by the Chairman and the Chief Executive and discussed and agreed by the Board.
Non executive directors may attend the Board discussion but may not participate in it.
The Board last reviewed fees in 2004 and plans to review them again in the 200708 nancial year.
The basic fee for nonexecutive directors is 40000 per year.
An additional fee for membership of a Board committee is 5000 per year and a further 5000 for chairing a committee.
Sir Anthony Greener who was Deputy Chairman and senior independent director until he retired on 30 September 2006 and also chaired both the Remuneration Committee and the Audit Committee received total fees of 115000 per year.
Maarten van den Bergh who was appointed Deputy Chairman and senior independent director from 1 October 2006 and chairman of the Remuneration Committee from that date and who is also chairman of the Pension Scheme Performance Review Group receives total fees of 120000 per year.
Carl Symon receives an annual fee of 70000 as chairman of the Equality of Access Board a Board Committee which was established on 1 November 2005.
To align further the interests of the nonexecutive directors with those of shareholders the companys policy is to encourage these directors to purchase on a voluntary basis 5000 of BT shares each year.
The directors are asked to hold these shares until they retire from the Board.
This policy is not mandatory.
No element of nonexecutive remuneration is performance related.
Nonexecutive directors do not participate in BTs bonus or employee share plans and are not members of any of the company pension schemes.
Report of the Directors Corporate governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151815 Date 190507
Directors service agreements and contracts of appointment The dates on which directors initial service agreementsletters of appointment commenced and the current expiry dates are as follows Chairman and executive directors Commencement date Expiry date of current service agreement or letter of appointment Sir Christopher Bland 1 May 2001 Sir Christopher Blands service agreement was extended on 19 February 2007 so that it will terminate on 30 September 2007.
B Verwaayen 14 January 2002 F Barrault 24 April 2007 A Green H Lalani I Livingston P Reynolds 19 November 2001 7 February 2005 8 April 2002 19 November 2001 The contract is terminable by the company on 12 months notice and by the director on six months notice.
Nonexecutive directors M van den Bergh 1 September 2000 Letter of appointment was for an initial period of three years.
The appointment was extended for three years in 2003 and extended for a further three years in 2006.
The appointment is terminable by the company or the director on three months notice.
C Brendish Baroness Jay J F Nelson C G Symon 1 September 2002 14 January 2002 14 January 2002 14 January 2002 Letters of appointment were for an initial period of three years.
Appointments were extended for a further three years and are terminable by the company or the director on three months notice.
Sir Anthony Greener 1 October 2000 Letter of appointment was for an initial period of three years.
The appointment was extended for a further three years.
Terminated 30 September 2006.
M Alahuhta P Hodkinson D Lathen 1 February 2006 1 February 2006 1 February 2007 Letters of appointment are for an initial period of three years and are terminable by the company or the director on three months notice.
The appointment is renewable by mutual agreement.
Franc ois Barrault also has a management agreement dated 26 April 2004 which he entered into when he was appointed President BT International.
This agreement is terminable by the company on 12 months notice and by Franc ois Barrault on six months notice.
There are no other service agreements or material contracts existing or proposed between the company and the directors.
There are no arrangements or understandings between any director or executive ofcer and any other person pursuant to which any director or executive ofcer was selected to serve.
There are no family relationships between the directors.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 61 Report of the Directors Governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151817 Date 190507 Checksum tel Directors interests The interests of directors holding ofce at the end of the year and their families in the companys ordinary shares at 31 March 2007 and 1 April 2006 or date of appointment if later are shown below
Benecial holdings 2007 2006 Sir Christopher Bland B Verwaayen 1238827 951497 F Barrault ae A Green H Lalani bc I Livingston bc P Reynolds bc M Alahuhta 20000 20000 M van den Bergh 13621 12040 C Brendish 30920 30920 P Hodkinson 4622 4622 Baroness Jay 10185 8214 D Lathen J F Nelson 50000 50000 C G Symon 15069 15069 Total 2795794 2344784 At 31 March 2007 Sir Christopher Bland and each of the executive directors as potential beneficiaries had a nonbeneficial interest in 20797054 shares 2006  24809976 held in trust by Ilford Trustees Jersey Limited for allocation to employees under the employee share plans.
They each also had a nonbeneficial interest in 30378 shares 2006  50342 held in trust by Halifax Corporate Trustees Limited for participants in the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan.
Includes free shares awarded under the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan.
During the period from 1 April 2007 to 15 May 2007 Paul Reynolds and Hanif Lalani each purchased 473 shares and Ian Livingston purchased 472 shares under the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan.
Deborah Lathen was appointed as a director on 1 February 2007.
Franc ois Barrault was appointed as a director on 24 April 2007.
The directors as a group benecially own less than 1% of the companys ordinary shares.
Performance graph This graph illustrates as required by the Companies Act 1985 the performance of BT Group plc measured by TSR relative to a broad equity market index over the past ve years.
We consider the FTSE 100 to be the most appropriate index against which to measure performance for these purposes as BT has been a constituent of the FTSE 100 throughout the veyear period and the index is widely used.
TSR is the measure of the returns that a company has provided for its shareholders reecting share price movements and assuming reinvestment of dividends.
Report of the Directors Corporate governance 62 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138405.3d Time 151817 Date 190507
REMUNERATION REVIEW This part of the Report on directors remuneration is subject to audit.
Directors emoluments Directors emoluments for the nancial year 200607 were as follows
Pension allowance net of pension Total salary Annual Expenses
Sir Christopher Bland B Verwaayen 74tel 44 1860 1694 1366 1316 A Green 500  500 483  36 101telH Lalani cd 45tel 39 106telI Livingston bc 52tel19 12 1165 1110 380 315 P Reynolds bc 45tel19 18 105telM van den Bergh 93  93    93 59 M Alahuhta 45  45    45 8 C Brendish 50  50    50 50 P Hodkinson 55  55    55 8 Baroness Jay 50  50    50 50 D Lathen J F Nelson 55  55    55 52 Sir Anthony Greener L R Hughes 3695 577 4272 2752 38 185 7247 6326 Balance or part of the pension allowance for the financial year 200607  see Pensions below.
Retirement benefits are accruing to three directors under defined contribution arrangements and to three directors and one former director under defined benefit arrangements.
Expenses allowance in the above table includes a monthly cash allowance in lieu of a company car equivalent to 18500 received by Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds.
Other benefits includes some or all of the following company car fuel or driver personal telecommunications facilities and home security medical and dental cover for the director and immediate family special life cover professional subscriptions and personal tax planning and financial counselling.
In addition Paul Reynolds had an interest free loan  see Loans below.
Hanif Lalani received an additional cash payment of 150000 on 30 June 2006 in respect of a special retention arrangement established on 1 July 2004 when he was Chief Financial Officer BT Wholesale.
Deborah Lathen was appointed as a director on 1 February 2007.
Deferred annual bonuses payable in shares in three years time subject to continued employment.
Sir Anthony Greener retired as a director on 30 September 2006.
Lou Hughes retired as a director on 31 March 2006.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 63 Report of the Directors Governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151818 Date 190507 Checksum tel The annual salaries of the Chairman Andy Green Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds remained unchanged during the nancial year 200607.
Ben Verwaayens annual salary was increased from 700000 to 750000 and Hanif Lalanis annual salary was increased from 400000 to 460000 both on 1 June 2006.
Following this years review of annual salaries Ben Verwaayens salary will be increased from 750000 to 800000 Andy Greens salary will be increased from 500000 to 520000 Hanif Lalanis salary will be increased from 460000 to 520000 Ian Livingstons salary will be increased from 525000 to 560000 and Paul Reynolds salary will be increased from 450000 to 475000.
All increases will be effective from 1 June 2007.
Franc ois Barrault receives an annual salary ofE750000 approximately 500000.
Annual cash bonus awards in respect of the nancial year 200607 which are not pensionable to executive directors ranged from 96.5% to 117.85% of current salary 200506 80% to 112%.
Former directors Sir Peter Boneld received under preexisting arrangements a pension of 359900 payable in the nancial year 200607 200506  352153.
Loans
Prior to the date of his appointment to the Board on 19 November 2001 Paul Reynolds had an interestfree loan of 300000 from the company to assist with relocation.
At
31 March 2007 he owed 170000 31 March 2006 200000.
During the nancial year 200607 the maximum amount outstanding was 200000.
There are no outstanding loans granted by any member of the BT group to any other of the directors or guarantees provided by any member of the BT group for their benet.
Pensions
Sir Christopher Bland is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company paid a cash amount of 15186 representing a retirement allowance for the nancial year 200607.
Ben Verwaayen is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company has agreed to pay an annual amount equal to 30% of his salary towards pension provision.
The company paid 32580 into his personal pension plan plus a cash payment of 189920 representing the balance of the pension allowance for the nancial year 200607.
BT also provides him with a lump sum death in service benet of four times his salary.
Ian Livingston is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company has agreed to pay an annual amount equal to 30% of his salary towards pension provision.
The company paid 55665 into his personal pension plan plus a cash payment of 101835 representing the balance of the pension allowance for the nancial year 200607.
BT also provides him with a lump sum death in service benet of four times his salary.
Andy Green is a member of the BT Pension Scheme.
From
31 December 1997 the company has been purchasing an additional 203 days of pensionable service each year to bring his pensionable service at age 60 up to 40 years.
A twothirds widows pension would be payable on his death.
Hanif Lalani is a member of the BT Pension Scheme but has opted out of future pensionable service accrual.
A twothirds widows pension would be payable on death.
The company has agreed to pay an annual amount equal to 30% of his salary towards pension provision.
A cash payment of 135000 was therefore made for the nancial year 200607.
Paul Reynolds is a member of the BT Pension Scheme but has opted out of future pensionable service accrual.
A twothirds widows pension would be payable on death.
The company has agreed to pay an annual amount equal to 30% of his salary towards pension provision.
A cash payment of 135000 was therefore made for the nancial year 200607.
The table below shows the increase in the accrued benets including those referred to above to which each director who is a member of the BT Pension Scheme has become entitled during the year and the transfer value of the increase in accrued benets.
Accrued pension Transfer value of accrued benets Change in transfer value cd less directors contributions
Transfer value of increase in accrued benets in e less directors contributionsteltel 2007 A Green 167 157 2879 2H Lalani 126 112 1394 1P Reynolds 140 140 2160 1995 165 ad As required by the Companies Act 1985 Schedule 7A.
These amounts represent the deferred pension to which the directors would have been entitled had they left the company on 31 March 2007 and 2006 respectively.
Transfer value of the deferred pension in column a as at 31 March 2007 calculated on the basis of actuarial advice in accordance with Actuarial Guidance Note GN11.
The transfer value represents a liability of the BT Pension Scheme rather than any remuneration due to the individual and cannot be meaningfully aggregated with annual remuneration as it is not money the individual is entitled to receive.
The equivalent transfer value but calculated as at 31 March 2006 on the assumption that the director left service at that date.
The increase in pension built up during the year net of inflation.
The gross amount can be calculated by deducting the amount under column b from the amount under column a.
The transfer value of the pension in column e less directors contributions.
Directors contributions in the financial year 200607 were as follows Andy Green 30000 2006  30000 Hanif Lalani nil 2006  24000 and Paul Reynolds nil 2006  26000.
Report of the Directors Corporate governance 64 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138405.3d Time 151818 Date 190507 Checksum tel Share options held at 31 March 2007 or date of appointment if later Number of shares under option 1 April 2006 Granted Lapsed Exercised 31 March 2007 Option price per share Usual date from which exercisable Usual expiry date Sir Christopher Bland 314244 314244 318p 01052004 01052011 B Verwaayen 1121121 1121121   250p 01042005 11022012 935830   187p 29072005 29072012 1052632 199.5p 24062006 24062013 229687  317188 192p 24062007 24062014 3656458  2286638  1369820 F Barrault 180p 21052007 21052014 A Green 568190 568190   187p 29072005 29072012 639098 199.5p 24062006 24062013 139453  192579 192p 24062007 24062014 5712 165p 14082007 31022008 1545032  707643  837389 H Lalani 177810 177810   187p 29072005 29072012 210527 199.5p 24062006 24062013 65625  90625 192p 24062007 24062014 5346  173p 14082006 13022007 8994 179p 14082012 13022013 105264 199.5p 24062004 24062013 655197 8994 243435 5346 415410 I Livingston 601610 601610   187p 29072005 29072012 676692 199.5p 24062006 24062013 147656  203907 192p 24062007 24062014 7290 227p 14082007 13022008 1637155  749266  887889 P Reynolds 534760 534760   187p 29072005 29072012 601504 199.5p 24062006 24062013 131250  181250 192p 24062007 24062014 4555 218p 14022007 13082007 1453319  666010  787309 Total 9261405 8994 4652992 5346 4974561 All of the above options were granted for nil consideration.
Option granted under the GSOP on 22 June 2001.
The option is not subject to a performance measure.
It was a term of Sir Christopher Blands initial service contract that i he purchased BT shares to the value of at least 1 million and ii as soon as practicable after the purchase of the shares invested shares the company would grant a share option over shares to the value of at least 1 million.
Sir Christopher Bland was the legal and beneficial owner of the invested shares on 1 May 2004 so the option became exercisable on that date.
Option granted under the GSOP on 11 February 2002.
The exercise of the option was subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure was relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100 as at 1 April 2002.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the option to become exercisable.
At median 40% of the option would be exercisable.
Below that point none of the option may be exercised.
On 31 March 2005 BTs TSR was below median and also when it was retested on 31 March 2006 and 31 March 2007.
As a result the option lapsed on 31 March 2007.
Options granted under the GSOP on 29 July 2002.
The exercise of the options was subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure was relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100 as at 1 April 2002.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to become exercisable.
At median 30% of the options would be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
On 31 March 2005 BTs TSR was below median and also when it was retested on 31 March 2006 and 31 March 2007.
As a result the options lapsed on 31 March 2007.
Options granted under the GSOP on 24 June 2003.
The exercise of the options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100 as at 1 April 2003.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to become exercisable.
At median 30% of the options will become exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
On 31 March 2006 BTs TSR was at 85th position against the FTSE 100.
As a result the options did not become exercisable.
The TSR will be retested against a fixed base on 31 March 2008.
Options granted under the GSOP on 24 June 2004.
The exercise of the options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with a group of 20 companies from the European Telecom Sector as at 1 April 2004.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of each option to become exercisable.
At median 30% of the option will be exercisable.
Below that point no part of the option may be exercised.
On 31 March 2007 BTs TSR was at 8th position against the comparator group and as a result 42% of each option lapsed and 58% of each option will become exercisable on 24 June 2007.
Option granted on 25 June 2004 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Option granted on 27 June 2003 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
On 14 August 2006 Hanif Lalani exercised his option and realised a gain of 3608 based on the share price of 240.5p per share on the date of exercise.
Option granted under the GSOP Special Incentive Award on 24 June 2003 prior to Hanif Lalanis appointment as a director.
This option is not subject to a performance measure as the grant was linked to personal performance.
Option granted on 25 June 2002 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Option granted on 21 December 2001 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Franc ois Barrault was appointed as a director on 24 April 2007.
Option granted on 23 June 2006 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Option granted under the GSOP on 21 May 2004.
The exercise of the option is subject to the same performance measure as options granted on 24 June 2004  see e above.
The market price of a BT share at 31 March 2007 was 303.75p 2006  222p and the range during the nancial year 200607 was BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 65 Report of the Directors Governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151819 Date 190507 Checksum tel Unrealised gains As at 31 March 2007 Hanif Lalani had an unrealised gain on an exercisable option granted on 24 June 2003 of 109738 and Paul Reynolds had an unrealised gain on an exercisable option granted on 21 December 2001 of 3906.
There were no further unrealised gains on share options as at 31 March 2007 2006  15790.
Share awards under longterm incentive plans held at 31 March 2007 or date of appointment if later Details of the companys ordinary shares provisionally awarded to directors as participants under the ISP and RSP are as follows 1 April 2006 Awarded
Total number of award shares 31 March
Price on grant Market price at vesting
Sir Christopher Bland RSP 2003 314785  14633   329418 2007 B Verwaayen ISP 2004 265475  12341  125017 152799 31032007 193.42p ISP 2005 322767  15005   337772 31032008 227.75p ISP 2006 302271 14052   316323 31032009 231.58p F Barrault RSP 2004 358655 21052007 181.00p ISP 2005    185894 31032008 227.75p ISP 2006 194914 31032009 231.58p RSP 2007 160865 30062009 300.25p A Green ISP 2004 161180  7492  75902 92770 31032007 193.42p ISP 2005 230546  10717   241263 31032008 227.75p ISP 2006 215908 10037   225945 31032009 231.58p RSP 2006 ac 323862 15056   338918 30062009 231.58p H Lalani ISP 2004 75845  3525  35716 43654 31032007 193.42p ISP 2005 184438  8573   193011 31032008 227.75p ISP 2006 172726 8029   180755 31032009 231.58p I Livingston ISP 2004 170661  7933  80367 98227 31032007 193.42p ISP 2005 242074  11253   253327 31032008 227.75p RSP 2005 ae 536803  20532 276456  280879 09112007 213.25p 279.5p 772 ISP 2006 226703 10539   237242 31032009 231.58p P Reynolds ISP 2004 151700  7052  71438 87314 31032007 193.42p ISP 2005 184438  8573   193011 31032008 227.75p ISP 2006 194317 9033   203350 31032009 231.58p Vesting of RSP awards is not subject to a performance target being met.
Awards under the ISP were granted on 30 June 2006.
The number of shares subject to awards was calculated using the average middle market price of a BT share for the three days prior to the grant.
The awards will vest subject to meeting a performance target on 31 March 2009.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with a group of companies from the European Telecom Sector as at 1 April 2006.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the awards to vest.
At median 25% of the shares will vest.
Below that point none of the shares will vest.
The RSP award was granted to Andy Green on 30 June 2006.
The award will vest subject to continued employment on 30 June 2009.
Awards granted under the ISP in 2004 were subject to a performance target.
The performance measure was relative TSR compared with a group of 20 companies from the European Telecom Sector as at 1 April 2004.
BTs TSR had to be in the upper quartile for all of the awards to vest.
At median 25% of the shares would vest.
At 31 March 2007 BTs TSR was at 8th position against the comparator group.
As a result 45% of the awards lapsed on that date and 55% of the awards will be transferred to participants in May 2007.
Ian Livingston was granted an award under the RSP on 31 May 2005.
50% of the award vested on 10 November 2006 and 50% will vest on 9 November 2007.
Franc ois Barrault was appointed as a director on 24 April 2007.
The RSP award granted to Sir Christopher Bland on 1 September 2003 will vest subject to continued employment at the conclusion of the 2007 AGM.
Report of the Directors Corporate governance 66 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138405.3d Time 151820 Date 190507 Checksum tel Vesting of outstanding share awards and options Details of options granted under the GSOP in the nancial years 200203 and 200304 which would vest based on BT Groups TSR compared with the other companies in the FTSE 100 for the relevant performance period up to 31 March 2007 details of options granted under the GSOP in the nancial year 200405 and awards of shares under the ISP in the nancial years 200405 200506 and 200607 which would vest based on BT Groups TSR against the comparator group of European Telecom companies for the relevant performance periods up to 31 March 2007 are as follows 31 March 2007 31 March 2006 Expected vesting date TSR position Percentage of shares vesting TSR position Percentage of shares vesting GSOP 2002 29072005 62 0% 73 0% GSOP 2003 24062006 60 0% 85 0% GSOP 2004 24062007 8 58% 9 44% ISP 2004 23052007 8 55% 9 40% ISP 2005 31032008 7 70% 8 55% ISP 2006 31032009 3 100% Deferred Bonus Plan awards at 31 March 2007 or date of appointment if later The following deferred bonuses have been awarded to the directors under the DBP.
These shares will normally be transferred to participants at the end of the threeyear deferred period if those participants are still employed by BT Group.
1 April 2006 Awarded
Dividends reinvested Lapsed Total number of award shares 31 March
Market price at vesting
B Verwaayen 487679  487679     199.5p 237.62p 1159 244290   11356  255646 010807 193.42p 103398   4806  108204 010808 227.75p 568269  26418  594687 010809 231.58p F Barrault 59013 010807 193.42p 55767 010808 227.75p 91491 010809 231.58p A Green 88001  88001     199.5p 237.62p 209 95654   4446  100100 010807 193.42p 46974   2183  49157 010808 227.75p 129544  6021  135565 010809 231.58p H Lalani 27718  27718     199.5p 237.62p 66 28709   1334  30043 010807 193.42p 31459   1462  32921 010808 227.75p 103635  4817  108452 010809 231.58p I Livingston 96918  96918    010806 199.5p 237.62p 230 92378   4294  96672 010807 193.42p 45617   2119  47736 010808 227.75p 136002  6323  142325 010809 231.58p P Reynolds 82822  82822     199.5p 237.62p 197 83995   3904  87899 010807 193.42p 49119   2283  51402 010808 227.75p 116590  5419  122009 010809 231.58p Awards granted on 30 June 2006 in respect of the financial year 200506.
The number of shares subject to awards was calculated using the average middle market price of a BT share for the three days prior to the grant.
Awards granted on 24 June 2003 vested on 1 August 2006.
Franc ois Barrault was appointed as a director on 24 April 2007.
Details of deferred bonus awards in respect of the financial year 200607 are given in the table on page 63.
Awards in respect of the deferred bonuses will be granted in June 2007.
The number of shares subject to the awards will be calculated using the average middle market price of a BT share for the three days prior to the grant.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 67 Report of the Directors Governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151821 Date 190507
Share awards under the Employee Share Investment Plan at 31 March 2007 or date of appointment if later 1 April 2006 Awarded Vested Total number of award shares 31 March 2007 Expected vesting date Sir Christopher Bland ESIP 2003 186   186 05082008 ESIP 2004 116   116 04082009 ESIP 2005 56   56 27062010 ESIP 2006  107 107 2606tel 465 F Barrault ESIP 2006    107 26062011 A Green ESIP 2002 130   130 14082007 ESIP 2003 186   186 05082008 ESIP 2004 116   116 04082009 ESIP 2005 56   56 27062010 ESIP 2006  107 107 2606tel 595 H Lalani ESIP 2002 130   130 14082007 ESIP 2003 186   186 05082008 ESIP 2004 116   116 04082009 ESIP 2005 56   56 27062010 ESIP 2006  107 107 2606tel 595 I Livingston ESIP 2004 116   116 04082009 ESIP 2005 56   56 27062010 ESIP 2006  107 107 2606tel 279 P Reynolds ESIP 2002 130   130 14082007 ESIP 2003 186   186 05082008 ESIP 2004 116   116 04082009 ESIP 2005 56   56 27062010 ESIP 2006  107 107 2606tel 595 Awards granted on 26 June 2006.
At that time the market price of a BT share was 229.75p.
Franc ois Barrault was appointed as a director on 24 April 2007.
By order of the Board Maarten van den Bergh Deputy Chairman and Chairman of Remuneration Committee 16 May 2007 Report of the Directors Corporate governance 68 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138405.3d Time 151822 Date 190507 Checksum tel DIRECTORS INFORMATION Election and reelection All directors are required by the companys articles of association to be elected by shareholders at the rst annual general meeting AGM after their appointment if appointed by the Board. intervals of not more than three years.
The director may seek reelection.
In accordance with the articles of association Deborah Lathen and Franc ois Barrault having been appointed as directors by the Board retire at the forthcoming AGM and will be proposed for election.
Sir Christopher Bland Andy Green Ian Livingston and John Nelson retire by rotation and will be proposed for reelection.
Details of these directors contracts of appointment are included in the Report on directors remuneration.
Meetings attendance The following table shows the attendance of directors at meetings of the Board and Audit Nominating and Remuneration Committees during the 2007 nancial year.
Board
Audit
Committee
Nominating
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Attendance shown for committee member Number of meetings 11 Sir Christopher Bland 11 6 Matti Alahuhta 11 5 Franc ois Barrault Maarten van den Bergh Clay Brendish 10 3 Andy Green 11 Sir Anthony Greener Phil Hodkinson 10 3 6 Baroness Jay 10 4 Hanif Lalani 11 Deborah Lathen Ian Livingston 10 John Nelson 11 4 8 Paul Reynolds 11 Carl Symon 11 4 5 Ben Verwaayen 11 Two meetings were ad hoc for timecritical matters.
Did not attend certain meetings in relation to his succession.
Was appointed to the Board on 24 April 2007.
Resigned from the Board and Committees on 30 September 2006.
Was appointed to the Committee on 1 October 2006.
Was appointed to the Board and the Committee on 1 February 2007.
Service agreements The Chairman and executive directors have service agreements which are approved by the Remuneration Committee.
Information about the periods of these contracts is in the Report on directors remuneration.
Training and information On appointment directors take part in an induction programme when they receive information about BT the role of the Board and the matters reserved for its decision the terms of reference and membership of the principal Board committees and the powers delegated to those committees the companys corporate governance policies and procedures including the powers reserved to the groups most senior executives and the latest nancial information about the group.
This is supplemented by visits to key BT locations and meetings with members of the Operating Committee and other key senior executives.
Each year directors participate in BTs Back to the Floor programme an activity that demonstrates commitment to our customers and the people who serve them.
Throughout their period in ofce the directors are continually updated on BTs business the competitive and regulatory environments in which it operates technology and corporate social responsibility matters and other changes affecting BT and the communications industry as a whole by written briengs and meetings with senior BT executives.
The Board also has two lengthy sessions annually to discuss strategy.
Directors are also advised on appointment of their legal and other duties and obligations as a director of a listed company both in writing and in facetoface meetings with the Secretary.
They are reminded of these duties each year and they are also updated on changes to the legal accounting and governance requirements affecting the company and themselves as directors.
During the 2007 nancial year for example they attended presentations on BTs accounting policies and on the SarbanesOxley Act which affects BT because its securities are registered with the SEC and received briengs on changes to UK company law and various corporate governance proposals from the European Commission.
The Chairman also sends a weekly email to nonexecutive directors with topical sector highlights.
Guidelines are in place concerning the content presentation and delivery of papers for each Board meeting so that the directors have enough information to be properly briefed sufciently far ahead of each Board meeting and at other appropriate times.
Independent advice The Board has a procedure for directors in furtherance of their duties to take independent professional advice if necessary at the companys expense.
In addition all directors have access to the advice and services of the Secretary.
Directors and ofcers liability insurance and indemnity For some years the company has purchased insurance to cover its directors and ofcers against their costs in defending themselves in civil legal proceedings taken against them in that capacity and in respect of damages resulting from the unsuccessful defence of any proceedings.
At the date upon which this report was approved and throughout the 2007 nancial year the companys whollyowned subsidiary British Telecommunications plc has provided an indemnity in respect of all the companys directors.
Neither the insurance nor the indemnity provides cover where the director has acted fraudulently or dishonestly.
Interest of management in certain transactions During and at the end of the 2007 nancial year none of the companys directors was materially interested in any material transaction in relation to the groups business and none is materially interested in any presently proposed material transactions.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 69 Report of the Directors Governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151822 Date 190507
BUSINESS POLICIES Responsible business To reinforce our commitment to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity and ethics we have had in place for nearly eight years a written statement of business practice The Way We Work.
This covers all our operations and applies worldwide to all employees and to all agents and contractors when representing BT and is available in eight languages. to the employees of newlyacquired subsidiaries.
We measure our performance against these principles through our Ethics Performance Measure EPM one of our key CSR key performance indicators.
The EPM comprises a measure of employee awareness of The Way We Work our ranking in an external benchmarking of a selection of FTSE100 companies and the results of a survey on the extent to which employees consider our activities ethical.
In the 2007 nancial year the EPM was 84%.
Global sourcing a key aspect of which is managing a complex global supply chain is increasingly important to BT.
Through our Sourcing with Human Dignity initiative we seek to ensure that working conditions in our supply chain meet internationally recognised human rights standards.
We investigate potential social and environmental shortcomings and are committed to achieving 100% followup within three months for all suppliers identied as high or mediumrisk.
During the 2007 nancial year we conducted 413 risk assessments.
We also conduct a survey every two years to establish the effectiveness of our relationships with suppliers.
The next survey will be carried out in the 2008 nancial year.
During the 2007 nancial year we put increased emphasis on the environmental aspects of our supply chain by introducing new procurement principles covering the energy consumption and environmental impacts of products and services from manufacture through usage and including disposal.
In the 2008 nancial year we will be focusing on the implementation of these principles.
The highlevel principles in The Way We Work are supported by a continuing and comprehensive communications programme and online training.
A condential helpline and dedicated e mail facility are also available to employees who have questions about the application of these principles.
The helpline number is also published externally.
BTs new Undertakings code of practice It matters forms part of our statement of business practice and is consistent with it.
A Board committee  the Community Support Committee chaired by Sir Christopher Bland and comprising representatives from BT businesses three nonexecutive directors and an independent member  oversees our community investment activities including charitable and arts expenditure and the strategy for maximising our contribution to society.
An executive committee the Corporate Social Responsibility Steering Group oversees the implementation of our CSR strategy and programme.
This includes risk assessment setting of targets and objectives and public accountability.
BT also takes advice from an external independent panel of CSR experts.
More information including details of charitable donations made by the group is available in Business review  Our commitment to society.
Political donations The companys continuing policy is that no company in the group shall make contributions in cash or kind to any political party whether by gift or loan.
Arrangements are in place to implement this policy.
However the denition of political donations used in the Companies Act 1985 is very much broader than the sense in which these words are ordinarily used.
It covers activities such as making MPs and others in the political world aware of key industry issues and matters affecting the company which make an important contribution to their understanding of BT.
These activities are carried out on an even handed basis related broadly to the major UK political parties electoral strength.
The authority we are requesting at the AGM is not designed to change the above policy.
It will however ensure that BT acts within the provisions of the Companies Act 1985 the Act requiring companies to obtain shareholder authority before they can make donations to EU political organisations which includes UK political parties as dened in the Act.
During the 2007 nancial year the companys wholly owned subsidiary British Telecommunications plc made the following payments to cover the cost of hosting brieng meetings with MPs and MEPs about the companys activities Labour Party 3953 Conservative Party 5710 Liberal Democrats 4444 Scottish National Party 3500 Plaid Cymru No loans were made to any political party by any company in the BT group.
Pension funds BTs two main pension funds  the BT Pension Scheme and the BT Retirement Plan  are not controlled by the Board but by separate and independent trustees.
The trustees look after the assets of the funds which are held separately from those of the company.
The pension funds assets can be used only in accordance with their respective rules and for no other purpose.
Payment of suppliers BT subscribes to the Better Payment Practice Code for all suppliers the four principles of which are to agree payment terms at the outset and stick to them to explain payment procedures to suppliers to pay bills in accordance with any contract agreed with the supplier or as required by law and to tell suppliers without delay when an invoice is contested and settle disputes quickly.
Details of this code can be found at site BTs normal payment terms are 42 calendar days from date of receipt of a due and valid invoice.
BT will make payment to the supplier on the next payment run following expiry of this term.
The ratio expressed in days between the amounts invoiced to the company by its suppliers in the 2007 nancial year and the amounts owed to its trade creditors at the end of the year was 44 calendar days.
Financial statements So far as each of the directors is aware there is no relevant information that has not been disclosed to the companys auditors and each of the directors believes that all steps have been taken that ought to have been taken to make them aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the companys auditors have been made aware of that information.
A statement by the directors of their responsibilities for preparing the nancial statements is included in the Statement of directors responsibility.
The directors statement on going concern is included in Financial review  Capital resources.
Financial instruments Details of the nancial risk management objectives and policies of the group and exposure to interest risk credit risk liquidity risk and price risk are given on page 45 and note 33 on pages Report of the Directors Corporate governance 70 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138405.3d Time 151822 Date 190507 Checksum tel Internal control and risk management The Board is responsible for the groups systems of internal control and risk management and for reviewing the effectiveness of those systems which it does annually.
Such systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives any system can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The process in place for reviewing the groups systems of internal control includes procedures designed to identify and evaluate failings and weaknesses and in the case of any categorised as signicant procedures exist to ensure that necessary action is taken to remedy the failings.
The Board also takes account of signicant social environmental and ethical matters that relate to BTs businesses and reviews annually BTs corporate social responsibility.
The companys workplace practices specic environmental social and ethical risks and opportunities and details of underlying governance processes are dealt with in the Business review Motivating our people and living the BT values and Our commitment to society.
BT has processes for identifying evaluating and managing the signicant risks faced by the group.
These processes have been in place for the whole of the 2007 nancial year and have continued up to the date on which this document was approved.
The processes are in accordance with the Revised Guidance for Directors on the Combined Code published by the Financial Reporting Council the Turnbull Guidance.
Risk assessment and evaluation takes place as an integral part of the groups annual strategic planning cycle.
The group has a detailed risk management process culminating in a Board review which identies the key risks facing the group and each business unit.
This information is reviewed by senior management as part of the strategic review.
The groups current key risks are summarised in Business review  Group risk factors.
The key features of the risk management process comprise the following procedures r senior executives led by the Secretary review the groups key risks and have created a group risk register describing the risks owners and mitigation strategies.
This is reviewed by the Operating Committee before being reviewed and approved by the Board. ensure that the key risks are addressed.
Director on the operation of internal controls in its area of responsibility. internal controls during the nancial year. of the quality of risk management and control.
Internal Audit reports to the management and the Audit Committee on the status of specic areas identied for improvement.
Internal
Audit also promotes effective risk management in the lines of business operations. in the group during the nancial year.
It reviews reports from the internal auditors and from the external auditors and reports its conclusions to the Board.
The Audit Committee has carried out these actions for the 2007 nancial year.
New subsidiaries acquired during the year have not been included in the above risk management process.
They will be included for the 2008 nancial year.
Material joint ventures and associates which BT does not control outside the UK are not part of the group risk management process and are responsible for their own internal control assessment.
The Board has approved the formal statement of matters which are reserved to it for consideration approval or oversight.
It has also approved the groups corporate governance framework which sets out the high level principles by which the group is managed and the responsibilities and powers of the Operating Committee and the groups senior executives.
As part of this framework the development and implementation of certain powers relating to groupwide policies and practices are reserved to identied senior executives.
US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 BT has securities registered with the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC.
As a result BT is obliged to comply with those provisions of the SarbanesOxley Act applicable to foreign issuers.
BT complies with the legal and regulatory requirements introduced pursuant to this legislation in so far as they are applicable to the group.
It is the opinion of the Board that the Audit Committee includes in the person of Phil Hodkinson a member who is an audit committee nancial expert and who is independent as dened for this purpose.
The Board considers that the Committees members generally have broad commercial and business leadership experience having held various roles in accountancy nancial management and supervision treasury and corporate nance and that there is a broad and suitable mix of business nancial and IT experience on the Committee.
The code of ethics adopted for the purposes of the Sarbanes Oxley Act is posted on the companys website at site ethics The code applies to the Chief Executive Group Finance Director and senior nance managers.
Disclosure controls and procedures The Chief Executive and Group Finance Director after evaluating the effectiveness of BTs disclosure controls and procedures as of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report and Form 20F have concluded that as of such date BTs disclosure controls and procedures were effective to ensure that material information relating to BT was made known to them by others within the group.
The Chief Executive and Group Finance Director have also provided the certications required by the SarbanesOxley Act.
Internal control over nancial reporting BTs management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over nancial reporting for the group.
Internal control over nancial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of nancial reporting and the preparation of nancial statements for external reporting purposes in accordance with IFRS and the required reconciliation to US GAAP.
Management conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over nancial reporting based on the framework for internal control evaluation contained in the Turnbull
Based on this assessment management has concluded that as at 31 March 2007 the groups internal control over nancial reporting was effective.
There were no changes in BTs internal control over nancial reporting that occurred during the 2007 nancial year that have BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 71 Report of the Directors Governance Filename 5138405.3d Time 151823 Date 190507 affected the groups internal control over nancial reporting.
Any signicant deciency as dened by the US Public Company Accounting Oversight Board PCAOB in internal control over nancial reporting is reported to the Audit Committee.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP which has audited the consolidated nancial statements of the group for the 2007 nancial year has also audited managements assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over nancial reporting and the effectiveness of the groups internal control over nancial reporting under Auditing Standard No.
2 of the PCAOB.
Their report is on page 75.
SHAREHOLDERS AND ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING Relations with shareholders Senior executives led by the Chief Executive and the Group Finance Director and including as appropriate the other executive directors hold meetings with the companys principal institutional shareholders to discuss the companys strategy nancial performance and specic major investment activities.
The Deputy Chairman also attends at his discretion and in consultation with the Chairman and the Chief Executive meetings with shareholders during the year this may also include meetings with investors to discuss overall remuneration policies and plans in his role as chairman of the Remuneration
All nonexecutive directors have an invitation to attend investors meetings if they wish.
Contact with institutional shareholders and with nancial analysts brokers and the media is controlled by written guidelines to ensure the protection of share price sensitive information that has not already been made generally available to the companys shareholders.
The directors are provided with either full or summarised reports and other written briengs from the companys major shareholders and analysts and are regularly informed by the Secretary about the holdings of its principal shareholders.
The Secretary also surveys the companys retail shareholders about the quality of the companys shareholder communications and share registration services.
Established procedures ensure the timely release of share price sensitive information and the publication of the companys nancial results and regulatory nancial statements.
All external announcements are also reviewed for accuracy and compliance requirements by a committee of senior executives the Disclosure Committee which is chaired by the Secretary.
Substantial shareholdings At 16 May 2007 the company had received notications from Legal and General Investment Management Limited Brandes Investment Partners LLC and Barclays PLC under the Disclosure and Transparency Rules issued by the Financial Services Authority in respect of holdings of 300805154 shares 330627819 shares and 360935363 shares respectively representing holdings of 3.6% 4.0% and 4.4% of the companys total voting rights.
AGM resolutions We are continuing our policy that shareholders vote on the annual report at the AGM.
Shareholders will also again be asked to vote separately on the Report on directors remuneration.
It is part of our policy to involve shareholders fully in the affairs of the company and to give them the opportunity at the AGM to ask questions about the companys activities and prospects.
We also give shareholders the opportunity to vote on every substantially different issue by proposing a separate resolution for each issue.
The proxy votes for and against each resolution as well as votes withheld will be counted before the AGM and the results will be made available at the meeting after the shareholders have voted on each resolution on a show of hands and at the end of the meeting.
It is our policy for all directors to attend the AGM if at all possible.
Whilst because of ill health or other pressing reasons this may not always be possible in normal circumstances this means that the chairmen of the Audit Nominating and Remuneration committees are at the AGM and are available to answer relevant questions.
All the directors attended the 2006 AGM.
The resolutions to be proposed at the AGM at The Sage Gateshead on 19 July 2007 together with explanatory notes appear in the separate Annual Review and Notice of Meeting 2007 which is sent to all shareholders together with the Annual Report and Form 20F if requested.
These documents are sent out in the most costeffective fashion given the large number of shareholders.
We aim to give as much notice as possible and at least 21 clear days notice as required by the companys articles of association.
In practice these documents are being sent to shareholders more than 20 working days before the
In line with the new provisions introduced by the Companies Act 2006 we are proposing a resolution at the AGM to allow us more exibility in communicating electronically with shareholders in the future.
Resolutions to reappoint PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as auditors of the company and to authorise the directors to settle their remuneration will also be proposed at the AGM.
Authority to purchase shares The authority given at last years AGM of the company held on 12 July 2006 for the company to purchase in the market 834 million of its shares representing 10% of the issued share capital expires on 11 October 2007.
Shareholders will be asked to give a similar authority at the AGM.
During the 2007 nancial year 148 million shares of 5 pence each were purchased under this authority 1.7% of the share capital for a total consideration of 401 million at an average price of 2.72 per share.
The shares were purchased in an on market programme of buying back the companys shares initiated in November 2003 as part of the companys shareholder distribution strategy.
For more details see the table on page 162.
A total of 368 million shares have been retained as treasury shares.
At 16 May 2007 91 million treasury shares had been transferred to meet the companys obligations under its employee share plans.
By order of the Board Larry Stone
16 May 2007 Report of the Directors Corporate governance 72 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138406.3d Time 151824 Date 190507
74 Statement of directors responsibility 75 Report of the independent auditors 77 Consolidated nancial statements 143 Glossary of terms and US equivalents 144 Report of the independent auditors  parent company 145 Financial statements of BT Group plc 148 Subsidiary undertakings and associate 149 Quarterly analysis of revenue and prot 150 Selected nancial data 154 Financial statistics 156 Operational statistics Financial statements The groups consolidated nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union EU.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 73 Filename 5138406.3d Time 151824 Date 190507 Checksum tel The directors are responsible for preparing the groups nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union EU and for preparing the parent company nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
The directors are responsible for preparing nancial statements for each nancial year which give a true and fair view in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU of the state of affairs of the group and of the prot or loss of the group and a true and fair view in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice UK GAAP of the state of affairs of the company and of the prot or loss of the company for that period.
In preparing those nancial statements the directors are required to r select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently r make judgments and estimates that are reasonable and prudent r state whether the group nancial statements comply with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and with regard to the parent company nancial statements whether applicable accounting standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the nancial statements and r prepare the group nancial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the group will continue in business.
The directors conrm that they have complied with the above requirements in preparing the nancial statements.
The directors are responsible for keeping proper accounting records that disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the company and the group and to enable them to ensure that the group nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 1985 and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and the parent company nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 1985.
They are also responsible for the preparation of the Report on directors remuneration safeguarding the assets of the company and the group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and nancial information included on the groups website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of nancial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Financial statements Statement of directors responsibility for preparing the nancial statements 74 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138407.3d Time 151826 Date 190507
UNITED KINGDOM OPINION Independent auditors report to the members of BT Group plc We have audited the group nancial statements of BT Group plc for the year ended 31 March 2007 which comprise the group income statement the group balance sheet the group cash ow statement the group statement of recognised income and expense accounting policies and the related notes.
These group nancial statements are set out on pages 78 to 142 and 148.
These group nancial statements have been prepared under the accounting policies set out therein.
We have reported separately on the parent company nancial statements of BT Group plc for the year ended 31 March 2007 and on the information in the Report on directors remuneration that is described as having been audited.
This separate report is set out on page 144.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditors The directors responsibilities for preparing the Annual Report and the group nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union are set out in the statement of directors responsibilities.
Our responsibility is to audit the group nancial statements in accordance with relevant legal and regulatory requirements and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
This report including the opinion has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Section 235 of the Companies Act 1985 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving this opinion accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
We report to you our opinion as to whether the group nancial statements give a true and fair view and whether the group nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We also report to you whether in our opinion the information given in the Report of the Directors is consistent with the group nancial statements.
In addition we report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or if information specied by law regarding directors remuneration and other transactions is not disclosed.
We review whether the Corporate governance statement reects the companys compliance with the nine provisions of the Combined Code  specied for our review by the Listing Rules of the Financial Services Authority and we report if it does not.
We are not required to consider whether the boards statements on internal control cover all risks and controls or form an opinion on the effectiveness of the groups corporate governance procedures or its risk and control procedures.
We read other information contained in the Annual Report and Form 20F and consider whether it is consistent with the audited group nancial statements.
The other information comprises only BT at a glance the Chairmans message the Chief Executives statement and the Report of the Directors.
We consider the implications for our report if we become aware of any apparent misstatements or material inconsistencies with the group nancial statements.
Our responsibilities do not extend to any other information.
Basis of audit opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland issued by the Auditing Practices Board.
An audit includes examination on a test basis of evidence relevant to the amounts and disclosures in the group nancial statements.
It also includes an assessment of the signicant estimates and judgments made by the directors in the preparation of the group nancial statements and of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the groups circumstances consistently applied and adequately disclosed.
We planned and performed our audit so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered necessary in order to provide us with sufcient evidence to give reasonable assurance that the group nancial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or other irregularity or error.
In forming our opinion we also evaluated the overall adequacy of the presentation of information in the group nancial statements.
Opinion
In our opinion r the group nancial statements give a true and fair view in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union of the state of the groups affairs as at 31 March 2007 and of its prot and cash ows for the year then ended r the group nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and r the information given in the Report of the Directors is consistent with the group nancial statements.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors London United Kingdom 16 May 2007 Financial statements Report of the independent auditors BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 75 Financial statements Filename 5138407.3d Time 151826 Date 190507 Checksum tel 76 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F UNITED STATES OPINION Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm to the Board of Directors and Shareholders of BT Group plc We have completed an integrated audit of BT Group plcs 31 March 2007 consolidated nancial statements and of its internal control over nancial reporting as of 31 March 2007 and audits of its 31 March 2006 and 31 March 2005 consolidated nancial statements in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States.
Our opinions based on our audits are presented below.
Consolidated nancial statements In our opinion the accompanying group income statements and the related group balance sheets group statements of cash ows and group statements of recognised income and expense present fairly in all material respects the nancial position of BT Group plc and its subsidiaries at 31 March 2007 and 2006 and the results of their operations and their cash ows for each of the three years in the period ended 31 March 2007 in conformity with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
These nancial statements are the responsibility of the companys management.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these nancial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits of these nancial statements in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the nancial statements are free of material misstatement.
An audit of nancial statements includes examining on a test basis evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the nancial statements assessing the accounting principles used and signicant estimates made by management and evaluating the overall nancial statements presentation.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
As discussed in the accounting policies section in the nancial statements the group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 at 1 April 2005 prospectively.
IFRSs as adopted by the European Union vary in certain signicant respects from accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Information relating to the nature and effect of such differences as restated is presented in the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles note to the consolidated nancial statements note 35.
Internal control over nancial reporting Also in our opinion managements assessment included in Managements Evaluation of the Effectiveness of Internal Control as set out in the rst three paragraphs of Internal Control over nancial reporting in Report of the Directors Corporate governance of the Form 20F that the group maintained effective internal control over nancial reporting as of 31 March 2007 based on criteria established in Internal Control  Revised Guidance for Directors on the Combined Code as issued by the Financial Reporting Council the Turnbull criteria is fairly stated in all material respects based on those criteria.
Furthermore in our opinion the company maintained in all material respects effective internal control over nancial reporting as of 31 March 2007 based on criteria established in the Turnbull criteria.
The companys management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over nancial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over nancial reporting.
Our
We conducted our audit of internal control over nancial reporting in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over nancial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
An audit of internal control over nancial reporting includes obtaining an understanding of internal control over nancial reporting evaluating managements assessment testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control and performing such other procedures as we consider necessary in the circumstances.
We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinions.
A companys internal control over nancial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of nancial reporting and the preparation of nancial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
A companys internal control over nancial reporting includes those policies and procedures that i pertain to the maintenance of records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company ii provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of nancial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company and iii provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition use or disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the nancial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations internal control over nancial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Also projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors London United Kingdom 16 May 2007 Financial Statements Report of the independent auditors Filename 5138408.3d Time 151833 Date 190507 Checksum tel 74 Statement of directors responsibility 75 Report of the independent auditors Consolidated nancial statements 143 Glossary of terms and US equivalents 144 Report of the independent auditors  parent company 145 Financial statements of BT Group plc 148 Subsidiary undertakings and associate 149 Quarterly analysis of revenue and prot 150 Selected nancial data 154 Financial statistics 156 Operational statistics Consolidated nancial statements 78 Accounting policies 86 Group income statement 87 Group statement of recognised income and expense 88 Group cash ow statement 89 Group balance sheet 90 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 90 Segmental analysis 95 Other operating income 96 Operating costs 97 Specic items 97 Finance income and nance expense 98 Taxation 99 Dividends 100 Earnings per share 101 Cash and cash equivalents 101 Net debt 102 Free cash ow 102 Intangible assets 104 Property plant and equipment 105 Investments 106 Associates and joint ventures 107 Trade and other receivables 107 Loans and other borrowings 108 Derivative nancial instruments 109 Trade and other payables 109 Provisions 110 Deferred taxation 111 Minority interests 111 Reconciliation of movements in equity 111 Share capital 112 Other reserves and retained earnings 113 Related party transactions 113 Financial commitments and contingent liabilities 114 Acquisitions 117 Retirement benet plans 121 Employees 121 Share based payments 126 Audit and non audit services 126 Financial instruments and
risk management
133 Post balance sheet events 134 United States generally accepted accounting principles Consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 77 Filename 5138408.3d Time 151833 Date 190507 Checksum tel I BASIS OF PREPARATION OF THE FINANCIAL
These consolidated nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
For BT there are no differences between IFRSs as adopted for use in the EU and full IFRS as published by the IASB.
The nancial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention modied for the revaluation of certain nancial assets and liabilities at fair value.
Where there are signicant differences to US GAAP these have been described in note 35.
The policies set out below have been consistently applied to all years presented with the exception of those relating to nancial instruments under IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement which have been applied with effect from 1 April 2005.
Certain comparative balance sheet amounts for the 2006 nancial year have been reclassied to conform with the presentation adopted in the 2007 nancial year.
These include 305 million which has been reclassied from prepayments to non current assets at 31 March 2006 in respect of costs relating to the initial set up transition or transformation phase of long term networked IT services contracts.
In addition 267 million has been reclassied from property plant and equipment to intangible assets at 31 March 2006 in respect of IT software application assets.
The preparation of nancial statements in conformity with IFRSs requires the use of accounting estimates.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the groups accounting policies.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity or areas where assumptions and estimates are signicant to the consolidated nancial statements are disclosed below in Critical accounting estimates and key judgements.
The groups income statement and segmental analysis separately identies trading results before signicant oneoff or unusual items termed specic items a non GAAP measure.
This is consistent with the way that nancial performance is measured by management and assists in providing a meaningful analysis of the trading results of the group.
The directors believe that presentation of the groups results in this way is relevant to an understanding of the groups nancial performance as specic items are signicant oneoff or unusual in nature and have little predictive value.
Furthermore the group consider a columnar presentation to be appropriate as it improves the clarity of the presentation and is consistent with the way that nancial performance is measured and reported to the board of directors.
Specic items may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Items which have been considered signicant oneoff or unusual in nature include disposals of businesses and investments business restructuring asset impairment charges and property rationalisation programmes.
The directors intend to follow such a presentation on a consistent basis in the future.
Specic items for the current and prior years are disclosed in note 4.
Accounting policies in respect of the parent company BT Group plc are set out on page 145.
These are in accordance with UK GAAP.
II BASIS OF CONSOLIDATION The group nancial statements consolidate the nancial statements of BT Group plc  the company  and entities controlled by the company its subsidiaries and incorporate its share of the results of jointly controlled entities joint ventures and associates using the equity method of accounting.
The results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are consolidated from the effective date of acquisition or up to the effective date of disposal as appropriate.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the nancial statements of subsidiaries associates and joint ventures to bring the accounting policies used in line with those used by the group.
All intragroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Investments in associates and joint ventures are initially recognised at cost.
Subsequent to acquisition the carrying value of the groups investment in associates and joint ventures includes the groups share of post acquisition reserves less any impairment in the value of individual assets.
The income statement reects the groups share of the results of operations after tax of the associate or joint venture.
The groups principal operating subsidiaries and associate are detailed on page 148.
III REVENUE Revenue represents the fair value of the consideration received or receivable for communication services and equipment sales net of discounts and sales taxes.
Revenue from the rendering of services and sale of equipment is recognised when it is probable that the economic benets associated with a transaction will ow to the group and the amount of revenue and the associated costs can be measured reliably.
Where the group acts as agent in a transaction it recognises revenue net of directly attributable costs.
Revenue arising from separable installation and connection services is recognised when it is earned upon activation.
Revenue from the rental of analogue and digital lines and private circuits is recognised evenly over the period to which the charges relate.
Revenue from calls is recognised at the time the call is made over the groups network.
Subscription fees consisting primarily of monthly charges for access to broadband and other internet access or voice services are recognised as revenue as the service is provided.
Revenue arising from the interconnection of voice and data trafc between other telecommunications operators is recognised at the time of transit across the groups network.
Revenue from the sale of peripheral and other equipment is recognised when all the signicant risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the buyer which is normally the date the equipment is delivered and accepted by the customer.
Revenue from long term contractual arrangements is recognised based on the percentage of completion method.
The stage of completion is estimated using an appropriate measure according to the nature of the contract.
For long term services contracts revenue is recognised on a straight line basis over the term of the contract.
However if the performance pattern is other than straight line revenue is recognised as services are provided usually on an output or consumption basis.
For xed price contracts including contracts to design and build software Consolidated nancial statements Accounting policies 78 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138408.3d Time 151834 Date 190507 of completion such as contract milestone customer acceptance.
In the case of time and materials contracts revenue is recognised as the service is rendered.
Costs related to delivering services under long term contractual arrangements are expensed as incurred.
An element of costs incurred in the initial set up transition or transformation phase of the contract are deferred and recorded within non current assets.
These costs are then recognised in the income statement on a straight line basis over the remaining contractual term unless the pattern of service delivery indicates a different prole is appropriate.
These costs are directly attributable to specic contracts relate to future activity will generate future economic benets and are assessed for recoverability on a regular basis.
The percentage of completion method relies on estimates of total expected contract revenues and costs as well as reliable measurement of the progress made towards completion.
Unless the nancial outcome of a contract can be estimated with reasonable certainty no attributable prot is recognised.
In such circumstances revenue is recognised equal to the costs incurred to date to the extent that such revenue is expected to be recoverable.
Recognised revenue and prots are subject to revisions during the contract if the assumptions regarding the overall contract outcome are changed.
The cumulative impact of a revision in estimates is recorded in the period in which such revisions become likely and can be estimated.
Where the actual and estimated costs to completion exceed the estimated revenue for a contract the full contract life loss is immediately recognised.
Where a contractual arrangement consists of two or more separate elements that have value to a customer on a standalone basis revenue is recognised for each element as if it were an individual contract.
The total contract consideration is allocated between the separate elements on the basis of relative fair value and the appropriate revenue recognition criteria applied to each element as described above.
IV LEASES The determination of whether an arrangement is or contains a lease is based on the substance of the arrangement and requires an assessment of whether the fullment of the arrangement is dependent on the use of a specic asset or assets and whether the arrangement conveys the right to use the asset.
Leases of property plant and equipment where the group holds substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership are classied as nance leases.
Finance lease assets are capitalised at the commencement of the lease term at the lower of the present value of the minimum lease payments or the fair value of the leased asset.
The obligations relating to nance leases net of nance charges in respect of future periods are recognised as liabilities.
Leases are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
If a sale and leaseback transaction results in a nance lease any excess of sale proceeds over the carrying amount is deferred and recognised in the income statement over the lease term.
Leases where a signicant portion of the risks and rewards are held by the lessor are classied as operating leases.
Rentals are charged to the income statement on a straight line basis over the period of the lease.
If a sale and leaseback transaction results in an operating lease any prot or loss is recognised in the income statement immediately.
V FOREIGN CURRENCIES Items included in the nancial statements of each of the groups subsidiaries are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency.
The consolidated nancial statements are presented in sterling the presentation currency of the group.
Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the date of the transaction.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at period end exchange rates are recognised in the income statement in the line which most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
Where monetary items form part of the net investment in a foreign operation and are designated as hedges of a net investment or as cash ow hedges such exchange differences are initially recognised in equity.
On consolidation assets and liabilities of foreign undertakings are translated into sterling at year end exchange rates.
The results of foreign undertakings are translated into sterling at average rates of exchange for the year unless this average is not a reasonable approximation of the cumulative effects of the rates prevailing on the transaction dates in which case income and expenses are translated at the dates of the transactions.
Foreign exchange differences arising on retranslation are recognised directly in a separate component of equity the translation reserve.
In the event of the disposal of an undertaking with assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency the cumulative translation difference associated with the undertaking in the translation reserve is charged or credited to the gain or loss on disposal.
VI BUSINESS COMBINATIONS The purchase method of accounting is used for the acquisition of subsidiaries in accordance with IFRS 3 Business
On transition to IFRSs the group elected not to apply IFRS 3 retrospectively to acquisitions that occurred before 1 April 2004.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition of subsidiaries which occurred between 1 January 1998 and 1 April 2004 is therefore included in the balance sheet at original cost less accumulated amortisation to the date of transition and any provisions for impairment.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition of a subsidiary which occurred prior to 1 January 1998 was written off directly to retained earnings.
On acquisition of a subsidiary fair values are attributed to the identiable net assets acquired.
The excess of the cost of the acquisition over the fair value of the groups share of the identiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
If the cost of the acquisition is less than the fair value of the groups share of the identiable net assets acquired the difference is recognised directly in the income statement.
On disposal of a subsidiary the gain or loss on disposal includes the carrying amount of goodwill relating to the subsidiary sold.
Goodwill previously written off to retained earnings is not recycled to the income statement on disposal of the related subsidiary.
VII INTANGIBLE ASSETS Identiable intangible assets are recognised when the group controls the asset it is probable that future economic benets attributable to the asset will ow to the group and the cost of BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 79 Financial statements Filename 5138408.3d Time 151834 Date 190507 Checksum tel the asset can be reliably measured.
All intangible assets other than goodwill and indenite lived assets are amortised over their useful economic life.
The method of amortisation reects the pattern in which the assets are expected to be consumed.
If
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of an acquisition over the fair value of the groups share of the identiable net assets including intangible assets of the acquired subsidiary.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Telecommunication licences Licence fees paid to governments which permit telecommunication activities to be operated for dened periods are initially recorded at cost and amortised from the time the network is available for use to the end of the licence period.
Brands customer lists and customer relationships Intangible assets acquired through business combinations are recorded at fair value at the date of acquisition.
Assumptions are used in estimating the fair values of acquired intangible assets and include managements estimates of revenue and prots to be generated by the acquired businesses.
Computer software Computer software comprises computer software purchased from third parties and also the cost of internally developed software.
Computer software purchased from third parties is initially recorded at cost.
Subscriber acquisition costs Subscriber acquisition costs are expensed as incurred unless they meet the criteria for capitalisation in which case they are capitalised and amortised over the shorter of the customer life or contractual period.
Estimated useful economic lives The estimated useful economic lives assigned to the principal categories of intangible assets are as follows Telecommunication licences 1 to 5 years Brands customer lists and customer relationships 3 to 15 years Computer software 2 to 5 years VIII RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT Research expenditure is recognised in the income statement in the period in which it is incurred.
Development expenditure including the cost of internally developed software is recognised in the income statement in the period in which it is incurred unless it is probable that economic benets will ow to the group from the asset being developed the cost of the asset can be reliably measured and technical feasibility can be demonstrated.
Capitalisation ceases when the asset being developed is ready for use.
Research and development costs include direct labour contractors charges materials and directly attributable overheads.
IX PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Property plant and equipment is included in the balance sheet at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and any provisions for impairment.
On disposal of property plant and equipment the difference between the sale proceeds and the net book value at the date of disposal is recorded in the income statement.
Cost
Included within the cost for network infrastructure and equipment are direct labour contractors charges materials payments on account and directly attributable overheads.
Depreciation
Depreciation is provided on property plant and equipment on a straight line basis from the time the asset is available for use so as to write off the assets cost over the estimated useful life taking into account any expected residual value.
Freehold land is not subject to depreciation.
The lives assigned to principal categories of assets are as follows Land and buildings Freehold buildings 40 years Leasehold land and buildings Unexpired portion of lease or 40 years whichever is the shorter Network infrastructure and equipment Transmission equipment Duct 40 years Cable 3 to 25 years Radio and repeater equipment 2 to 25 years Exchange equipment 2 to 13 years Payphones other network equipment 2 to 20 years
Motor vehicles 2 to 9 years Computers and ofce equipment 3 to 6 years Assets held under nance leases are depreciated over the shorter of the lease term or their useful economic life.
Residual values and useful lives are reassessed annually and if necessary changes are recognised prospectively.
X ASSET IMPAIRMENT NON FINANCIAL ASSETS Intangible assets with nite useful lives and property plant and equipment are tested for impairment if events or changes in circumstances assessed at each reporting date indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
When an impairment test is performed the recoverable amount is assessed by reference to the higher of the net present value of expected future cash ows value in use of the relevant cash generating unit and the fair value less cost to sell.
Goodwill and intangible assets with indenite useful lives are tested for impairment at least annually.
If a cash generating unit is impaired provision is made to reduce the carrying amount of the related assets to their estimated recoverable amount normally as a specic item.
Impairment losses are allocated rstly against goodwill and secondly on a pro rata basis against intangible and other assets.
Where an impairment loss is recognised against an asset it may be reversed in future periods where there has been a Consolidated nancial statements Accounting policies 80 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138408.3d Time 151834 Date 190507 Checksum tel change in the estimates used to determine the recoverable amount since the last impairment loss was recognised except in respect of impairment of goodwill which may not be reversed in any circumstances.
XI INVENTORY Inventory mainly comprises items of equipment held for sale or rental and consumable items.
Equipment held and consumable items are stated at the lower of cost and estimated net realisable value after provisions for obsolescence.
Cost is calculated on a rstinrstout basis.
XII TERMINATION BENEFITS Termination benets leaver costs are payable when employment is terminated before the normal retirement date or when an employee accepts voluntary redundancy in exchange for these benets.
The group recognises termination benets when it is demonstrably committed to the affected employees leaving the group.
XIII POST RETIREMENT BENEFITS The group operates a funded dened benet pension plan which is administered by an independent trustee for the majority of its employees.
The groups net obligation in respect of dened benet pension plans is calculated separately for each scheme by estimating the amount of future benet that employees have earned in return for their service to date.
That benet is discounted to determine its present value and the fair value of any plan assets is deducted.
The discount rate used is the yield at the balance sheet date on AA credit rated bonds that have maturity dates approximating the terms of the groups obligations.
The calculation is performed by a qualied actuary using the projected unit credit method.
The net obligation recognised in the balance sheet is the present value of the dened benet obligation less the fair value of the plan assets.
The income statement charge is allocated between an operating charge and a net nance charge.
The operating charge reects the service cost which is spread systematically over the working lives of the employees.
The net nance charge reects the unwinding of the discount applied to the liabilities of the plan offset by the expected return on the assets of the plan based on conditions prevailing at the start of the year.
Actuarial gains and losses are recognised in full in the period in which they occur and are presented in the statement of recognised income and expense.
Actuarial valuations of the main dened benet plan are carried out by an independent actuary as determined by the trustees at intervals of not more than three years to determine the rates of contribution payable.
The pension cost is determined on the advice of the groups actuary having regard to the results of these trustee valuations.
In any intervening years the actuaries review the continuing appropriateness of the contribution rates.
The group also operates dened contribution pension schemes and the income statement is charged with the contributions payable.
XIV SHARE BASED PAYMENTS The group has a number of employee share schemes and share option and award plans under which it makes equity settled share based payments to certain employees.
The fair value of options and awards granted is recognised as an employee expense after taking into account the groups best estimate of the number of awards expected to vest allowing for non market and service conditions.
Fair value is measured at the date of grant and is spread over the vesting period of the award.
The fair value of options and awards granted is measured using either the Binomial or Monte Carlo model whichever is most appropriate to the award.
Any proceeds received are credited to share capital and share premium when the options are exercised.
The group has applied IFRS 2 Share based payment retrospectively to all options and awards granted after 7 November 2002 and not fully vested at 1 January 2005.
XV TAXATION Current tax including UK corporation tax and foreign tax is provided at amounts expected to be paid or recovered using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantially enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is recognised using the liability method in respect of temporary differences between the carrying amount of the groups assets and liabilities and their tax base.
Deferred tax liabilities are offset against deferred tax assets within the same taxable entity or qualifying local tax group.
Any remaining deferred tax asset is recognised only when on the basis of all available evidence it can be regarded as probable that there will be suitable taxable prots within the same jurisdiction in the foreseeable future against which the deductible temporary difference can be utilised.
Deferred tax is determined using tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods in which the asset is realised or liability settled based on tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantially enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is provided on temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries associates and joint ventures except where the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Current and deferred tax are recognised in the income statement except when the tax relates to items charged or credited directly in equity in which case the tax is also recognised in equity.
XVI ADVERTISING AND MARKETING The costs associated with the groups advertising and marketing activities are expensed within other operating costs as incurred.
XVII DIVIDENDS Final dividends are recognised as a liability in the year in which they are declared and approved by the companys shareholders in general meeting.
Interim dividends are recognised when they are paid.
XVIII PROVISIONS Provisions are recognised when the group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events it is more likely than not that an outow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount can be reliably estimated.
Provisions are discounted to present value where the effect is material.
XIX FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS FROM 1 APRIL 2005 The following are the key accounting policies used from 1 April 2005 onwards to reect the adoption of IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 81 Financial statements Filename 5138408.3d Time 151834 Date 190507
Recognition and derecognition of nancial assets and nancial liabilities Financial assets and nancial liabilities are recognised when the group becomes party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets are derecognised when the group no longer has rights to cash ows the risks and rewards of ownership or control of the asset.
Financial liabilities are derecognised when the obligation under the liability is discharged cancelled or expires.
In particular for all regular way purchases and sales of nancial assets the group recognises the nancial assets on the settlement date which is the date on which the asset is delivered to or by the group.
Financial assets Financial assets at fair value through income statement A nancial asset is classied in this category if acquired principally for the purpose of selling in the short term held for trading or if so designated by management.
Financial assets held in this category are initially recognised and subsequently measured at fair value with changes in value recognised in the income statement in the line which most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are non derivative nancial assets with xed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market other than r those that the group intends to sell immediately or in the short term which are classied as held for trading r those for which the group may not recover substantially all of its initial investment other than because of credit deterioration which are classied as availableforsale.
Loans and receivables are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs and subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method with changes in carrying value recognised in the income statement in the line which most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
Availableforsale nancial assets Nonderivative nancial assets classied as availableforsale are either specically designated in this category or not classied in any of the other categories.
Availableforsale nancial assets are carried at fair value with unrealised gains and losses except for changes in exchange rates for monetary items interest dividends and impairment losses which are recognised in the income statement are recognised in equity until the nancial asset is derecognised at which time the cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in equity is taken to the income statement in the line that most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
Trade and other receivables Financial assets within trade and other receivables are initially recognised at fair value which is usually the original invoiced amount and subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provisions made for doubtful receivables.
Provisions are made specically where there is objective evidence of a dispute or an inability to pay.
An additional provision is made based on an analysis of balances by age previous losses experienced and general economic conditions.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand and current balances with banks and similar institutions which are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and which are subject to insignicant risk of changes in value and have an original maturity of three months or less.
For the purpose of the consolidated cash ow statement cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and cash equivalents as dened above net of outstanding bank overdrafts.
Bank overdrafts are included within loans and other borrowings in current liabilities on the balance sheet.
Impairment of nancial assets The group assesses at each balance sheet date whether a nancial asset or group of nancial assets are impaired.
Where there is objective evidence that an impairment loss has arisen on assets carried at amortised cost the carrying amount is reduced with the loss being recognised in the income statement.
The impairment loss is measured as the difference between that assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash ows discounted at the nancial assets original effective interest rate.
The impairment loss is only reversed if it can be related objectively to an event after the impairment was recognised and is reversed to the extent the carrying value of the asset does not exceed its amortised cost at the date of reversal.
If an availableforsale asset is impaired an amount comprising the difference between its cost net of any principal payment and amortisation and its fair value is transferred from equity to the income statement.
Reversals of impairment losses on debt instruments are taken through the income statement if the increase in fair value of the instrument can be objectively related to an event occurring after the impairment loss was recognised in the income statement.
Reversals in respect of equity instruments classied as availableforsale are not recognised in the income statement.
If there is objective evidence of an impairment loss on an unquoted equity instrument that is not carried at fair value because its fair value cannot be objectively measured or on a derivative asset that is linked to and must be settled by delivery of such an unquoted equity instrument has been incurred the amount of loss is measured as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash ows discounted at the current market rate of return for a similar nancial asset.
Financial liabilities Trade and other payables Financial liabilities within trade and other payables are initially recognised at fair value which is usually the original invoiced amount and subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Loans and other borrowings Loans and other borrowings are initially recognised at fair value plus directly attributable transaction costs.
Where loans and other borrowings contain a separable embedded derivative the fair value of the embedded derivative is the difference between the fair value of the hybrid instrument and the fair value of the loan or borrowing.
The fair value of the embedded derivative and the loan or borrowing is recorded separately on initial recognition.
Loans and other borrowings are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method and if included in a fair value hedge relationship are revalued to reect the fair value movements on the hedged risk associated Consolidated nancial statements Accounting policies 82 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138408.3d Time 151835 Date 190507 with the loans and other borrowings.
The resultant amortisation of fair value movements are recognised in the income statement.
Financial guarantees Financial guarantees are recognised initially at fair value plus transaction costs and subsequently measured at the higher of the amount determined in accordance with the accounting policy relating to provisions and the amount initially determined less when appropriate cumulative amortisation.
Derivative nancial instruments The group uses derivative nancial instruments mainly to reduce exposure to foreign exchange risks and interest rate movements.
The group does not hold or issue derivative nancial instruments for nancial trading purposes.
However derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting are accounted for as trading instruments.
Derivative nancial instruments are classied as held for trading and initially recognised at cost.
Subsequent to initial recognition derivative nancial instruments are stated at fair value.
The gain or loss on remeasurement to fair value is recognised immediately in the income statement in net nance expense.
However where derivatives qualify for hedge accounting recognition of any resultant gain or loss depends on the nature of the hedge.
Derivative nancial instruments are classied as current assets or current liabilities where they are not designated in a hedging relationship or have a maturity period within 12 months.
Where derivative nancial instruments have a maturity period greater than 12 months and are designated in a hedge relationship they are classied within either non current assets or non current liabilities.
Derivatives embedded in other nancial instruments or other host contracts are treated as separate derivatives when their risk and characteristics are not closely related to those of host contracts and host contracts are not carried at fair value.
Changes in the fair value of embedded derivatives are recognised in the income statement in the line which most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
Hedge accounting Cash ow hedge When a nancial instrument is designated as a hedge of the variability in cash ows of a recognised asset or liability or a highly probable transaction the effective part of any gain or loss on the derivative nancial instrument is recognised directly in equity.
For cash ow hedges of recognised assets or liabilities the associated cumulative gain or loss is removed from equity and recognised in the same line in the income statement in the same period or periods during which the hedged transaction affects the income statement.
For highly probable transactions when the transaction subsequently results in the recognition of a nonnancial asset or nonnancial liability the associated cumulative gain or loss is removed from equity and included in the initial cost or carrying amount of the nonnancial asset or liability.
If a hedge of a highly probable transaction subsequently results in the recognition of a nancial asset or a nancial liability then the associated gains and losses that were recognised directly in equity are reclassied into the income statement in the same period or periods during which the asset acquired or liability assumed affects the income statement.
Any ineffectiveness arising on a cash ow hedge of a recognised asset or liability is recognised immediately in the same income statement line as the hedged item.
Where ineffectiveness arises on highly probable transactions it is recognised in the line which most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
Fair value hedge When a derivative nancial instrument is designated as a hedge of the variability in fair value of a recognised asset or liability or unrecognised rm commitment the change in fair value of the derivatives that are designated as fair value hedges are recorded in the same line in the income statement together with any changes in fair value of the hedged asset or liability that is attributable to the hedged risk.
Hedge of net investment in a foreign operation Exchange differences arising from the retranslation of currency instruments designated as hedges of net investments in a foreign operation are taken to shareholders equity on consolidation to the extent the hedges are deemed effective.
Any ineffectiveness arising on a hedge of a net investment in a foreign operation is recognised in net nance expense.
Discontinuance of hedge accounting Discontinuance of hedge accounting may occur when a hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised the hedge no longer qualies for hedge accounting or the group revokes designation of the hedge relationship but the hedged nancial asset or liability remains or highly probable transaction is still expected to occur.
Under a cash ow hedge the cumulative gain or loss at that point remains in equity and is recognised in accordance with the above policy when the transaction occurs.
If
Under a hedge of a net investment the cumulative gain or loss remains in equity when the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised the hedge no longer qualies for hedge accounting or the group revokes designation of the hedge relationship.
The cumulative gain or loss is recognised in the income statement as part of the prot on disposal when the net investment in the foreign operation is disposed.
Under a fair value hedge the cumulative gain or loss adjustment associated with the hedged risk is amortised to the income statement using the effective interest method over the remaining term of the hedged item.
Share capital Ordinary shares are classied as equity.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares are shown in equity as a deduction from the proceeds received.
Shares in the parent company BT Group plc held by employee share ownership trusts and repurchased shares are recorded in the balance sheet as a deduction from shareholders equity at cost.
XX FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS TO 31 MARCH 2005 The accounting policies adopted in respect of nancial instruments in periods up to and including 31 March 2005 are set out below.
Financial assets were held at the lower of cost and net realisable value in accordance with UK GAAP.
Debt instruments are stated at the amount of net proceeds adjusted to amortise any discount over the term of the debt.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 83 Financial statements Filename 5138408.3d Time 151836 Date 190507 Checksum tel Criteria to qualify for hedge accounting The group considers its derivative nancial instruments to be hedges when certain criteria are met.
For foreign currency derivatives the instrument must be related to actual foreign currency assets or liabilities or a probable commitment whose characteristics have been identied.
It must involve the same currency or similar currencies as the hedged item and must also reduce the risk of foreign currency exchange movements on the groups operations.
For interest rate derivatives the instrument must be related to assets or liabilities or a probable commitment such as a future bond issue and must also change the interest rate or the nature of the interest rate by converting a xed rate to a variable rate or vice versa.
Accounting for derivative nancial instruments Interest differentials under interest rate swap agreements used to vary the amounts and periods for which interest rates on borrowings are xed are recognised by adjustment of net nance expense.
The forward exchange contracts used to change the currency mix of net debt are revalued to balance sheet rates with net unrealised gains and losses included in current and non current derivative nancial instruments.
The difference between spot and forward rate for these contracts is recognised as part of net nance expense over the term of the contract.
The forward exchange contracts hedging transaction exposures are revalued at the prevailing forward rate on the balance sheet date with net unrealised gains and losses being shown as current and noncurrent derivative nancial instruments.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND KEY
The preparation of nancial statements in conformity with IFRSs requires the use of accounting estimates and assumptions.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the groups accounting policies.
We continually evaluate our estimates assumptions and judgements based on available information and experience.
As the use of estimates is inherent in nancial reporting actual results could differ from these estimates.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity are described below.
Interconnect income and payments to other telecommunications operators In certain instances BT relies on other operators to measure the trafc ows interconnecting with our networks.
Estimates are used in these cases to determine the amount of income receivable from or payments we need to make to these other operators.
The prices at which these services are charged are often regulated and are subject to retrospective adjustment and estimates are used in assessing the likely effect of these adjustments.
Providing for doubtful debts BT provide services to around 18 million individuals and businesses mainly on credit terms.
We know that certain debts due to us will not be paid through the default of a small number of our customers.
Estimates based on our historical experience are used in determining the level of debts that we believe will not be collected.
These estimates include such factors as the current state of the economy and particular industry issues.
Goodwill
The recoverable amount of cash generating units has been determined based on value in use calculations.
These calculations require the use of estimates including managements expectations of future revenue growth operating costs and prot margins for each cash generating unit.
Useful lives for property plant and equipment The plant and equipment in BTs networks is long lived with cables and switching equipment operating for over ten years and underground ducts being used for decades.
The annual depreciation charge is sensitive to the estimated service lives allocated to each type of asset.
Asset lives are assessed annually and changed when necessary to reect current thinking on their remaining lives in light of technological change network investment plans including the groups 21CN transformation programme prospective economic utilisation and physical condition of the assets concerned.
Changes to service lives of assets implemented from 1 April 2006 in aggregate had no signicant impact on the results for the year ended 31 March 2007.
Property arrangements As part of the property rationalisation programme we have identied a number of surplus properties.
Although efforts are being made to sublet this space it is recognised that this may not be possible immediately in the current economic environment.
Estimates have been made of the cost of vacant possession and any shortfall arising from the sub lease rental income being lower than the lease costs being borne by BT.
Any such cost or shortfall has been recognised as a provision.
Long term customer contracts Long term customer contracts can extend over a number of nancial years.
During the contractual period revenue costs and prots may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate protability of each contract.
If at any time these estimates indicate the contract will be unprotable the entire estimated loss for the contract is recognised immediately.
The group performs ongoing protability reviews of its contracts in order to determine whether the latest estimates are appropriate.
Key factors reviewed include transaction volumes or other inputs for which we get paid future staff and third party costs and anticipated cost productivity savings and efciencies.
Pension obligations BT has a commitment mainly through the BT Pension Scheme to pay pension benets to approximately 350000 people over more than 60 years.
The cost of these benets and the present value of our pension liabilities depend on such factors as the life expectancy of the members the salary progression of our current employees the return that the pension fund assets will generate in the time before they are used to fund the pension payments and the rate at which the future pension payments are discounted.
We use estimates for all these factors in determining the pension costs and liabilities incorporated in our nancial statements.
The assumptions reect historical experience and our judgement regarding future expectations.
Deferred tax Deferred tax assets and liabilities require management judgement in determining the amounts to be recognised.
In particular judgement is used when assessing the extent to which deferred tax assets should be recognised with consideration given to the timing and level of future taxable income.
Consolidated nancial statements Accounting policies 84 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138408.3d Time 151836 Date 190507
Income tax The actual tax we pay on our prots is determined according to complex tax laws and regulations.
Where the effect of these laws and regulations is unclear we use estimates in determining the liability for the tax to be paid on our past prots which we recognise in our nancial statements.
We believe the estimates assumptions and judgements are reasonable but this can involve complex issues which may take a number of years to resolve.
The nal determination of prior year tax liabilities could be different from the estimates reected in the nancial statements.
Determination of fair values Certain nancial instruments such as investments derivative nancial instruments and certain elements of loans and borrowings are carried on the balance sheet at fair value with changes in fair value reected in the income statement.
Fair values are estimated by reference in part to published price quotations and in part by using valuation techniques.
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS INTERPRETATIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO PUBLISHED STANDARDS ADOPTED IN THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2007 During the year the following standards which are relevant to the groups operations became effective and were adopted r Amendment to IAS 21 Net Investment in a Foreign
Contracts r Amendment to IAS 39 Cash Flow Hedge Accounting of Forecast Intragroup Transactions r Amendment to IAS 39 The Fair Value Option r IFRIC 4 Determining whether an arrangement contains a lease r IFRIC 6 Liabilities arising from Participating in a Specic Market  Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment The adoption of these standards has not had a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements in the year.
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS INTERPRETATION AND AMENDMENTS TO PUBLISHED STANDARDS NOT YET
Certain new standards amendments and interpretations to existing standards have been published that are mandatory for the groups accounting periods beginning on or after 1 April 2007 or later periods but which the group has not early adopted.
The new standards which are relevant to the groups operations are as follows IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures effective from 1 April 2007 and amendment to IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements  Capital Disclosures effective from 1 April 2007 IFRS 7 introduces new disclosures of qualitative and quantitative information about exposure to risks arising from nancial instruments including specied minimum disclosures about credit risk liquidity risk and market risk including sensitivity analysis to market risk.
The amendment to IAS 1 introduces disclosures about the level of an entitys capital and how it manages capital.
Management is currently assessing the disclosure impact of IFRS 7 and the amendment to IAS 1 on the groups nancial statements.
IFRS 8 Operating Segments effective from 1 April IFRS 8 requires the identication of operating segments based on internal reporting to the chief operating decision maker and extends the scope and disclosure requirements of IAS 14 Segmental Reporting.
The group is currently assessing the impact of IFRS 8 on its segmental analysis disclosure.
Amendment to IAS 23 Borrowing Costs effective from 1 April 2009 The amendment to IAS 23 eliminates the option to expense borrowing costs attributable to the acquisition construction or production of a qualifying asset as incurred.
As a result the group will be required to capitalise such borrowing costs as part of the cost of that asset.
The group is currently assessing the impact of the amendment upon the results and net assets of the group.
IFRIC 8 Scope of IFRS 2 effective from 1 April IFRIC 8 claries that transactions within the scope of IFRS 2 Share Based Payment include those in which the entity cannot specically identify some or all of the goods and services received.
The group has assessed the impact of this interpretation and has concluded it is not likely to have a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements.
IFRIC 9 Reassessment of embedded derivatives effective from 1 April 2007 IFRIC 9 claries that an entity should assess whether an embedded derivative is required to be separated from the host contract and accounted for as a derivative when the entity rst becomes a party to the contract.
Subsequent reassessment is prohibited unless there is a change in the contract terms in which case it is required.
The group has assessed the impact of this interpretation and has concluded it is not likely to have a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements.
IFRIC 10 Financial Reporting and Impairment effective from 1 April 2007 IFRIC 10 states that impairment losses recognised in interim nancial statements should not be reversed in subsequent interim or full year nancial statements.
The group has assessed the impact of this interpretation and has concluded it is not likely to have a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements.
IFRIC 11 IFRS 2  Group and Treasury Share Transactions effective from 1 April 2007 IFRIC 11 provides guidance on whether share based payment arrangements involving group entities should be accounted for as cash settled or equity settled.
The group has assessed the impact of this interpretation and has concluded it is not likely to have a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements.
IFRIC 12 Service Concession Arrangements effective from 1 April 2008 IFRIC 12 addresses the accounting by operators of publicprivate service concession arrangements.
The group has assessed the impact of this interpretation and has concluded it is not likely to have a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 85 Financial statements Filename 5138408.3d Time 151839 Date 190507 Checksum tel 86 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Before specic items
Total
For the year ended 31 March 2007 Notes m m m Revenue 1 20223  20223 Other operating income 2 236 3 233 Operating costs 3 17746 169 17915 Operating prot 1 2713 172 2541 Finance expense 5 2604  2604 Finance income 5 2371 139 2510 Net nance expense 233 139 94 Share of post tax prot of associates and joint ventures 15 15  15 Prot on disposal of associate 2222 Prot before taxation 2495 11 2484 Taxation 6 611 979 368 Prot for the year 1884 968 2852 Attributable to Equity shareholders of the parent 1882 968 2850 Minority interests 22 2 2 Earnings per share 8 Basic 34.4p Diluted 33.6p Before specic items
Total
For the year ended 31 March 2006 Notes m m m Revenue 1 19514  19514 Other operating income 2 227  227 Operating costs 3 17108 138 17246 Operating prot 1 2633 138 2495 Finance expense 5 2740  2740 Finance income 5 2268  2268 Net nance expense 472  472 Share of post tax prot of associates and joint ventures 15 16  16 Prot on disposal of joint venture 11 Prot before taxation 2177 137 2040 Taxation 6 533 41 492 Prot for the year 1644 96 1548 Attributable to Equity shareholders of the parent 1643 96 1547 Minority interests 22 1  1 Earnings per share 8 Basic 18.4p Diluted 18.1p For a definition of specific items see accounting policies.
An analysis of specific items is provided in note 4.
Dividends paid in the year were 1053 million 2006 912 million 2005 786 million as shown in note 7.
Dividends proposed in respect of the 2007 nancial year were 15.1 pence per share 2006 11.9 pence 2005 10.4 pence which amounts to 1247 million 2006 993 million 2005 883 million.
Consolidated nancial statements Group income statement For the year ended 31 March 2007 Filename 5138408.3d Time 151840 Date 190507 Checksum tel BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 87 Before specic items
Total
For the year ended 31 March 2005 Notes m m m Revenue 1 18429  18429 Other operating income telOperating costs 3 15929 59 15988 Operating prot 1 2693 299 2992 Finance expense 5 2773  2773 Finance income 5 2174  2174 Net nance expense 599  599 Share of post tax loss of associates and joint ventures 14 25 39 Prot before taxation 2080 274 2354 Taxation 6 541 16 525 Prot for the year 1539 290 1829 Attributable to Equity shareholders of the parent 1540 290 1830 Minority interests 22 1  1 Earnings per share 8 Basic 21.5p Diluted 21.3p For a definition of specific items see accounting policies.
An analysis of specific items is provided in note 4.
Group statement of recognised income and expense For the year ended 31 March 2007
Prot for the year 2852 1548 1829 Actuarial gains relating to retirement benet obligations 29 1409 2122 294 Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 95 53 27 fair value loss on net investment hedges  20 reclassied and reported in net prot  9 Fair value movements on availableforsale assets fair value gains  35 reclassied and reported in net prot  35 Fair value movements on cash ow hedges fair value losses gains 201 4 reclassied and reported in net prot 364 204 Tax impact of above items 6 486 593 79 Net gains recognised directly in equity 991 1353 242 Total recognised income and expense for the year 3843 2901 2071 Attributable to Equity shareholders of the parent 3843 2900 2072 Minority interests  1 1 3843 2901 2071 The group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 with effect from 1 April 2005.
The adoption of IAS 32 and IAS 39 resulted in a decrease in equity at 1 April 2005 of 209 million net of deferred tax of which nil was attributable to minority interests.
A reconciliation of the changes in other reserves and retained earnings is given in note 25.
Consolidated nancial statements Group income statement For the year ended 31 March 2007 continued Financial statements Filename 5138408.3d Time 151840 Date 190507
88 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F
Cash ow from operating activities Prot before taxation 2484 2040 2354 Depreciation and amortisation 2920 2884 2844 Prot loss on sale of associates and non current asset investments 19 1 358 Net nance expense 94 472 599 Other non cash charges 50 87 2 Share of prots losses of associates and joint ventures 15 16 39 Increase in inventories 6 13 12 Increase decrease in trade and other receivables 373 41 206 Increase in trade and other payables 327 174 59 Decrease increase in provisions and other liabilities 217 189 173 Cash generated from operations 5245 5777 5906 Income taxes paid 411 390 332 Income tax repayment for prior years 376 Net cash inow from operating activities 5210 5387 5574 Cash ow from investing activities Interest received 147 185 374 Dividends received from associates and joint ventures 6 12 Proceeds on disposal of group undertakings 27 Proceeds on disposal of property plant and equipment 89 66 111 Proceeds on disposal of associates and joint ventures 27 35 Proceeds on disposal of non current nancial assets 4 1 539 Proceeds on disposal of current nancial assets 3687 5964 3754 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired 284 165 426 Purchases of property plant and equipment and computer software 3298 2940 3056 Investment in associates and joint ventures 7 2 27 Purchases of non current nancial assets 7 2 2 Purchases of current nancial assets 3426 2743 3044 Net cash outow inow from investing activities 3035 365 1740 Cash ow from nancing activities Equity dividends paid 1054 907 784 Dividends paid to minority interests 3 Interest paid 797 1086 1260 Repayments of borrowings 809 4148 1022 Repayment of nance lease liabilities 276 284 275 New bank loans raised 11 1022 5 Net proceeds on issue of commercial paper 309 464 Repurchase of ordinary shares 400 348 195 Proceeds on issue of treasury shares 123 92 Repurchase of ordinary shares by subsidiary 2 Net cash used in nancing activities 2898 5278 3529 Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 37 Net decrease increase in cash and cash equivalents 760 474 305 Cash and cash equivalents at the start of the year 1784 1310 1005 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 9 1024 1784 1310 Consolidated nancial statements Group cash ow statement For the year ended 31 March 2007 Filename 5138408.3d Time 151843 Date 190507
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 89
Non current assets Intangible assets 12 2584 1908 Property plant and equipment 13 14997 15222 Derivative nancial instruments 18 25 19 Investments 14 27 17 Associates and joint ventures 15 67 48 Trade and other receivables 16 523 305 Deferred tax assets 21 117 764 18340 18283 Current assets Inventories 133 124 Trade and other receivables 16 4073 3894 Current tax receivable 504 Derivative nancial instruments 18 27 69 Investments 14 3 365 Cash and cash equivalents 9 1075 1965 5815 6417 Current liabilities Loans and other borrowings 17 2203 1940 Derivative nancial instruments 18 318 332 Trade and other payables 19 6719 6540 Current tax liabilities 277 598 Provisions 20 100 70 9617 9480 Total assets less current liabilities 14538 15220 Non current liabilities Loans and other borrowings 17 6387 7995 Derivative nancial instruments 18 992 820 Other payables 19 590 485 Deferred tax liabilities 21 1683 1505 Retirement benet obligations 29 389 2547 Provisions 20 225 261 10266 13613
Ordinary shares 24 432 432 Share premium 24 31 7 Capital redemption reserve 2 2 Other reserves 25 88 364 Retained earnings 25 3685 750 Total parent shareholders equity 4238 1555 Minority interests 22 34 52 Total equity 23 4272 1607 14538 15220 The consolidated nancial statements on pages 78 to 142 and 148 were approved by the Board of Directors on 16 May 2007 and were signed on its behalf by Sir Christopher Bland
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director Consolidated nancial statements Group balance sheet As at 31 March 2007 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151850 Date 190507 Checksum tel SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS Primary reporting format  business segments The group provides communication services which include networked IT services local and international telecommunications services and broadband and internet products and services.
The group is organised into four primary business segments BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale and Openreach.
Each of these four lines of businesses have differing risks rewards and customer proles and hence are the groups primary reporting segments.
The revenue of each business segment is derived as follows BT Global Services mainly generates its revenue from the provision of networked IT services outsourcing and system integration work and traditional xed line services to multisite organisations which include the public sector and major corporates and from the xed network operations of the groups worldwide subsidiaries.
BT Retail derives its revenue from the supply of exchange lines and from the calls made over these lines the leasing of private circuits and other private services.
It also generates revenue from broadband mobility data internet and multimedia services and from providing managed and packaged communications solutions to consumers and small and medium sized business customers in the UK.
BT Wholesale derives its revenue from providing network services and solutions to communication companies including xed and mobile network operators and other service providers and from carrying transit trafc between telecommunications operators.
Openreach derives its revenue from providing equivalent access to the local access network in the UK.
Its primary products are Local Loop Unbundling LLU Wholesale Line Rental WLR Wholesale Extension Services WES and Backhaul Extension Services
These equivalent products are sold to BT lines of business and other communication providers at the same arms length prices with the BT lines of business being treated no differently than any other customer with regard to terms and conditions or access to systems and data.
There is extensive trading between BTs lines of business and the line of business protability is dependent on the transfer price levels.
For regulated products and services those transfer prices are market based whilst for other products and services the transfer prices are agreed between the relevant lines of business on an arms length basis.
These intragroup trading arrangements are subject to periodic review.
Impact of Openreach on segmental disclosure Prior to the 2007 nancial year the group was organised into three primary segments BT Global Services BT Retail and BT
On 22 September 2005 BT entered into the Undertakings with Ofcom as a result of which BT was required to establish a new line of business and primary segment called Openreach.
Openreach was launched operationally on 21 January 2006 and is separately reported within BTs results for the rst time in the 2007 nancial year.
In accordance with the timetable set out in the Undertakings the group was required to facilitate the reporting of Openreach as a separate line of business by the end of July 2006.
This was achieved and discrete nancial information has been presented to senior management on the new business structure with respect to periods from 1 April 2006 onwards.
Both IFRSs and US GAAP require segmental information to be presented on a consistent basis for all years reported.
In the event of a restructuring of business segments comparative information is therefore required to be restated unless this is impracticable.
The results for the 2006 nancial year have been restated to reect the separate reporting of Openreach as a new business segment.
These restatements also reect the impact of the new internal trading arrangements which have been implemented due to the creation of Openreach.
The results for the 2005 nancial year however have not been restated as it is impracticable to do so.
Some of the products and services that Openreach now sell were previously provided by BT Wholesale but in a different form.
As a result of the Undertakings new equivalent products which did not previously exist had to be created for both internal and external customers.
The changes required to capture the separate reporting of these new products and services were introduced during the 2006 nancial year and therefore actual data was available to support the estimates and assumptions required to restate the results for that year.
The equivalent products and services did not exist in the 2005 nancial year and therefore the level of estimation and extrapolation required to restate the results for that year would have been too signicant to provide sufciently objective and reliable information.
Furthermore the fundamental level of reorganisation and restructuring which occurred combined with the fact that the products previously sold by BT Wholesale no longer exist mean it is also impracticable to report the results for the current nancial year on the old business segment structure.
In order to assist the readers understanding of the year on year performance additional disclosures have been presented showing the previously reported segmental data for the 2006 and 2005 nancial years on the old business segment basis prior to the creation of Openreach.
Consolidated nancial statements Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 90 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151850 Date 190507
SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS continued Business segment results for the years ended 31 March 2007 and 2006  new segment structure BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale Openreach Other Intragroup Total Year ended 31 March 2007 m m m m m m m
External revenue 7467 7997 4057 685 17  20223 Internal revenue 1639 417 3527 4492  10075 Total revenue 9106 8414 7584 5177 17 10075 20223 BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale Openreach Other Intragroup Total Year ended 31 March 2006 restated m m m m m m m
External revenue 7168 8102 3908 318 18  19514 Internal revenue 1604 405 3435 4824  10268 Total revenue 8772 8507 7343 5142 18 10268 19514 BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale Openreach Other Total Year ended 31 March 2007 m m m m m m
Operating prot before specic items 293 674 724 1177 155 2713 Specic items 172 172 Segment result 293 674 724 1177 327 2541 Share of post tax prot of associates and joint ventures 15 Prot on disposal of associate 22 Net nance expense 94 Prot before tax 2484 Taxation 368 Prot for the year 2852 Capital additions Property plant and equipment 434 9tel2440 Intangible assets tel1017 1108 261 3247 Depreciation 494 128 1102 663 149 2536 Amortisation a Additions to intangible assets exclude goodwill arising on acquisitions.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 91 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151851 Date 190507
SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS continued BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale Openreach Other Total Year ended 31 March 2006 restated m m m m m m
Operating prot before specic items 288 569 759 1183 166 2633 Specic items 138 138 Segment result 288 569 759 1183 304 2495 Share of post tax prot of associates and joint ventures 16 Prot on disposal of joint venture 1 Net nance expense 472 Prot before tax 2040 Taxation 492 Prot for the year 1548 Capital additions Property plant and equipment 466 9tel2550 Intangible assets tel975 1038 274 3142 Depreciation 555 120 1008 770 181 2634 Amortisation a Additions to intangible assets exclude goodwill arising on acquisitions.
BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale Openreach Other Total As at 31 March 2007 m m m m m m
Segment assets 6714 1831 5054 8707 34 22340 Associates and joint ventures 67 67 Unallocated assets 1748 1748 Consolidated total assets 6714 1831 5054 8707 1849 24155
Segment liabilities 3128 2351 1426 598 31 7534 Unallocated liabilities 12349 12349 Consolidated total liabilities 3128 2351 1426 598 12380 19883 BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale Openreach Other Total As at 31 March 2006 restated m m m m m m
Segment assets 6253 2517 4959 8200 93 21836 Associates and joint ventures 48 48 Unallocated assets 2816 2816 Consolidated total assets 6253 2517 4959 8200 2771 24700
Segment liabilities 3795 2400 911 489 308 7287 Unallocated liabilities 15806 15806 Consolidated total liabilities 3795 2400 911 489 15498 23093 Segment assets consist primarily of property plant and equipment intangible assets inventories and trade receivables.
Unallocated assets include deferred and current taxation investments derivatives and associates and joint ventures.
Segment liabilities comprise trade and other payables and provisions.
Unallocated liabilities include current and deferred taxation retirement benet obligations nance lease liabilities corporate borrowings and related derivatives.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 92 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151851 Date 190507 Checksum tel SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS continued Segment results for the years ended 31 March 2006 and 2005  as previously reported excluding Openreach BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale Other Intragroup Total Year ended 31 March 2006 m m m m m m
External revenue 7151 8119 4226 18  19514 Internal revenue 1481 333 5006  6820 Total revenue 8632 8452 9232 18 6820 19514 BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale Other Intragroup Total Year ended 31 March 2005 m m m m m m
External revenue 6154 8430 3820 25  18429 Internal revenue 1334 268 5275  6877 Total revenue 7488 8698 9095 25 6877 18429 BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale Other Total Year ended 31 March 2006 m m m m m
Operating prot before specic items 363 644 1992 366 2633 Specic items 138 138 Segment result 363 644 1992 504 2495 Share of post tax prot of associates and joint ventures 16 Prot on disposal of joint venture 1 Net nance expense 472 Prot before tax 2040 Taxation 492 Prot for the year 1548 Capital additions Property plant and equipment 466 98 1743 243 2550 Intangible assets 236 55 270 3tel2013 274 3142 Depreciation 555 120 1778 181 2634
Additions to intangible assets exclude goodwill arising on acquisitions.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 93 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151851 Date 190507
SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS continued BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale Other Total Year ended 31 March 2005 m m m m m
Operating prot before specic items 411 607 1950 275 2693 Specic items 299 299 Segment result 411 607 1950 24 2992 Share of post tax loss of associates and joint ventures 39 Net nance expense 599 Prot before tax 2354 Taxation 525 Prot for the year 1829 Capital additions Property plant and equipment 450 119 1783 219 2571 Intangible assets 155 51 198 3tel1981 255 3011 Depreciation 513 133 1831 217 2694
Additions to intangible assets exclude goodwill arising on acquisitions.
BT Global Services BT Retail BT Wholesale Other Total As at 31 March 2006 m m m m m
Segment assets 6253 2517 13159 93 21836 Associates and joint ventures 48 48 Unallocated assets 2816 2816 Consolidated total assets 6253 2517 13159 2771 24700
Segment liabilities 3776 2419 1400 308 7287 Unallocated liabilities 15806 15806 Consolidated total liabilities 3776 2419 1400 15498 23093 Segment assets consist primarily of property plant and equipment intangible assets inventories and trade receivables.
Unallocated assets include deferred and current taxation investments derivatives and associates and joint ventures.
Segment liabilities comprise trade and other payables and provisions.
Unallocated liabilities include current and deferred taxation retirement benet obligations nance lease liabilities corporate borrowings and related derivatives.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 94 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151851 Date 190507
SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS continued Secondary reporting format  geographical segments Revenue by geographic area UK 17241 16901 16863 Europe excluding the UK 2174 1900 1306 Americas 711 627 190 Asia Pacic 97 86 70 Total 20223 19514 18429 The creation of Openreach has not impacted the presentation of the geographical segments of the group.
The analysis of revenue by geographical area is on the basis of the country of origin of the customer invoice.
In an analysis of revenue by destination incoming and transit international calls would be treated differently but would not lead to a materially different geographical analysis.
Total assets Capital additions Total assets and capital additions by geographic area UK 17208 16240 2951 2872 Europe excluding the UK 4078 3777 203 191 Americas 993 1704 73 66 Asia Pacic Unallocated assets 1748 2816 Total assets 24155 24700 3247 3142 Total assets and capital additions are allocated to geographical areas based on the location of the asset.
OTHER OPERATING INCOME Prots on disposal of property plant and equipment 13 222 Income from repayment works 68 74 64 Other operating income 155 151 107 Other operating income before specic items 236 227 193 Specic items note 4 3  358 Other operating income 233 227 551 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 95 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151851 Date 190507 Checksum tel OPERATING COSTStel m m m Costs by nature Staff costs Wages and salaries 4099 3910 3645 Social security costs 388 377 319 Pension costs 643 603 540 Share based payments 93 76 50 Total staff costs 5223 4966 4554 Own work capitalised 718 674 620 Net staff costs 4505 4292 3934 Depreciation of property plant and equipment Owned assets 2420 2500 2536 Under nance leases 116 134 158 Amortisation of intangible assets 384 250 150 Payments to telecommunications operators 4162 4045 3725 Other operating costs 6159 5887 5426 Total operating costs before specic items 17746 17108 15929 Specic items note 4 169 138 59 Total operating costs 17915 17246 15988 Operating costs include the following Early leaver costs 147 133 166 Research and development expenditure Rental costs relating to operating leases 389 413 419 Foreign currency losses 5 12 3 Research and development expenditure includes amortisation of 314 million 2006 161 million 2005 95 million in respect of internally developed computer software.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 96 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151852 Date 190507
SPECIFIC ITEMS The group separately identies and discloses signicant oneoff or unusual items termed specic items.
This is consistent with the way that nancial performance is measured by management and we believe assists in providing a meaningful analysis of the trading results of the group.
A denition of specic items is provided in the accounting policies section on page 78.
Other operating income Net loss on sale of group undertakings Prot on sale of non current asset investments Operating costs Property rationalisation costs Creation of Openreach Write off of circuit inventory and other working capital balances Costs associated with settlement of open tax years Finance income Interest on settlement of open tax years Share of results of associates and joint ventures Impairment of assets in joint ventures Prot on disposal of associates and joint ventures Net specic items charge credit before tax 11 137 274 Tax credit in respect of settlement of open tax years Tax credit on specic items 41 41 16 Net specic items credit charge after tax 968 96 290 In the current year the group disposed of some noncore businesses.
The loss on disposal relates primarily to the disposal of the groups satellite broadcast service assets 7 million.
In the current year the group disposed of some noncore investments resulting in a profit of 2 million.
In the 2005 financial year the group recognised a profit on disposal of 358 million comprising 236 million from the sale of the groups 15.8% interest in Eutelsat SA 46 million from sale of the 4% interest in Intelsat 38 million from the sale of the 11.9% interest in Starhub Pte Ltd and other gains of 38 million.
In the current year 64 million 2006 68 million 2005 59 million of property rationalisation charges were recognised in relation to the groups provincial office portfolio.
In the current year a provision of 30 million 2006 70 million 2005 nil was recognised for the estimated incremental and directly attributable costs arising from the groups obligation to set up Openreach and meet the requirements of the Undertakings.
In the current year the group recorded a charge of 65 million as a result of a review of circuit inventory and other working capital balances arising before 31 March 2006.
In the current year the group agreed settlement of substantially all open UK tax matters relating to the ten tax years up to and including 200405 with HM Revenue and Customs.
Specific items therefore include a net credit of 1067 million which represents those elements of the tax charges previously recognised that were in excess of the final agreed liability of 938 million interest income of 139 million on the repayment and operating costs of 10 million representing the costs associated with reaching the agreement.
In the 2005 financial year the group incurred an impairment charge of 25 million representing its share of a write down of Albacoms assets prior to Albacom becoming a subsidiary.
In the current year the group disposed of 6% of its equity interest in Tech Mahindra Limited an associated undertaking.
The resulting profit on disposal was 22 million.
The groups shareholding at 31 March 2007 was 35%.
FINANCE INCOME AND FINANCE EXPENSEtel m m m Finance expense Interest on listed bonds debentures and notes Interest on nance leases 44 62 68 Interest on other borrowings 58 20 19 Unwinding of discount on provisions 3 33 Net charge on nancial instruments in a fair value hedge Net foreign exchange on items in hedging relationships Fair value movements on derivatives not in a designated hedge relationship 4 8 Interest on pension scheme liabilities 1872 1816 1720 Total nance expense 2604 2740 2773 The group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 from 1 April 2005.
For the 2005 financial year the groups previous accounting policies have therefore been applied in calculating the recognition and measurement basis for finance expense see accounting policies.
Includes a net charge of 67 million 2006 41 million relating to fair value movements on derivatives recycled from the cash flow reserve.
Includes a net credit of 70 million 2006 net charge of 71 million relating to fair value movements arising on hedged items and a net charge of 70 million 2006 net credit of 71 million relating to fair value movements arising on derivatives designated as fair value hedges.
Includes a net credit of 420 million 2006 net charge of 330 million relating to foreign exchange movements on hedged loans and borrowings and a net charge of 420 million 2006 net credit of 330 million relating to fair value movements on derivatives recycled from the cash flow reserve.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 97 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151853 Date 190507
FINANCE INCOME AND FINANCE EXPENSE continuedtel m m m Finance income Income from listed investments Other interest and similar income bcd Net foreign exchange on items in hedging relationships Expected return on pension scheme assets 2292 2070 1918 Total nance income 2510 2268 2174 Net nance expense 94 472 599 The group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 from 1 April 2005.
For the 2005 financial year the groups previous accounting policies have therefore been applied in calculating the recognition and measurement basis for finance income see accounting policies.
Income from listed investments and other interest and similar income includes 45 million 2006 37 million relating to gains on held for trading investments.
On 11 August 2005 the group exercised its option to require early redemption of its US dollar convertible 2008 bond.
Bondholders had the option to take redemption proceeds in the form of cash or shares in the groups interest in LG Telecom.
The majority of bondholders exercised their option to take the redemption proceeds in the form of LG Telecom shares.
Other interest in 2006 includes a net bond redemption gain of 27 million.
This reflects the write off of LG Telecom shares of 121 million and the associated release from the availableforsale reserve of 35 million the write off of the bond and transaction costs of 87 million and the associated option liability of 17 million and the release from the translation reserve of 9 million credit relating to foreign exchange movements on the investment in LG Telecom to the date of disposal.
The 2007 financial year includes 139 million relating to interest on settlement of open tax matters disclosed as a specific item see note 4.
Includes a net charge of 123 million 2006 net credit 85 million relating to foreign exchange movements on hedged investments and a net credit of 123 million 2006 net charge 85 million relating to fair value movements on derivatives recycled from the cash flow reserve.
TAXATIONtel m m m Analysis of taxation credit expense for the year United Kingdom Corporation tax at 30% 2006 and 2005 30% 256 404 542 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 1096 69 4 NonUK taxation Current 25 12 4 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 38 1 3 Total current tax credit expense 777 348 539 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary differences 367 155 15 Adjustment in respect of prior periods 42 11 1 Total deferred tax expense credit 409 144 14 Total taxation credit expense in the income statement 368 492 525 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 98 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151853 Date 190507
TAXATION continued Factors affecting taxation credit expense The taxation credit expense on the prot for the year differs from the amount computed by applying the corporation tax rate to the prot before taxation as a result of the following factorstel m % m % m % Prot before taxation 2484 2040 2354 Notional taxation expense at UK rate of 30% 2006 and 2005 30% 745 30.0 612 30.0 706 30.0 Effects of Non deductible depreciation and amortisation 4 0.1 8 0.4 6 0.2 Non deductible non UK losses 9 0.4 29 1.4 38 1.6 Higher lower taxes on non UK prots 11 0.4 1  14 0.6 Lower taxes on gain on disposal of non current investments and group undertakings 2 0.1   107 4.5 Other deferred tax assets not recognised  25 1.2 Associates and joint ventures 5 0.2 5 0.2 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 78 3.2 79 3.9 2 0.1 Tax credit in respect of settlement of open tax years 938 37.8 Total taxation credit expense and effective tax Specic items 979 39.4 41 0.4 16 3.7 Total taxation expense before specic items and effective tax rate 611 24.5 533 24.5 541 26.0tel m m m Tax on items taken directly to equity Current tax charge on exchange movements offset in reserves  7 Deferred tax charge credit relating to losses on cash ow hedges 62 45 Deferred tax charge relating to ineffective hedges  9 Deferred tax charge on actuarial gain relating to retirement benet obligations 424 629 72 Total taxation on items taken to statement of recognised income and expense 486 593 79 Current tax credit relating to share based payments 12 Deferred tax credit relating to share based payments 70 5 Total taxation on items taken directly to equity 404 588 79
Final paid in respect of the prior year 7.60 6.50 5.3telInterim paid in respect of the current year 5.10 4.30 3.9tel12.70 10.80 9.20 1053 912 786 The directors are proposing that a nal dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2007 of 10.0 pence per share will be paid to shareholders on 17 September 2007 taking the full year proposed dividend in respect of the 2007 nancial year to 15.1 pence 2006 11.9 pence 2005 10.4 pence.
This dividend is subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting and therefore the liability of 825 million 2006 631 million has not been included in these nancial statements.
The proposed dividend will be payable to all shareholders on the Register of Members on 24 August 2007.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 99 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151856 Date 190507 Checksum tel EARNINGS PER SHARE The basic earnings per share are calculated by dividing the prot attributable to equity shareholders by the weighted average number of shares in issue after deducting the groups shares held by employee share ownership trusts and treasury shares.
In calculating the diluted earnings per share share options outstanding and other potential ordinary shares have been taken into account where the impact of these is dilutive.
Options over 12 million shares 2006 52 million shares 2005 207 million shares were excluded from the calculation of the total diluted number of shares as the impact of these is antidilutive.
The weighted average number of shares in the years were millions of shares millions of shares millions of shares Basic 8293 8422 8524 Dilutive ordinary shares from share options and shares held in trust 186 115 57 Total diluted 8479 8537 8581 Prot attributable to equity shareholders of the parent m 2850 1547 1830 Basic earnings per share pence 34.4p 18.4p 21.5p Diluted earnings per share pence 33.6p 18.1p 21.3p Basic earnings per share before specic items and the per share impact of individual specic items is as follows pence per share pence per share pence per share Per share impact of specic items Net loss on sale of group undertakings  5 Prot on sale of non current asset investments 2   4.2 358 Property rationalisation costs 0.8 64 0.8 68 0.7 59 Creation of Openreach 0.4 30 0.8 70 Write off of circuit inventory and other working capital balances 0.8 65 Costs associated with settlement of open tax years 0.1 10 Interest on settlement of open tax years 1.7 139 Prot on disposal of associates and joint ventures 0.3 22 1 Impairment of assets in joint ventures    0.3 25 Tax credit in respect of settlement of open tax years 11.3 938 Tax credit on specic items 0.5 41 0.5 41 0.2 16 Basic earnings loss per shareprot loss for the year attributable to specic items 11.7 968 1.1 96 3.4 290 Basic earnings per shareprot for the year attributable to equity shareholders 34.4 2850 18.4 1547 21.5 1830 Adjustment Basic earnings loss per shareprot loss for the nancial year attributable to specic items 11.7 968 1.1 96 3.4 290 Basic earnings per shareprot for the year before specic items 22.7 1882 19.5 1643 18.1 1540 Diluted earnings per shareprot for the year 33.6 2850 18.1 1547 21.3 1830 Adjustment Diluted earnings loss per shareprot loss for the nancial year attributable to specic items 11.4 968 1.1 96 3.4 290 Diluted earnings per shareprot for the year before specic items 22.2 1882 19.2 1643 17.9 1540 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 100 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151856 Date 190507 Checksum tel BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 101 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS 2007 2006 m m Cash at bank and in hand 568 511 Cash equivalents Listed cash equivalents Euro treasury bills 10 8 Unlisted cash equivalents US corporate debt securities  422 UK deposits 417 914 European deposits 57 70 US deposits 23 40 Total cash equivalents 507 1454 Total cash and cash equivalents 1075 1965 Bank overdrafts 51 181 Cash and cash equivalents per the cash ow statement 1024 1784 The group has cross undertaking guarantee facilities across certain bank accounts which allow a legally enforceable right of set off of the relevant cash and overdraft balances on bank accounts included within each scheme.
Included within overdrafts at 31 March 2007 were balances of 49 million 2006 171 million which had a legally enforceable right of set off against cash balances of 117 million 2006 209 million.
These balances have not been netted above as settlement is not intended to take place simultaneously or on a net basis.
NET DEBT Net debt consists of loans and other borrowings less current asset investments and cash and cash equivalents.
Loans and other borrowings are measured at the net proceeds raised adjusted to amortise any discount over the term of the debt.
For the purpose of this analysis current asset investments and cash and cash equivalents are measured at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Currency denominated balances within net debt are translated to sterling at swapped rates where hedged.
This denition of net debt measures balances at the expected value of future cash ows due to arise on maturity of nancial instruments and removes the balance sheet adjustments made from the remeasurement of hedged risks under fair value hedges and the use of the amortised cost method as required by IAS 39.
In addition the gross balances are adjusted to take account of netting arrangements amounting to 49 million 2006 171 million.
Net debt is a non GAAP measure since it is not dened in IFRSs but it is a key indicator used by management in order to assess operational performance and balance sheet strength.
2007 2006 m m Analysis of net debt Loans and other borrowings current and non current 8590 9935
Cash and cash equivalents 1075 1965 Current asset investments 3 365 7512 7605
To retranslate currency denominated balances at swapped rates where hedged 577 121 To recognise borrowings and investments at net proceeds and unamortised discount 175 192 Net debt 7914 7534 After allocating the element of the adjustments which impacts loans and other borrowings as dened above gross debt at 31 March 2007 was 8943 million 2006 9685 million.
2007 2006 m m Reconciliation of movement in net debt Net debt at 1 April 7534 7893 Increase decrease in net debt resulting from cash ows 219 199 Net debt assumed or issued on acquisitions 11 Currency movements 124 75 Other noncash movements 26 85 Net debt at 31 March 7914 7534 Noncash transactions Other noncash movements in 2006 includes 87 million relating to the early redemption of the groups US dollar convertible bond for shares in LG Telecom.
Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151856 Date 190507
FREE CASH FLOW The components of free cash ow which is a non GAAP measure are presented in the table below and reconciled to net cash inow from operating activities the most directly comparable IFRS measure.
Free cash ow is not dened in IFRSs but is a key indicator used by management to measure operational performance.
Cash generated from operations before taxation 5245 5777 5906 Income taxes paid net of repayments 35 390 332 Net cash inow from operating activities 5210 5387 5574 Included in cash ows from investing activities Net purchase of property plant and equipment computer software and licences 3209 2874 2945 Net purchase sale of non current nancial assets 3 1 537 Dividends received from associates and joint ventures 6 12 Interest received 147 185 374 Included in cash ows from nancing activities Interest paid 797 1086 1260 Free cash ow 1354 1612 2282 INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Telecommunication licences and other Brands customer lists and relationships
Total m m m m m At 1 April tel84 1160 1845 Additions    592 592 Disposals and adjustments    8 8 Exchange differences 18 8  8 34 Acquisitions through business combinations At 1 April tel106 1784 2639 Additions    807 807 Disposals and adjustments  15  104 119 Exchange differences 20 10  12 42 Acquisitions through business combinations At 31 March tel118 2487 3609
At 1 April 2005 51  415 466 Charge for the year Acquisitions   15 15 Disposals and adjustments   8 8 Exchange differences 2 6 8 At 1 April Charge for the year Acquisitions 1 7 8 Disposals and adjustments 8  73 81 Exchange differences 7  10 17 At 31 March 025 Carrying amount At 31 March tel94 1545 2584 At 31 March tel95 1126 1908 Includes additions in 2007 of 741 million 2006 544 million in respect of internally developed computer software.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 102 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151857 Date 190507 Checksum tel INTANGIBLE ASSETS continued Impairment tests of goodwill During the 2007 nancial year the group made a number of acquisitions.
INS Counterpane and I3IT have been fully integrated into BT Global Services which is considered to be the relevant cash generating unit CGU.
PlusNet for which the relevant CGUs are considered to be the Enterprises and Consumer divisions of BT Retail respectively.
In addition the group reorganised its structure with effect from 1 April 2006 such that the Irish operations were transferred from BT Global Services to BT Retail and BT Ireland now also represents a separate CGU.
For the purposes of goodwill impairment testing the group therefore had four relevant CGUs at 31 March 2007.
These are the smallest identiable groups of assets that generate cash inows that have goodwill and are largely independent of the cash inows from other assets or groups of assets.
Goodwill is allocated to the groups CGUs as follows BT Retail BT Global Services Consumer Enterprises BT Ireland Total m m m m m At 1 April 2005 360  37 7 404 Acquisition through business combinations 111  1 9 121 Exchange differences 17  1  18 At 1 April 2006 488  39 16 543 Acquisition through business combinations 223 57 16  296 Exchange differences 20    20 At 31 March The recoverable amount of each CGU is based on value in use calculations.
These are determined using cash ow projections derived from nancial budgets approved by the board covering a four year period.
They reect managements expectation of revenue growth operating costs and margin for each CGU based on past experience.
Cash ows beyond the four year period have been extrapolated using estimated terminal growth rates ranging from 0% to 2%.
These rates have been determined with regard to projected growth rates for the specic markets in which the CGU participates and are not considered to exceed the long term average growth rates for those markets.
Discount rates applied to the cash ow forecasts are derived from the groups pretax weighted average cost of capital for regulated and nonregulated products.
The discount rates applied range from 10.0% to 11.4%.
The forecasts are most sensitive to changes in projected revenue growth rates in the rst four years of the forecast period.
However there is signicant headroom and based on the sensitivity analysis performed we have concluded that no reasonably possible changes in the base case assumptions would cause the carrying amount of the CGUs to exceed their recoverable amount.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 103 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151857 Date 190507
PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Land and buildings ab
Other
Assets in course of construction Total m m m m m
At 1 April 2005 1065 34957 2189 763 38974 Additions 17 263 247 2038 2565 Acquisition through business combinations Transfers 50 1802 15 1867 Exchange differences 4 71 14  89 Disposals and adjustments 39 1447 310 41 1837 At 31 March 2006 1120 35911 2188 895 40114 Additions 19 296 210 1936 2461 Acquisition through business combinations 4 13 11  28 Transfers 57 1767 9 1833 Exchange differences 10 107 20 4 141 Disposals and adjustments 75 1031 178 19 1265 At 31 March 2007 1115 36849 2220 1013 41197 Accumulated depreciation At 1 April 2005 371 21865 1544  23780 Charge for the year 58 2353 223  2634 Acquisition through business combinations 14 200 28  242 Exchange differences 1 44 10  55 Disposals and adjustments 32 1479 251  1762 At 31 March 2006 412 22983 1554  24949 Charge for the year 49 2307 180  2536 Acquisition through business combinations 2 7 7  16 Exchange differences 5 64 14  83 Disposals and adjustments 32 1000 150  1182 At 31 March 2007 426 24233 1577  26236 Carrying amount At 31 March 2007 689 12616 643 1013 14961 Engineering stores    36 36 Total at 31 March 2007 689 12616 643 1049 14997 At 31 March 2006 708 12928 634 895 15165 Engineering stores    57 57 Total at 31 March 2006 708 12928 634 952 15tel m m The carrying amount of land and buildings including leasehold improvements comprised Freehold 254 311 Long leases over 50 years unexpired 131 136 Short leases 304 261 Total land and buildings 689 708 The carrying amount of the groups property plant and equipment includes an amount of 353 million 2006 460 million in respect of assets held under finance leases.
The depreciation charge on those assets for the year ended 31 March 2007 was 116 million 2006 134 million.
Other mainly comprises motor vehicles and computers.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 104 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151857 Date 190507 Checksum tel PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT continued 2007 2006 m m Additions to property plant and equipment comprised Land and buildings 61 68 Network infrastructure and equipment Transmission equipment 1209 1429 Exchange equipment 118 80 Other network equipment 854 727
Computers and ofce equipment 149 138 Motor vehicles and other 70 123 Total additions to property plant and equipment 2461 2565 Decrease in engineering stores 21 15 Total additions 2440 2550
2007 2006 m m Non current assets Availableforsale 14 9 Loans and receivables Current assets Availableforsale  2 Held for trading  348 Loans and receivables 3 15 3tel m m
At 1 April 11 1156 Additions 7 195 Transfer from associates and joint ventures  86 Revaluation surplus transfer to equity  35 Disposals 4 1461 At 31 March 14 11 Less Non current availableforsale assets 14 9 Current availableforsale assets  2 Availableforsale nancial assets consist mainly of listed corporate debt securities and notes denominated in sterling.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 105 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151858 Date 190507
INVESTMENTS continued 2007 2006 m m Held for trading US Government debt securities  51 US Corporate debt securities  297 The investments included above represent listed short term debt securities with quoted market prices.
The group has not designated any nancial assets that are not classied as held for trading as nancial assets at fair value through the income statement.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivable nancial assets mainly consist of term deposits xed term loans and other xed term debt securities mainly denominated in sterling with a xed coupon and in certain instances options for early redemption.
ASSOCIATES AND JOINT VENTURES The groups share of the assets liabilities revenue and expenses of its interest in associates and joint ventures at 31 March was as follows Associates Joint ventures Total Associates Joint ventures
Non current assets Current assets Current liabilities 29 3 32 21 1 22 Share of net assets Revenue Expenses 113 21 134 59 108 167 Taxation 2  2 1 3 4 Share of post tax results 22 7 Associates Joint ventures Total m m m At 1 April Share of post tax prot 13 3 16 Acquisitions 268 Disposals  86 86 Translation differences and other 268 At 1 April Share of post tax prot loss 22 7 15 Dividends received 5 1 6 Acquisitions 347 Disposals 1  1 Translation differences and other 3 7 4 At 31 March During the 2007 nancial year the group disposed of 6% of its equity interest in its associate Tech Mahindra resulting in a prot on disposal of 22 million.
At 31 March 2007 the fair value of the groups investments in associates and joint ventures for which published price quotations are available was 702 million 2006 nil.
During the 2006 nancial year the LG Telecom joint venture carrying value 86 million was transferred to availableforsale assets in connection with the early redemption of the groups US dollar convertible 2008 bond.
Details of the groups principal associate at 31 March 2007 are set out on page 148.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 106 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151858 Date 190507
TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES 2007 2006 m m
Trade receivables 1592 1662 Prepayments 922 686 Accrued income 1284 1254 Other debtors 275 292 4073 3894 Trade receivables are stated after deducting 280 million 2006 315 million for doubtful debts.
The amount charged to the income statement for doubtful debts for the year ended 31 March 2007 was 117 million 2006 170 million 2005 150 million.
2007 2006 m m Non current Other assets Represents costs relating to the initial set up transition or transformation phase of long term networked IT services contracts.
LOANS AND OTHER BORROWINGS US dollar 9.125% 2006 8.875% notes 2030 minimum 8.625% 1398 1580 Sterling 5.75% bonds telSterling 3.5% indexed linked notes telSterling 8.625% bonds telSterling 8.0% 2006 7.75% notes 2016 minimum 7.5% Euro 7.375% 2006 7.125% notes 2011 minimum 6.875% US dollar 8.625% 2006 8.375% notes 2010 minimum 8.125% 1515 1713 US dollar 8.765% bonds 2009 US dollar 7% notes 2007 Sterling 7.375% notes 2006 minimum 7.125% Total listed bonds debentures and notes 6249 7140 Finance leases 567 845 Commercial paper bd Sterling bank loans due 20072009 average effective interest rate 10.4% 2006 9.7% 147 240 Sterling oating rate note 20072009 average effective interest rate 4.3% 2006 4.1% 42 49 Sterling oating rate loan 20072009 average effective interest rate 5.5% 2006 4.6% 724 1003 Preference shares  5 Other loans 20072010 16 Bank overdrafts of which 49 million 2006 171 million had a legally enforceable right of set off  see note 9 51 181 Total other loans and borrowings 1774 1950 Total loans and other borrowings 8590 9935 The interest rate payable on these notes will be subject to adjustment from time to time if either Moodys or Standard and Poors SandP reduces the rating ascribed to the groups senior unsecured debt below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of SandP.
In this event the interest rate payable on the notes and the spread applicable to the floating notes will be increased by 0.25% for each ratings category adjustment by each rating agency.
In addition if Moodys or SandP subsequently increase the ratings ascribed to the groups senior unsecured debt then the interest rate then payable on notes and the spread applicable to the floating notes will be decreased by 0.25% for each rating category upgrade by each rating agency but in no event will the interest rate be reduced below the minimum interest rate reflected in the above table.
Hedged in a designated cash flow hedge.
Hedged in a designated cash flow and fair value hedge.
Commercial paper is denominated in sterling 2007 25 million 2006 35 million US dollar 2007 nil 2006 66 million and euro 2007 769 million 2006 371 million.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 107 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151900 Date 190507 Checksum tel LOANS AND OTHER BORROWINGS continued The interest rates payable on loans and borrowings disclosed above reect the coupons on underlying issued loans and borrowings and not the interest rates achieved through applying associated currency and interest rate swaps in hedge arrangements.
The carrying values disclosed above for the current year reect balances at amortised cost adjusted for deferred and current fair value adjustments to the relevant loans or borrowings hedged risk in a fair value hedge.
This does not reect the nal principal repayment that will arise after taking account of the relevant derivatives in hedging relationships which is reected in the table below.
Apart from nance leases all borrowings as at 31 March 2007 and 2006 are unsecured.
2007 2006
Effect of hedging and interest
Carrying amount Effect of hedging and interest
Repayments fall due as follows Within one year or on demand 2203 132 2071 1940 190 1750 Between one and two years 330 1 331 1182 3 1179 Between two and three years  337 Between three and four years 2250 271 2Between four and ve years 12  12 2467 55 2522 After ve years 3454 242 3696 3628 63 3691 Total due for repayment after more than one year 6386 535 6921 7983 123 8106 Total repayments 8589 403 8992 9923 67 9856 Fair value adjustments for hedged risk 1 12 Total loans and other borrowings 8590 9935 Adjustment for hedging and interest reflects the impact of the currency element of derivatives and adjusts the repayments to exclude interest recognised in the carrying amount.
Minimum lease payments Repayment of outstanding lease obligationstel 2006 m m m m Amounts payable under nance leases Within one year 32telIn the second to fth years inclusive After ve years 41tel867 1182 567 845 Less future nance charges 300 337 Total nance lease obligations 56telThe groups obligations under nance leases are secured by the lessors title to the leased assets.
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS 2007 2006
Liabilities
Assets
Liabilities
Interest rate swaps  cash ow hedge 15 234  405 Other interest rate swaps Cross currency swaps  cash ow hedge Cross currency swaps  fair value hedge 78 12 16 Forward foreign exchange contracts  cash ow hedge 16 3 75 Other forward foreign exchange contracts  3 Embedded derivatives  options  2 52 1310 88 1152 Analysed as Current Non current  1310 88 1152 Details of hedges in which the derivative nancial instruments are utilised are disclosed in note 33.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 108 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151900 Date 190507 Checksum tel TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES 2007 2006 m m
Trade payables 3717 3466 Other taxation and social security 473 521 Other creditors 939 945 Accrued expenses 519 488 Deferred income 1071 1120 6719 6tel m m Non current Other creditors 553 445 Deferred income Non current payables relate to operating lease liabilities and deferred gains on a prior period sale and nance leaseback transaction.
PROVISIONS
Property provisions
Total m m m At 1 April tel331 Charged to the income statement Unwind of discount 3 3 Utilised in the year 74 50 124 At 31 March 2007 240tel 2006 m m Analysed as Current 100 70 Non current 22tela Property provisions comprise amounts provided for obligations to complete nearly finished new properties and remedial work to be undertaken on properties and the onerous lease provision on rationalisation of the groups property portfolio.
The provisions will be utilised over the remaining lease periods which range from 1 to 24 years.
Other provisions include amounts provided for legal or constructive obligations arising from insurance claims and litigation which will be utilised as the obligations are settled.
Also included are amounts provided for the estimated incremental and directly attributable costs arising from the groups obligation to set up Openreach which will be utilised over one year.
Includes specific items of 64 million for property rationalisation costs and 30 million relating to the estimated incremental and directly attributable costs arising from the groups obligation to set up Openreach and meet the requirements of the Undertakings see note 4.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 109 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151901 Date 190507 Checksum tel DEFERRED TAXATION Excess capital allowances
Share based payments
Total
At 1 April 2005 1968 1434 7 518 9 Charge credit to income statement 16 41 13 132 144 Charge credit to equity  629 5 36 588 At 31 March 2006 1952 764 25 422 741 Deferred tax asset  764   764 Deferred tax liability 1952  25 422 1505 At 31 March 2006 1952 764 25 422 741 Charge credit to income statement 144 223 33 75 409 Charge credit to equity  424 70 62 416 At 31 March 2007 2096 117 128 285 1566 Deferred tax asset  117   117 Deferred tax liability 2096  128 285 1683 At 31 March 2007 2096 117 128 285 1566 At 31 March 2007 117 million 2006 764 million of the deferred tax asset of 117 million 2006 764 million is expected to be recovered after more than twelve months.
At 31 March 2007 1683 million 2006 1505 million of the deferred tax liability of 1683 million 2006 1505 million is expected to be settled after more than twelve months.
At 31 March 2007 the group had operating losses capital losses and other temporary differences carried forward in respect of which no deferred tax assets were recognised amounting to 21.1 billion 2006 21.8 billion.
The groups capital losses and other temporary differences have no expiry date restrictions.
The expiry date of operating losses carried forward is dependent upon the tax law of the various territories in which the losses arise.
A summary of expiry dates for losses in respect of which restrictions apply is set out below
Expiry of losses Restricted losses Americas 218 20122027 Europe 1226 20072022 Total restricted losses 1444 Unrestricted losses Operating losses 1026 No expiry Capital losses 17595 No expiry Other 1044 No expiry Total unrestricted losses 19665 Total 21109 At the balance sheet date the undistributed earnings of overseas subsidiaries was 9.3 billion 2006 8.6 billion.
No deferred tax liabilities have been recognised in respect of those unremitted earnings because the group is in a position to control the timing of the reversal of these temporary differences and it is probable that such differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Temporary differences arising in connection with interests in associates and joint ventures for which deferred tax liabilities have not been recognised are insignicant.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 110 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151901 Date 190507 Checksum tel MINORITY INTERESTS 2007 2006 m m At 1 April 52 50 Share of prots 2 1 Disposal 15 Minority share of dividend paid 3 Exchange adjustments 2 1 At 31 March 34 52 RECONCILIATION OF MOVEMENTS IN EQUITYtel m m m Total equity at 1 April 1607 95 1039 Transition to IAS 32 and IAS 39  209 Prot for the year 2850 1548 1829 Dividends 1053 912 786 Share based payments 71 65 20 Issue of shares 24 41 Net purchase of treasury shares 284 344 176 Exchange differences on translation 93 24 27 Actuarial gains 1409 2122 294 Net fair value movements on cash ow hedges 163 200 Tax on items taken directly to equity 404 588 79 Minority interest 18 24 Net movement in equity 2665 1512 1134 Total equity at 31 March 4272 1607 95 SHARE CAPITAL Share capital Share premium m m Balances at 31 March 2005 432 3 Arising on share issues 4 Balances at 31 March 2006 432 7 Arising on share issues 24 Balances at 31 March 2007 432 31 The authorised share capital of the company throughout the years ended 31 March 2007 and 2006 was 13463 million representing 269260253468 ordinary shares of 5p each.
The allotted called up and fully paid ordinary share capital of the company at 31 March 2007 was 432 million 2006 432 million representing 8640654852 ordinary shares of 5p each 2006 8635377801.
Of the authorised but unissued share capital at 31 March 2007 21 million ordinary shares 2006 26 million were reserved to meet options granted under employee share option schemes.
The share premium account representing the premium on allotment of shares is not available for distribution.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 111 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151901 Date 190507 Checksum tel OTHER RESERVES AND RETAINED EARNINGS
Cash ow reserve
Translation reserve
Total other reserves
At 1 April 2004 80    998 918 2439 Prot for the year   1829 Foreign exchange adjustments    27  27 Share based payments  20 Dividends   786 Net purchase of treasury shares 176  176 Actuarial gain   294 Tax on items taken directly to equity    7  7 72 At 31 March 2005 256   20 998 762 1154 Transition to IAS 32 and IAS 39 At 1 April 2005 256 77  20 998 839 1440 Prot for the year   1548 Foreign exchange adjustments    53  53 Share based payments  65 Dividends   912 Net purchase of treasury shares 344  344 Actuarial gain   2122 Net fair value gains on cash ow hedges  4    4 Gains on availableforsale investments   35   35 Fair value loss on net investment hedge    20  20 Recognised in income and expense in the year  204 35 9  248 Tax on items taken directly to equity  45    45 633 At 1 April 2006 600 78  4telProt for the year   2850 Foreign exchange adjustments    93  93 Share based payments  71 Dividends   1053 Net purchase of treasury shares 284  284 Actuarial gain   1409 Net fair value losses on cash ow hedges  201    201 Recognised in income and expense in the year  364    364 Tax on items taken directly to equity  62    62 342 At 31 March 2007 884 23  49 998 88 3685 During the year ended 31 March 2007 the company repurchased 147550000 2006 165772145 2005 101280000 of its own shares of 5p each representing 2% of the calledup share capital for consideration including transaction costs of 404 million 2006 365 million 2005 195 million.
In addition 66719600 shares 2006 10221961 2005 11131503 were issued from treasury to satisfy obligations under employee share schemes at a cost of 120 million 2006 21 million 2005 19 million.
At 31 March 2007 370877631 shares 2006 290047231 shares with an aggregate nominal value of 19 million are held as treasury shares at cost.
The cash flow reserve is used to record the effective portion of the cumulative net change in the fair value of cash flow hedging instruments related to hedged transactions that have not yet occurred.
The availableforsale reserve is used to record the cumulative fair value gains and losses on availableforsale financial assets.
The cumulative gains and losses are recycled to the income statement on disposal of the assets.
The gross gain in the period amounted to nil 2006 35 million.
The translation reserve is used to record cumulative translation differences on the assets and liabilities of foreign operations.
The cumulative translation differences are recycled to the income statement on disposal of the foreign operation.
The merger reserve arose on the group reorganisation that occurred in November 2001 and represents the difference between the nominal value of shares in the new parent company BT Group plc and the share capital share premium and capital redemption reserve of the prior parent company British Telecommunications plc.
Other reserves included within this caption relate primarily to unrealised gains and losses on the transfer of assets and group undertakings to a joint venture.
The total impact on reserves of the IAS 32 and IAS 39 transitional adjustment is a charge of 209 million.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 112 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151901 Date 190507 Checksum tel BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 113 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS Amounts paid to the groups retirement benet plans are set out in note 29.
There were a number of transactions during the year between the company and its subsidiary undertakings which are eliminated on consolidation and therefore not disclosed.
Key management personnel are deemed to be the members of the Operating Committee which include the companys executive directors.
It is this committee which has responsibility for planning directing and controlling the activities of the group.
Key management personnel compensation is shown in the table belowtel m m m Salaries and shortterm benets 6.5 5.8 5.2 Post employment benets 1.4 1.9 1.1 Share based payments 3.2 2.6 1.8 More detailed information concerning directors remuneration shareholdings pension entitlements share options and other longterm incentive plans is shown in the audited part of the Report on directors remuneration which forms part of the nancial statements.
During the 2007 nancial year the group purchased services in the normal course of business and on an arms length basis from its associate Tech Mahindra Limited.
The value of services purchased was 178 million 2006 105 million and the amounts outstanding and payable for services at 31 March 2007 was 97 million 2006 59 million.
FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENT LIABILITIES Capital expenditure contracted for at the balance sheet date but not yet incurred was 2007 2006 m m Property plant and equipment and software 779 754 Future minimum operating lease payments for the group were as follows 2007 2006 m m Payable in the year ending 31 March 2007  474 2008teltelteltel 408 402 Thereafter 7367 7175 Total future minimum operating lease payments 9557 9782 Operating lease commitments were mainly in respect of land and buildings.
Leases have an average term of 24 years and rentals are xed for an average of 24 years.
At 31 March 2007 other than disclosed below there were no contingent liabilities or guarantees other than those arising in the ordinary course of the groups business and on these no material losses are anticipated.
The group has insurance cover to certain limits for major risks on property and major claims in connection with legal liabilities arising in the course of its operations.
Otherwise the group generally carries its own risks.
The group has provided guarantees relating to certain leases entered into by O2 UK Limited prior to its demerger with O2 on 19 November 2001.
O2 plc has given BT a counterindemnity for these guarantees.
The maximum likely exposure is US82 million 2006 US72 million approximately 39 million 2006 42 million as at 31 March 2007 although this could increase by a further US486 million 2006 US545 million approximately 248 million 2006 314 million in the event of credit default in respect of amounts used to defease future lease obligations.
The guarantee lasts until O2 UK Limited has discharged all its obligations which is expected to be when the lease ends on 30 January 2017.
The company does not believe there are any pending legal proceedings which would have a material adverse effect on the nancial position or results of operations of the group.
There have been criminal proceedings in Italy against 21 defendants including a former BT employee in connection with the Italian UMTS auction.
Blu in which BT held a minority interest participated in that auction process.
On 20 July 2005 the former BT employee was found not culpable of the fraud charge brought by the Rome Public Prosecutor.
All the other defendents were also acquitted.
The
Public Prosecutor is in the process of appealing the courts decision.
If the appeal is successful BT could be held liable with others for any damages.
The company has concluded that it would not be appropriate to make a provision in respect of any such claim.
Following the European Commissions formal investigation into the way the UK government set BTs property rates and those paid by Kingston Communications and whether the government complied with European Community treaty rules on state aid the Commission concluded that no such state aid had been granted.
The Commissions decision has now been appealed but the company continues to believe that any allegation of state aid is groundless and that the appeal will not succeed.
Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151902 Date 190507
ACQUISITIONS
Year ended 31 March 2007
PlusNet
Other
Total
Fair value of consideration Less fair value of net assets acquired Goodwill arising Consideration Cash Deferred consideration Total The outow of cash and cash equivalents is as follows Cash consideration Less cash acquired Year ended 31 March 2006
Radianz
Other
Total
Fair value of consideration Less fair value of net assets acquired Goodwill arising
Cash Deferred consideration 7  17 24 Debt assumed 23 23 Total The outow of cash and cash equivalents is as follows Cash consideration Less cash acquired The fair value of net assets acquired through the acquisition of Atlanet have been restated in the current financial year.
For further details see Atlanet acquisition note.
Year ended 31 March 2007 International Network Services On 25 February 2007 BT acquired 100% of the issued share capital of International Network Services Inc INS for a total consideration of 133 million.
The net assets acquired in the transaction and the goodwill arising were as follows Book and fair value Intangible assets 3 Property plant and equipment 1 Receivables 18 Cash and cash equivalents 2 Payables 12 Net assets acquired 12 Goodwill 121 Total consideration 133 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 114 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151902 Date 190507
ACQUISITIONS continued The fair value adjustments relating to the acquisition of INS are provisional due to the timing of the transaction and will be nalised during the 2008 nancial year which will include the identication and valuation of any intangible assets acquired through the transaction.
Accordingly the value of any acquired intangible assets are aggregated within goodwill.
From the date of acquisition INS has contributed to the groups results revenue of 5 million and a net loss of 1 million.
If the acquisition had occurred on 1 April 2006 the groups revenue would have been higher by 63 million and prot for the year would have been lower by 5 million 2006 74 million higher and 5 million lower respectively.
PlusNet
On 16 November 2006 the group announced an offer to acquire 100% of the share capital of PlusNet plc.
The offer became unconditional on 23 January 2007 once sufcient acceptances had been received from shareholders and all regulatory clearances were obtained.
23 January 2007 is therefore considered to be the date of acquisition.
The net assets acquired in the transaction and the goodwill arising were as follows Book and fair value Intangible assets 5 Property plant and equipment 5 Receivables 1 Cash and cash equivalents 5 Payables 7 Net assets acquired 9 Goodwill 57 Total consideration 66 The fair value adjustments relating to the acquisition of PlusNet are provisional due to the timing of the transaction and will be nalised during the 2008 nancial year which will include the identication and valuation of any intangible assets acquired through the transaction.
Accordingly the value of any acquired intangible assets are aggregated within goodwill.
From the date of acquisition PlusNet has contributed to the groups results revenue of 7 million and a net income of nil.
If the acquisition had occurred on 1 April 2006 the groups revenue would have been higher by 7 million and prot for the year would have been higher by 3 million 2006 9 million higher and 1 million higher respectively.
Other acquisitions During the year ended 31 March 2007site plc I3IT Limited and Counterpane LLC.
The combined net assets and goodwill arising in respect of these acquisitions were as follows Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value m m m Intangible assets 1212 Property plant and equipment 7 1 6 Inventory 4 4 Receivables 21  21 Cash and cash equivalents 14  14 Payables 29  29 Minority interest 12  12 Net assets acquired 29 11 40 Goodwill 104 Total consideration 144 The fair value adjustments in respect of intangible assets are due to the recognition of 8 million and 4 million in respect of a brand and customer relationships respectively.
The assessment of the fair value of the net assets of Counterpane LLC are provisional at 31 March 2007 and will be nalised during the 2008 nancial year.
This will include the identication and valuation of any intangible assets acquired through the transaction.
From the date of acquisition the companies have contributed to the groups results revenue of 180 million and a net prot of 5 million.
If the acquisitions had occurred on 1 April 2006 the groups revenue would have been higher by 15 million and prot for the year would have been lower by 4 million 2006 159 million higher and 3 million higher respectively.
Goodwill in respect of these acquisitions comprises principally the fair value of the skills and expertise of the acquired companies workforce and both anticipated revenue and cost synergies.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 115 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151903 Date 190507
ACQUISITIONS continued Year ended 31 March 2006
On 28 February 2006 the group acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Atlanet SpA Atlanet for total consideration of 65 million including deferred consideration of 7 million and acquisition costs of 1 million.
At 31 March 2006 the fair value of Atlanets net assets were determined on a provisional basis.
During the 2007 nancial year the determination of fair value has been nalised and adjustments have been made to the balances previously reported.
Prior year balances have not been restated as the amount of the adjustments is not signicant to the group.
The net assets acquired in the transaction and the goodwill arising were as follows Book and fair value as previously reported Fair value adjustments Fair value Intangible assets 2 2 Property plant and equipment 25  25 Receivables 46 6 40 Cash and cash equivalents 5 5 Payables 43 6 49 Net assets acquired 35 14 21 Goodwill 44 Total consideration 65 The residual excess over the net assets acquired is recognised as goodwill.
Goodwill comprises principally the anticipated cost synergies and savings that are forecast to arise subsequent to the acquisition.
Radianz
On 29 April 2005 the group acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Radianz Limited Radianz for total consideration of 143 million including acquisition costs of 5 million.
The net assets acquired in the transaction and the goodwill arising were as follows Fair value Book value adjustments Fair value m m m Intangible assets 2222 Property plant and equipment 55 4 51 Receivables 40  40 Cash and cash equivalents 44  44 Payables 53  53 Net assets acquired 86 18 104 Goodwill 39 Total consideration 143 Intangible assets comprising a brand customer lists and customer relationships were recognised at their respective fair values.
The residual excess over the net assets acquired is recognised as goodwill.
Goodwill comprises principally the assembled work force expected cost savings and synergies.
Other
During the year ended 31 March 2006 the group acquired a number of other smaller subsidiary undertakings and businesses including principally SkyNet Systems Limited the CARA Group and Total Network Solutions Limited.
The combined net assets and goodwill arising in respect of these acquisitions were as follows Book and fair value Property plant and equipment 5 Inventories 4 Receivables 26 Cash and cash equivalents 11 Payables 29 Net assets acquired 17 Goodwill 52 Total consideration 69 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 116 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151904 Date 190507 Checksum tel RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS
The group offers retirement benet plans to its employees.
The groups main scheme the BT Pension Scheme BTPS is a dened benet scheme where the benets are based on employees length of service and nal pensionable pay.
This scheme has been closed to new entrants since 31 March 2001 and replaced by a dened contribution scheme the BT Retirement Plan BTRP.
The total pension cost of the group for the year included within staff costs was 643 million 2006 603 million 2005 540 million.
Dened contribution schemes The income statement charge in respect of dened contribution schemes represents the contribution payable by the group based upon a xed percentage of employees pay.
The total pension cost for the year in respect of the groups main dened contribution scheme was 28 million 2006 19 million 2005 11 million and 3 million 2006 2 million 2005 1 million of contributions were outstanding at 31 March 2007.
Dened benet schemes BT Pension Scheme Trustees Limited administers and manages the scheme on behalf of the members in accordance with the terms of the Trust Deed of the scheme and relevant legislation.
Under the terms of the trust deed of the BTPS there are nine trustee directors appointed by the group ve of which appointments are made with the agreement of the relevant trade unions including the Chairman of the Trustees.
Four trustee directors other than the Chairman are appointed by BT on the nomination of the relevant trade unions.
Two of the trustee directors will normally hold senior positions within the group and two will normally hold or have held senior positions in commerce or industry.
Subject to there being an appropriately qualied candidate there should be at least one current pensioner or deferred pensioner of the BTPS as one of the trustee directors.
Trustee directors are appointed for a threeyear term but are then eligible for reappointment.
Measurement of scheme assets and liabilities  IAS 19 Scheme assets are measured at market value at the balance sheet date.
The liabilities of the BTPS are measured by discounting the best estimate of future cash ows to be paid out by the scheme using the projected unit method.
Estimated future cash ows are discounted at the current rate of return on high quality corporate bonds of an equivalent term to the liability.
Actuarial gains and losses are recognised in full in the period in which they occur in the statement of recognised income and expense.
The nancial assumptions used to measure the net pension obligation of the BTPS at 31 March 2007 are as follows Real rates per annum Nominal rates per annumteltel % %% % %% Rate used to discount liabilities 2.28 2.19 2.63 5.35 5.00 5.40 Average future increases in wages and salaries 0.75 Average increase in pensions in payment and deferred pensions   3.00 2.75 2.70 Ination  average increase in retail price index   3.00 2.75 2.70 There is a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 0.5% for the first three years.
The average life expectancy assumptions after retirement at 60 years of age are as follows 2007 2006 Number of years Number of years Male in lower pay bracket 22.6 22.5 Male in higher pay bracket 25.0 24.7 Female 25.6 25.4 Future improvement every 10 years 1.0 1.0 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 117 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151904 Date 190507
RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS continued Amounts recognised in respect of dened benet schemes The net pension obligation is set out below 2007 2006
Present value of liabilities Decit Assets Present value of liabilities Decit m m m m m m BTPS 38287 38580 293 35550 38005 2455 Other schemes 390 38779 389 35640 38187 2547 Deferred tax asset at 30% 117 764 Net pension obligation 272 1783 Amounts recognised in the income statement on the basis of the above assumptions in respect of pension obligations are as followstel m m m Current service cost including dened contribution schemes 643 603 540 Total operating charge 643 603 540 Expected return on pension scheme assets 2292 2070 1918 Interest on pension scheme liabilities 1872 1816 1720 Net nance income 420 254 198 Total amount charged to the income statement 223 349 342 An analysis of actuarial gains and losses and the actual return on plan assets is shown belowtel m m m Actuarial gains and losses recognised in the year 1409 2122 294 Cumulative actuarial gains and losses 3825 2416 294 Actual return on plan assets 3285 6925 3582 Changes in the present value of the dened benet pension obligation are as follows 2007 2006 m m Opening dened benet pension obligation 38187 34435 Service cost 600 568 Interest cost 1872 1816 Contributions by employees 18 21 Actuarial gain loss 416 2733 Benets paid 1477 1385 Exchange differences 5 1 Closing dened benet pension obligation 38779 38187 The present value of the obligation is derived from long term cash ow projections and is thus inherently uncertain.
The benets payable by the BTPS are expected to be paid as follows Forecast benefits payable by the BTPS at 31 March 2007 billion eltelteltel Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 118 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151905 Date 190507 Checksum tel RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS continued Changes in the fair value of plan assets are as follows 2007 2006 m m Opening fair value of plan assets 35640 29628 Expected return 2292 2070 Actuarial gains 993 4855 Regular contributions by employer 406 398 Deciency contribution by employer 520 54 Contributions by employees 18 21 Benets paid 1477 1385 Exchange differences 2 1 Closing fair value of plan assets 38390 35640 The BTPS assets are invested in UK and overseas equities UK and overseas properties xed interest and index linked securities deposits and shortterm investments.
At 31 March 2007 the UK equities included 14 million 2006 15 million ordinary shares of the company with a market value of 43 million 2006 33 million.
The group occupies two properties owned by the BTPS scheme on which an annual rental of 0.1 million is payable 2006 2 million.
The expected long term rate of return and fair values of the assets of the BTPS at 31 March were 2007 2006 Expected long term rate of return per annum Asset fair value Target Expected long term rate of return per annum Asset fair value Target % bn % % % bn % % NonUK equities 7.4 11.2 29 31 7.4 10.8 30 32 Fixedinterest securities 4.7 6.5 17 16 4.9 5.6 16 16 Indexlinked securities 4.4 3.3 9 10 4.1 3.2 9 10 Cash and other 4.8 2.8 7 7 4.0 1.7 5 5 The assumption for the expected return on scheme assets is a weighted average based on the assumed expected return for each asset class and the proportions held of each asset class at the beginning of the year.
The expected returns on xed interest and interest linked securities are based on the gross redemption yields at the start of the year.
Expected returns on equities and property are based on a combination of an estimate of the risk premium above yields on government bonds and consensus economic forecasts of future returns.
The longterm expected rate of return on investments does not affect the level of the obligation but does affect the expected return on pension scheme assets within the net nance income.
The history of experience gains and losses are as followstel m m m Present value of dened benet obligation 38779 38187 34435 Less Fair value of plan assets 38390 35640 29628 Net pension obligation 389 2547 4807 Experience adjustment on dened benet obligation 190 527 437 Percentage of the present value of the dened benet obligation 0.5% 1.4% 1.3% Experience adjustment on plan assets 993 4855 1664 Percentage of the plan assets 2.6% 13.6% 5.6% The group expects to contribute approximately 748 million to the BTPS including 320 million of deciency contributions in the 2008 nancial year.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 119 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151906 Date 190507 Checksum tel RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS continued Sensitivity analysis of the principal assumptions used to measure BTPS scheme liabilities The assumed discount rate mortality rates and salary increases all have a signicant effect on the measurement of scheme liabilities.
The following table shows the sensitivity of the valuation to changes in these assumptions Impact on decit
Increase
0.25 percentage point increase to discount rate 1.4 salary increases 0.3 Additional 1.0 year increase to life expectancy 1.5 Funding valuation and future funding obligations A triennial valuation is carried out for the independent scheme trustees by a professionally qualied independent actuary using the projected unit credit method.
The purpose of the valuation is to design a funding plan to ensure that present and future contributions should be sufcient to meet future liabilities.
The funding valuation is performed at 31 December as this is the nancial year end of the BTPS.
The valuation basis for funding purposes is broadly as follows scheme assets are valued at market value at the valuation date and scheme liabilities are measured using a projected unit credit method and discounted to their present value.
The last three triennial valuations were determined using the following longterm assumptions Real rates per annum Nominal rates per annumteltel valuation valuation valuation valuation valuation valuation %%%%%% Discount rate Pre retirement liabilities 3.06 5.84 Post retirement liabilities 1.79 4.54 Return on existing assets relative to market values 4.52 2.38 7.13 5.45 after allowing for an annual increase in dividends of 1.00 1.00 3.53 4.03 Return on future investments 4.00 4.00 6.60 7.12 Average increase in retail price index    2.70 2.50 3.00 Average future increases in wages and salaries 0.75 1.5 Average increase in pensions    2.70 2.50 3.00 There is a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 1.25% for the first three years.
At 31 December 2005 the assets of the BTPS had a market value of 34.4 billion 2002 22.8 billion and were sufcient to cover 90.9% 2002 91.6% of the benets accrued by that date.
This represented a funding decit of 3.4 billion compared to 2.1 billion at 31 December 2002.
The funding valuation uses conservative assumptions whereas had the valuation been based on the actuarys view of the median estimate basis the scheme would have been in surplus.
The market value of equity investments had increased and the investment income and contributions received by the scheme exceeded the benets paid.
In the three years ended 31 December 2005 however the decit had not improved by the same amount as the assets because the liabilities included longer life expectancy assumptions and used a lower discount rate.
Following the valuation the ordinary contributions rate increased to 19.5% of pensionable salaries including employee contributions of 6% from 18.2% with effect from 1 January 2007.
In addition the group will make deciency payments equivalent to 280 million per annum for ten years.
The rst three years instalments are to be paid up front 520 million was paid in the 2007 nancial year and 320 million was paid in April 2007.
Subsequently annual payments of 280 million will be made with the next payment due in December 2009.
This compared to annual deciency payments of 232 million that were determined under the 2002 funding valuation.
In the year ended 31 March 2007 the group made regular contributions of 402 million 2006 396 million.
Deciency contributions of 520 million were also made 2006 54 million and a further 320 million was paid in April 2007.
Accordingly no further deciency payments are due until after the 31 December 2008 valuation.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 120 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151907 Date 190507
RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS continued The intention is for there to be sufcient assets in the scheme to pay pensions now and in the future.
Without any further contribution from the company it is estimated that as at 31 December 2005 the assets of the scheme would have been sufcient to provide around 70% of the members benets with an insurance company.
If the group were to become insolvent however there are a number of additional protections available to members.
Firstly there is the Crown Guarantee which was granted when the group was privatised in 1984.
This applies on a winding up of the group to pension entitlements for anyone who joined the scheme before 6 August 1984 and to payments to beneciaries of such persons.
Secondly the Pension Protection Fund PPF may take over the scheme and pay certain benets to members.
There are limits on the amounts paid by the PPF and this would not give exactly the same benets as those provided by the scheme.
Under the terms of the trust deed that governs the BTPS the group is required to have a funding plan that should address the decit over a maximum period of 20 years.
The agreed funding plan addresses the decit over a period of ten years.
The BTPS was closed to new entrants on 31 March 2001 and the age prole of active members will consequently increase.
Under the projected unit credit method the current service cost as a proportion of the active members pensionable salaries is expected to increase as the members of the scheme approach retirement.
Despite the scheme being closed to new entrants the projected payment prole extends over more than 60 years.
EMPLOYEESteltel
Year end Average Year end Average Year end Average Number of employees in the group Total employees 106.2 105.2 104.4 103.0 102.1 99.6teltel Year end Average Year end Average Year end Average Number of employees in the group BT Global Services 29.6 28.9 28.7 28.5 28.4 26.0 Openreach 33.3 32.1 30.5 30.0 The employee numbers by line of business for 2005 are presented on the previous line of business structure prior to the creation of Openreach see note 1.
SHARE BASED PAYMENTS The total charge recognised in the 2007 nancial year in respect of share based payments was 93 million 2006 76 million 2005 50 million.
The total fair value to be recognised over the vesting period of share options and awards granted in the 2007 nancial year was 92 million 2006 105 million 2005 88 million.
The company has an employee share investment plan and savingsrelated share option plans for its employees and those of participating subsidiaries further share option plans for selected employees and an employee stock purchase plan for employees in the United States.
It also has several share plans for executives.
All share based payment plans are equity settled and details of these plans are provided below.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 121 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151911 Date 190507
SHARE BASED PAYMENTS continued Share option plans BT Group Employee Sharesave plans There is an HM Revenue and Customs approved savings related share option plan under which employees save on a monthly basis over a three or ve year period towards the purchase of shares at a xed price determined when the option is granted.
This price is usually set at a 20% discount to the market price for ve year plans and 10% for three year plans.
The options must be exercised within six months of maturity of the savings contract otherwise they lapse.
Options are granted annually usually in June.
Similar plans operate for BTs overseas employees.
Employees may cancel sharesave options and remain employed by the group.
In such cases the options so cancelled do not vest and the monthly savings contributions are returned to the employee with interest if applicable.
Such events are accounted for by ceasing to record a share based payments charge from the date of the employees withdrawal from the relevant plan.
Previously recorded share based payment charges are not reversed and no charge is made for the accelerated vesting of future options that will not now vest.
For options outstanding at 31 March 2007 2006 and 2005 the weighted average exercise prices are shown below.
Number of share options millions
Number of share options millions
Number of share options millions
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 279 166p 262 169p 233 180p Granted during the year 49 185p 59 179p 91 149p Forfeited during the year 12 176p 20 173p 59 176p Exercised during the year 42 199p 2 215p Expired during the year 2 179p 20 216p 3 176p Outstanding at the end of the year 272 165p 279 166p 262 169p Exercisable at the end of the year 2 210p   16 218p The weighted average remaining contractual life of options exercisable at 31 March 2007 was 4 months 2006 nil 2005 5 months.
The intrinsic value of options exercisable at 31 March 2007 was 2 million 2006 nil 2005 nil.
Options were exercised regularly throughout the year.
The weighted average share price during the year was 265p 2006 205p 2005 183p.
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the year was 36.5 million 2006 0.7 million 2005 nil.
The intrinsic value of options outstanding at 31 March 2007 was 378 million 2006 155 million 2005 105 million.
The weighted average fair value of savings related options granted during the 2007 nancial year has been estimated on the date of grant using a binomial option pricing model.
The following weighted average assumptions were used in that model an expected life extending three months later than the rst exercise date share price at date of grant of 229p 2006 223p 2005 195p estimated annualised dividend yield of approximately 5.5% 2006 5% 2005 5% risk free interest rates of approximately 5% 2006 4% 2005 5% and expected volatility of approximately 17% 2006 25% 2005 25%.
Volatility has been determined by reference to BTs historical volatility over a three year period which is expected to reect the BT share price in the future.
The exercise prices are 202p 2006 192p 2005 165p for Sharesave options exercisable three years after the date of grant and 179p 2006 171p 2005 146p for Sharesave options exercisable ve years after the date of grant.
The weighted average fair value of Sharesave options granted in the 2007 nancial year was 35p 2006 44p 2005 41p for Sharesave options exercisable three years after the date of grant and 45p 2006 55p 2005 52p for Sharesave options exercisable ve years after the date of grant.
Options granted under BTs international sharesave which is a three year plan have been valued using the same assumptions.
The exercise price is 179p 2006 171p 2005 146p.
The weighted average fair value of these share options is 46p 2006 49p 2005 The share price at the date of grant was 229p 2006 214p 2005 195p.
BT Group Global Share Option Plan GSOP There were no options granted under the GSOP in the 2007 nancial year.
The options granted in previous years will be exercisable subject to continued employment and meeting corporate performance targets.
These options were valued using Monte Carlo simulations.
The weighted average fair value of options granted under the 2005 GSOP was estimated as 36p.
The following weighted average assumptions were used in that model dividend yield of 5% expected volatility of 25% and a risk free interest rate of 4%.
Details of this plan are provided in the share options section of the Report on directors remuneration.
BT Group Legacy Option Plan On the demerger of O2 BTs share option plans ceased to operate and were replaced by similar BT Group Employee Sharesave plans and the BT Group Global Share Option Plan.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 122 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151912 Date 190507
SHARE BASED PAYMENTS continued The BT Group Legacy Option Plan was launched on 17 December 2001 following the scheme of arrangement and demerger of O2 in November 2001 and is therefore outside the scope of IFRS 2.
Replacement unapproved options over BT Group shares were granted to all participants in the executive option plans who had released their options over British Telecommunications plc shares.
The value of the replacement options was determined by averaging the combined prices of BT Group plc and O2 plc shares over the 20 dealing days following the demerger on 19 November 2001.
This resulted in a factor of 1.3198 being applied to the former option over British Telecommunications plc shares in order to give the number of BT Group shares under the new option.
The option prices of the original options were also adjusted to take account of the different number of shares under option.
The options are exercisable subject to continued employment and meeting corporate performance targets on the third anniversary of the date of grant.
For options outstanding at 31 March 2007 2006 and 2005 in respect of the BT Group Global Share Option Plan and the BT Group Legacy Option Plan the weighted average exercise prices are shown below.
Number of share options millions
Number of share options millions
Number of share options millions
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 187 213p 206 213p 194 216p Granted during the year    31 193p Forfeited during the year 9 222p 16 205p 18 193p Exercised during the year 20 203p 3 199p Expired during the year 55 189p   1 353p Outstanding at the end of the year 103 227p 187 213p 206 213p Exercisable at the end of the year 48 261p 57 280p 34 206p Options were exercised regularly throughout the year.
The weighted average remaining contractual life of options exercisable at 31 March 2007 was 67 months 2006 84 months 2005 80 months.
The intrinsic value of options exercisable at 31 March 2007 was 37 million 2006 8 million 2005 1 million.
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the year was 23 million 2006 nil 2005 nil.
The intrinsic value of options outstanding at 31 March 2007 was 96 million 2006 46 million 2005 21 million.
The total fair value of options vested during the year was 8 million 2006 8 million 2005 nil.
Outstanding options Options outstanding under all share option plans at 31 March 2007 2006 and 2005 together with their exercise prices and dates were as follows Normal dates of exercise Exercise price per share Number of options millions Exercise price per share Number of options millions Exercise price per share Number of options millions BT Group Employee Sharesave Plans 2005    218p255p 20 2011 179p 35 BT Group Legacy Option Plan 20012011 318602p 12 318p602p 14 318p602p 15 Total 12 14 15 BT Group Global Share Option Plan Total outstanding options 375 466 468 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 123 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151912 Date 190507
SHARE BASED PAYMENTS continued The options outstanding under all share option plans at 31 March 2007 2006 and 2005 have weighted average remaining contractual lives as follows Executive plans Range of exercise prices
Number of outstanding options millions
Range of exercise prices
Number of outstanding options millions
Range of exercise prices
Number of outstanding options millions
250p  349p 263p 1 59 months 250p  349p 302p 8 65 months 250p  349p 304p 8 77 months 350p  650p 469p 11 44 months 350p  650p 552p 8 53 months 350p  650p 554p 8 65 months All employee plans Range of exercise prices
Number of outstanding options millions
Range of exercise prices
Number of outstanding options millions
Range of exercise prices
Number of outstanding options millions
200p  300p 214p 23 21 months 200p  300p 220p 36 18 months 200p  300p 222p 59 22 months Other share based payment plans Incentive Share Plan Deferred Bonus Plan and Retention Share Plan The BT Group Incentive Share Plan ISP and the BT Group Retention Share Plan RSP were introduced for employees of the group in 2001.
Under the plans company shares are conditionally awarded to participants.
Under the ISP participants are only entitled to these shares in full at the end of a three year period if the company has met the relevant predetermined corporate performance measure and if the participants are still employed by the group.
The corporate performance measure is BTs total shareholder return TSR measured against a comparator group of companies from the European Telecom Sector at the beginning of the relevant performance period.
The ISP operated in the 2007 nancial year with 1507 participants granted awards over 24.9 million shares 2006 1382 participants were granted awards over 23.2 million shares 2005 1406 participants were granted awards over 12.6 million shares.
Awards under the ISP have been valued using Monte Carlo simulations.
TSRs were generated for BT and the comparator group at the end of the three year performance period using each companys volatility and dividend yield as well as the cross correlation between pairs of stocks.
The weighted average fair value of awards granted under the ISP for the 2007 nancial year was 127p 2006 123p 2005 98p.
Awards under the ISP were valued by reference to the weighted average market price of the shares on the date of grant of 230p 2006 222p 2005 195p.
Historical dividend yields of 5.5% 2006 4.1% 2005 5% volatility of 17% 2006 24% 2005 25% and a risk free rate of 5% 2006 4% 2005 4% were used in the simulations.
Under the RSP the length of retention period before awards vest is exible.
Awards may vest annually in tranches.
The shares are transferred at the end of a specied period only if the employee is still employed by the group.
During the 2007 nancial year participants were granted awards over 0.8 million shares 2006 1.8 million shares 2005 1.6 million shares.
Awards under the RSP were valued using the average middle market share price for the three days prior to grant date.
The weighted average share price for awards granted in the 2007 nancial year was 267p 2006 216p 2005 182p.
During the 2007 nancial year 1.2 million shares vested in 11 participants in the RSP 2006 1.1 million shares vested in 16 participants 2005 2.0 million shares vested in 11 participants.
The BT Group Deferred Bonus Plan DBP was established in 1998 and awards are granted annually to selected employees of the group.
Under this plan shares in the company are transferred to participants at the end of three years if they continue to be employed by the group throughout that period.
During the 2007 nancial year participants were granted awards over 5.8 million shares 2006 2.3 million shares 2005 2.9 million shares.
Awards under the DBP were valued using the average middle market share price for the three days prior to grant date which was 232p 2006 223p 2005 193p.
During the 2007 nancial year 2.9 million shares 2006 2.0 million shares 2005 0.6 million shares were transferred to 184 2006 193 2005 219 participants at the end of the three year period.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 124 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151913 Date 190507 Checksum tel SHARE BASED PAYMENTS continued The number of shares issuable under the ISP DBP and RSP were as follows ISP DBP RSP Total Number of shares millions At 1 April 2004  5.2 3.0 8.2 Awards granted 12.6 2.9 1.6 17.1 Awards vested  0.6 2.0 2.6 Awards lapsed 0.3   0.3 Dividend shares reinvested 0.6 0.4 0.1 1.1 At 31 March 2005 12.9 7.9 2.7 23.5 Awards granted 23.2 2.3 1.8 27.3 Awards vested  2.0 1.1 3.1 Awards lapsed 1.0 0.2  1.2 Dividend shares reinvested 1.7 0.4 0.2 2.3 At 31 March 2006 36.8 8.4 3.6 48.8 Awards granted 24.9 5.8 0.8 31.5 Awards vested  2.9 1.2 4.1 Awards lapsed 5.3 0.6 0.1 6.0 Dividend shares reinvested 2.6 0.5 0.1 3.2 At 31 March 2007 59.0 11.2 3.2 73.4 In accordance with the terms of the ISP DBP and RSP plans dividends or dividend equivalents earned on shares during the conditional periods are reinvested in company shares for the potential benet of the participants.
At 31 March 2007 15.6 million shares 2006 21.4 million 2005 23.3 million were held in trust and 57.8 million shares 2006 27.4 million 2005 0.2 million were held in treasury for employee share plans and other share based payment plans.
Employee Share Investment Plan The BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP has been in operation since December 2001.
The ESIP which has been approved by HM Revenue and Customs comprises directshare and allshare.
Under directshare UK employees are given an opportunity to purchase shares partnership shares out of pretax salary up to a maximum value of 1500 per year.
During the 2007 nancial year 6.3 million shares 2006 6.4 million shares 2005 6.1 million shares including 1.0 million shares 2006 0.8 million shares 2005 0.2 million shares purchased by dividend reinvestment were purchased by the Trustee of the ESIP on behalf of 15445 2006 14443 2005 13017 employees at a total cost of 14.3 million 2006 13.7 million 2005 11.7 million.
Allshare the free shares element of the ESIP allows BT to provide free shares to UK employees which are held in trust for at least three years.
Employees outside the UK receive the same awards of shares where practicable otherwise they will receive awards equivalent to the value of the free shares.
In 2007 1% 2006 1% 2005 0.5% of pretax prots amounting to 25 million was allocated to Allshare 2006 22 million 2005 11 million.
Up to 2% of pretax prots would have been available subject to meeting two corporate performance targets one of these to maintain earnings per share at the same level as in the 2006 nancial year and the other to have ve percent more customers very or extremely satised with BT provided the percentage of customers who are dissatised did not increase compared with the 2006 nancial year.
The earnings per share target was met but not the one for customer satisfaction.
From the 2008 nancial year onwards Allshare will be replaced by free BT Total Broadband Option 3 for all BT employees in the UK.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan The BT Group Employee Stock Purchase Plan ESPP for employees in the US enables participants to purchase American Depositary Shares ADSs quarterly at a price the Initial Base Option Price which is 85% of the fair market price of an ADS at the start of the Initial Enrolment Period of in the case of employees who enrol in the ESPP after the Initial Enrolment Period 85% of the fair market price of an ADS on the last business day of the calendar quarter immediately following enrolment.
From 15 May 2006 to 15 May 2007 2070190 shares 207019 ADSs have been transferred to participants out of treasury under the ESPP from 15 May 2005 to 15 May 2006 1750560 shares 175056 ADSs from 15 May 2004 to 15 May 2005 934782 shares 93478 ADSs.
The fourth offer with an Initial Base Option Price of US32.52 ended in December 2006.
A fth offer was launched in December 2006 with an Initial Base Option Price of US46.00 and will expire in December 2008.
Openreach
In the Undertakings given to Ofcom on 22 September 2005 BT agreed that the incentive elements of the remuneration of employees within Openreach should be linked to Openreach performance rather than BT targets or share price.
However Openreach employees are allowed to participate in the BT HMRC approved allemployee share plans on the same terms as other BT employees.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 125 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151915 Date 190507
SHARE BASED PAYMENTS continued Therefore in order to comply with the Undertakings during the 2007 nancial year BT offered a cash alternative to 102 Openreach employees holding BT share options and awards in the 2004 and 2005 ISP and the 2004 GSOP.
The cash alternative is payable to the employees at the time the options and awards would normally vest and remains subject to the employees continuing in employment throughout the vesting period.
Those employees who declined the cash alternative will continue to be entitled to exercise their awards in accordance with the original vesting timetable.
The impact of this modication did not have a signicant impact on the consolidated nancial statements.
New arrangements were also introduced for Openreach employees during the 2007 nancial year whereby long term incentive arrangements are linked to Openreach targets and will be paid in cash instead of shares and hence are neither equity settled or cash settled share based payment arrangements.
AUDIT AND NON AUDIT SERVICES The following fees for audit and non audit services were paid or are payable to the companys auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP for the three years ended 31 March 2007.
Audit services Fees payable to the companys auditor for the audit of the parent company and consolidated nancial statements 3100 1927 1785 Non audit services Fees payable to the companys auditor and its associates for other services The audit of the companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 3518 3286 2363 Other services pursuant to legislation 1212 1361 1487 Tax services 763 1775 2912 Services relating to corporate nance transactions 748 317 989 All other services 23 556 480 9364 9222 10016 The audit fee of the company was 38600 2006 37700 2005 35000.
In order to maintain the independence of the external auditors the Board has determined policies as to what non audit services can be provided by the companys external auditors and the approval processes related to them.
Under those policies work of a consultancy nature will not be offered to the external auditors unless there are clear efciencies and value added benets to the company.
All non audit services are approved by the Audit Committee.
Audit services represents fees payable for services in relation to the audit of the parent company and the consolidated nancial statements and also includes fees for reports under section 404 of the SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 which is required for the rst time for the year ended 31 March 2007.
Other services pursuant to legislation represents fees payable for services in relation to other statutory lings or engagements that are required to be carried out by the companys auditor.
In particular this includes fees for audit reports issued on the groups regulatory nancial statements.
Tax services represents fees payable for tax compliance and advisory services.
Services relating to corporate nance transactions represent fees payable in relation to due diligence work completed on acquisitions.
All other services represents fees payable for nonregulatory reporting on internal controls and other advice on accounting matters.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT The group adopted IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement with effect from 1 April 2005.
Financial information was previously prepared under UK GAAP for the nancial year ended 31 March 2005.
Where applicable information for the comparative period has been separately disclosed below in order to comply with the previous requirements of UK GAAP.
The group issues or holds nancial instruments mainly to nance its operations for the temporary investment of shortterm funds and to manage the currency and interest rate risks arising from its operations and from its sources of nance.
In addition various nancial instruments for example trade receivables and trade payables arise directly from the groups operations.
The group nances its operations primarily by a mixture of issued share capital retained prots deferred taxation longterm loans and shortterm loans principally by issuing commercial paper supported by committed borrowing facilities.
The group borrows in the major longterm debt markets in major currencies.
Typically but not exclusively the bond markets provide the most cost effective means of longterm borrowing.
The group uses derivative nancial instruments primarily to manage its exposure to market risks from changes in interest and foreign exchange rates against these borrowings.
The derivatives used for this purpose are principally interest rate swaps cross currency swaps and forward currency contracts.
The group also uses nancial instruments to hedge some of its currency exposures arising from its overseas shortterm investment funds and other nonUK assets liabilities and forward purchase commitments.
The nancial instruments used comprise borrowings in foreign currencies and forward currency contracts.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 126 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151915 Date 190507
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT continued The group does not hold or issue derivative nancial instruments for trading purposes.
All transactions in derivative nancial instruments are undertaken to manage the risks arising from underlying business activities.
The groups prole of borrowings and shortterm funds is managed with consideration of the cash ow from operations.
These borrowings and short term funds are managed by the centralised treasury operation.
The types of nancial instrument used for investment of short term funds are prescribed in group treasury policies with limits on the exposure to any one organisation.
Short term investment in nancial instruments is partially undertaken on behalf of the group by substantial external fund managers who are limited to dealing in debt instruments and certain dened derivative instruments and are given strict guidelines on credit diversication and maturity proles.
The group has a centralised treasury operation whose primary role is to manage liquidity funding investment and the groups nancial risk including risk from volatility in currency and interest rates and counterparty credit risk.
The treasury operation is not a prot centre and the objective is to manage risk at optimum cost.
The Board sets the policy for the groups centralised treasury operation and its activities are subject to a set of controls commensurate with the magnitude of the borrowings and investments under its management.
Counterparty credit risk is closely monitored and managed within controls set by the Board.
During the year ended 31 March 2007 the groups net debt note 10 increased from 7.5 billion to 7.9 billion mainly due to outows arising on investing activities such as capital expenditure and acquisitions and from nancing activities such as dividend and net interest payments which more than offset inows mainly arising from operating activities.
During the 2007 nancial year debt amounting to 1.1 billion matured consisting of the 2006 sterling 7.375% notes nance leases and other sterling oating rate loans and notes.
This was offset by increased holdings of commercial paper and lower current nancial assets and cash and cash equivalent investments.
During the year ended 31 March 2006 the groups net debt note 10 reduced from 7.9 billion to 7.5 billion mainly due to operational and working capital inows.
During the 2006 nancial year two substantial notes matured namely the 2005 US dollar 7.875% notes and 2006 Euro 6.375% notes amounting to 3.8 billion and were primarily funded from current nancial assets and cash and cash equivalents.
The group utilised its commercial paper programme during the year which was supported by a committed borrowing facility as well as raising a sterling oating rate borrowing of 1 billion.
There has been no change in the nature of the groups risk prole between 31 March 2007 and the date of these nancial statements.
Interest rate risk management The group has interest bearing nancial assets and nancial liabilities.
The groups policy is to ensure that at least 70% of net debt is at xed rates.
In order to manage this prole the group has entered into interest rate swap agreements with commercial banks and other institutions to vary the amounts and periods for which interest rates on borrowings are xed.
Under interest rate swaps the group agrees with other parties to exchange at specied intervals the differences between xed rate and oating rate interest amounts calculated by reference to an agreed notional principal amount.
The majority of the groups longterm borrowings have been and are subject to xed sterling interest rates after applying the impact of hedging instruments.
At 31 March 2007 the group had outstanding interest rate swap agreements with notional principal amounts totalling 5.1 billion 2006 5.1 billion.
At 31 March 2007 the groups xedoating interest rate prole after hedging on net debt was 7525 2006 8515.
Based on the composition of net debt at 31 March 2007 a one percentage point increase in interest rates would increase the groups annual net nance expense by approximately 11 million 2006 10 million.
Foreign exchange risk management The purpose of the groups foreign currency hedging activities is to protect the group from the risk that the eventual net inows and net outows will be adversely affected by changes in exchange rates.
Most of the groups current revenue is invoiced in pounds sterling and most of its operations and costs arise within the UK.
The groups foreign currency borrowings which totalled 5.3 billion at 31 March 2007 2006 5.4 billion are used to nance its operations.
These borrowings have been predominantly swapped to sterling.
Cross currency swaps and forward currency contracts have been entered into to reduce the foreign currency exposure on the groups operations and the groups net assets.
The group also enters into forward currency contracts to hedge foreign currency investments interest expense capital purchases and purchase and sale commitments on a selective basis.
The commitments hedged are principally US dollar and euro denominated.
As a result of these policies the groups exposure to foreign currency arises mainly on the residual currency exposure on its nonUK investments in its subsidiaries and on imbalances between the value of outgoing and incoming international calls.
A 10% strengthening in sterling against major currencies would cause the groups net assets at 31 March 2007 to fall by less than 220 million 2006 150 million with an insignicant effect on the groups prots.
At 31 March 2007 the group had outstanding contracts to sell or purchase foreign currency with a total gross notional principal of 6.1 billion 2006 6.4 billion.
The majority of these instruments were cross currency swaps with a remaining term ranging from 2 months to 24 years.
The notional value of forward currency contracts included in the gross notional principal at 31 March 2007 were 1297 million 2006 809 million for purchases of currency and 2 million 2006 781 million for sales of currency.
The forward currency contracts had a term remaining ranging from 2 to 321 days.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 127 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151916 Date 190507
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT continued Credit risk management The group considers that it is not exposed to major concentrations of credit risk.
The group however is exposed to creditrelated losses in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to nancial instruments but does not expect any counterparties to fail to meet their obligations.
The group limits the amount of credit exposure to any one counterparty.
Where multiple transactions are undertaken with a single counterparty or group of related counterparties the group may enter into a netting arrangement to reduce the groups exposure to credit risk.
Currently the group makes use of standard International Swaps and Derivative Association ISDA documentation.
In addition where the group has a legal right of set off and the ability and intention to settle net the relevant assets and liabilities are netted within the balance sheet.
The group seeks collateral or other security where it is considered necessary.
The maximum credit risk exposure of the groups nancial assets at 31 March 2007 and 31 March 2006 is represented by the amounts reported under the corresponding balance sheet headings.
Liquidity risk management The group ensures its liquidity is maintained by entering into long and short term nancial instruments to support operational and other funding requirements.
The groups liquidity and funding management process includes projecting cash ows and considering the level of liquid assets in relation thereto monitoring balance sheet liquidity and maintaining a diverse range of funding sources and backup facilities.
Liquid assets surplus to immediate operating requirements of the group are generally invested and managed by the centralised treasury function.
Requirements of group companies for operating nance are met whenever possible from central resources.
The group manages liquidity risk by maintaining adequate committed borrowing facilities.
During the year the group utilised its commercial paper programme which was supported by a committed borrowing facility of up to 1500 million 2006 1500 million.
The facility is available for a period of ve years.
The group had additional committed borrowing facilities of 2035 million 2006 35 million.
This amount includes a facility of 2000 million 2006 nil and is available for one year with an extension option for a future year.
Renancing risk is managed by limiting the amount of borrowing that matures within any specied period.
Price risk management The group has limited exposure to equity securities price risk on investments held by the group.
Hedging activities The group entered into a combination of interest rate and cross currency swaps designated as a combination of fair value and cash ow hedges in order to hedge certain risks associated with the groups US dollar and euro borrowings.
The risks being hedged consist of currency cash ows associated with future interest and principal payments and the fair value risk of certain elements of borrowings arising from uctuations in currency rates and interest rates.
At 31 March 2007 the group had outstanding interest rate swap agreements in cash ow hedges against borrowings with a total notional principal amount of 3.2 billion 2006 3.2 billion.
The fair value of these interest rate swaps at the balance sheet date comprised assets of 15 million and liabilities of 234 million 2006 405 million.
The interest rate swaps have a remaining term ranging from four to 24 years 2006 four to 25 years to match the underlying hedged cash ows arising on the borrowings consisting of annual and semiannual interest payments.
The interest receivable under these swap contracts are at a weighted average rate of 5.5% 2006 4.6% and interest payable are at a weighted average rate of 5.9% 2006 5.9%.
At 31 March 2007 the group had outstanding cross currency swap agreements in cash ow and fair value hedges against borrowings with a total notional principal amount of 4.8 billion 2006 4.8 billion.
The fair value of these cross currency swaps at the balance sheet date comprised assets of 10 million 2006 32 million and liabilities of 833 million 2006 433 million.
The cross currency swaps have a remaining term ranging from two months to 24 years 2006 one to 25 years to match the underlying hedged borrowings consisting of annual and semiannual interest payments and the repayment of principal amounts.
The interest receivable under these swap contracts are at a weighted average rate of 6.9% 2006 6.9% for euro cross currency swaps and 8.2% 2006 8.2% for dollar cross currency swaps and interest payable are at a weighted average rate of 9.2% 2006 8.5%.
Forward currency contracts have been designated as cash ow hedges of currency cash ows associated with certain euro and US dollar step up interest payments on bonds.
At 31 March 2007 the group had outstanding forward currency contracts with a total notional principal amount of 205 million 2006 77 million.
The fair value of the forward currency contracts at the balance sheet date comprised an asset of 1 million 2006 1 million and had a remaining term of between three and 11 months 2006 three and 11 months after which they will be rolled into new contracts.
The hedged interest cash ows arise on a semiannual basis and extend over a period of up to 24 years 2006 12 years.
Forward currency contracts have been designated as cash ow hedges of currency cash ows associated with certain euro and US dollar commercial paper issues.
At 31 March 2007 the group had outstanding forward currency contracts with a total notional principal amount of 760 million 2006 434 million.
The fair value of the forward currency contracts at the balance sheet date comprised assets of 15 million 2006 6 million and had a remaining term of less than three months 2006 less than two months to match the cash ows on maturity of the underlying commercial paper.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 128 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151916 Date 190507 Checksum tel FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT continued Forward currency contracts have been designated as cash ow hedges against currency cash ows associated with the forecast purchase of xed assets and invoice cash ows arising on certain dollar denominated supplies.
At 31 March 2007 the group had outstanding forward currency contracts with a total notional principal amount of 2 million 2006 6 million for sales of currency and 165 million 2006 197 million for purchases of currency.
The fair value of forward currency contracts at the balance sheet date comprised liabilities of 3 million 2006 nil and had a remaining term of less than one month 2006 less than one month after which they will be rolled into new contracts.
The forecast cash ows are anticipated to arise over a period of one month to six years 2006 one month to six years from the balance sheet date.
The group has hedged currency cash ows associated with US dollar denominated investments using forward currency contracts.
At 31 March 2007 the group had outstanding forward currency contracts with a total notional principal amount of nil 2006 759 million.
The fair value of the forward foreign currency contracts at the balance sheet date comprised liabilities of nil 2006 5 million with a remaining term of less than one month.
Other derivatives At 31 March 2007 the group held certain foreign currency forward and interest rate swap contracts that were not in hedging relationships in accordance with IAS 39.
Foreign currency forward contracts were economically hedging operational purchases and sales and had a notional principal amount of nil for sales of currency 2006 16 million and 167 million for purchases of currency 2006 101 million and had a maturity period of under nine months 2006 under 12 months.
Interest rate swaps not in hedging relationships under IAS 39 had a notional principal amount of 1.9 billion 2006 1.9 billion and mature between 2014 and 2030 2006 2014 and 2030.
The interest receivable under these swap contracts are at a weighted average rate of 6.5% 2006 6.1% and interest payable are at a weighted average rate of 8.1% 2006 7.7%.
The volatility arising from these swaps is recognised through the income statement but is limited due to a natural offset in their valuation movements.
At 31 March 2006 the group recognised the fair value of an option contained in a supplier contract which required separate recognition.
In addition two embedded derivatives expired during the year.
The rst related to an option exercisable on the groups US dollar convertible bond see note 5 and the second related to a put option whose value was based on an underlying interest differential between sterling xed and oating interest rates.
Fair value of nancial instruments The following table discloses the carrying amounts and fair values of all of the groups nancial instruments which are not carried at an amount which approximates to its fair value on the balance sheet at 31 March 2007 and 2006.
The carrying amounts are included in the group balance sheet under the indicated headings.
The fair value of the nancial instruments are the amounts at which the instruments could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties other than in a forced liquidation or sale.
In particular the fair values of listed investments were estimated based on quoted market prices for those investments.
The carrying amount of the shortterm deposits and investments approximated to their fair values due to the short maturity of the investments held.
The carrying amount of trade receivables and payables approximated to their fair values due to the short maturity of the amounts receivable and payable.
The fair value of the groups bonds debentures notes nance leases and other longterm borrowings has been estimated on the basis of quoted market prices for the same or similar issues with the same maturities where they existed and on calculations of the present value of future cash ows using the appropriate discount rates in effect at the balance sheet dates where market prices of similar issues did not exist.
The fair value of the groups outstanding swaps and foreign exchange contracts where the estimated amounts calculated using discounted cash ow models that the group would receive or pay in order to terminate such contracts in an arms length transaction taking into account market rates of interest and foreign exchange at the balance sheet date.
Carrying amount Fair valuetel 2006 m m m m
Financial liabilities Listed bonds debentures and notes 6249 7140 7059 7946 Finance leases 56telOther loans and borrowings 1774 1950 1771 1976 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 129 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151916 Date 190507
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT continued Financial liabilities The following tables set out the exposure of nancial liabilities to market pricing interest cash ow risk and currency risk.
The maturity prole of nancial liabilities reects the contractual repricing dates.
Listed bonds debentures and notes Effect of hedging and interest
Finance leases Effect of hedging and interest
Other loans and borrowings Effect of hedging and interest
Current and non current trade and other payables Current and non current provisions m m m m m m m m m m m Fixed rate interest Pound sterling 1617 4085 5702 110  110 152 7 145 Euro 768 768 US dollar 3563 3563 Total xed rate interest nancial liabilities 5948 246 5702 110  110 152 7 145 Floating rate interest Pound sterling 30tel5 297 853 738 1591 Total oating rate interest nancial liabilities 30tel5 452 1622 31 1591 Total interest bearing nancial liabilities 6249 445 6694 567 5 562 1774 38 1736 Non interest bearing nancial liabilities Pound sterling  4034 272 Euro  856 9 US dollar  178 8 Other  107 Total 6249 445 6694 567 5 562 1774 38 1736 5175 289 Maturity prole of interest bearing nancial liabilities based on contractual repricing dates Less than one year 84tel5 452 1626 31 1595 Between one and two years  147 7 140 Between two and three years 108 108  1 1 Between three and four years 2283 227 2510 Between four and ve years Greater than ve years 3015 177 3192 110  110 Total interest bearing nancial liabilities 6249 445 6694 567 5 562 1774 38 1736 Weighted average effective xed interest rates %%%%%% Pound sterling 7.3 9.1 10.4 10.4 10.2 10.2 Euro 7.5 US dollar 8.6 Adjustment for hedging and interest reflects the effect of currency derivatives reclassifies the carrying amount to reflect interest derivatives and excludes interest and fair value adjustments for hedged risk recognised in carrying amounts.
The carrying amount excludes 1544 million of current and 590 million of non current trade and other payables which relate to non financial liabilities.
The carrying amount excludes 36 million of non current provisions which relate to non financial liabilities.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 130 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151916 Date 190507 Checksum tel FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT continued
Effect of hedging and interest
Finance leases Effect of hedging and interest
Other loans and borrowings Effect of hedging and interest
Current and non current trade and other payables Current and non current provisions m m m m m m m m m m m Fixed rate interest Pound sterling 2022 4077 6099 108  108 240  240 Euro 790 790 US dollar 4037 4037 Total xed rate interest nancial liabilities 6849 750 6099 108  108 240  240 Floating rate interest Pound sterling 29tel9 559 1273 426 1699 US dollar  66 66 Total oating rate interest nancial liabilities 29tel9 728 1710 11 1699 Total interest bearing nancial liabilities 7140 59 7081 845 9 836 1950 11 1939 Non interest bearing nancial liabilities Pound sterling  3492 298 Euro  923 US dollar  402 Other  82 Total 7140 59 7081 845 9 836 1950 11 1939 4899 298 Maturity prole of interest bearing nancial liabilities based on contractual repricing dates Less than one year 700 682 1382 737 9 728 1810 11 1799 Between one and two years 624 624 Between two and three years  140  140 Between three and four years 120 120 Between four and ve years 2503 7 2510 Greater than ve years 3193 4 3189 108  108 Total interest bearing nancial liabilities 7140 59 7081 845 9 836 1950 11 1939 Weighted average effective xed interest rates %%%%%% Pound sterling 7.3 8.8 10.4 10.4 9.8 9.8 Euro 7.6 US dollar 8.8 Adjustment for hedging and interest reflects the effect of currency derivatives reclassifies the carrying amount to reflect interest derivatives and excludes interest and fair value adjustments for hedged risk recognised in carrying amounts.
The carrying amount excludes 1641 million of current and 485 million of non current trade and other payables which relate to non financial liabilities.
The carrying amount excludes 9 million of current and 24 million of non current provisions which relate to non financial liabilities.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 131 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151917 Date 190507
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT continued The oating rate nancial liabilities bear interest rates xed in advance for periods ranging from one day to one year by reference to LIBOR quoted rates.
Financial assets The following tables set out the exposure of nancial assets to market pricing and interest cash ow risk and currency risk.
The maturity prole of nancial assets reects the contractual repricing dates.
Current investments Effect of hedging and interest
Non current investments Cash and cash equivalents Effect of hedging and interest
Trade and other receivables m m m m m m m m Fixed rate interest Pound sterling 3 3 Total xed rate nancial assets 3 3 Floating rate interest Pound sterling     687  687 Euro     188  188 US dollar     106  106 Other  94  94 Total oating rate nancial assets     1075  1075 Total interest bearing nancial assets 3  3  1075  1075 Non interest bearing nancial assets Pound sterling    14    2393 Euro  393 US dollar    9    302 Other  4  63 Total 3  3 27 1075  1075 3151 Adjustment for hedging and interest reflects the effect of currency derivatives reclassifies the carrying amount to reflect interest derivatives and excludes interest recognised in carrying amounts.
The carrying amount excludes 922 million of current and 523 million of non current trade and other receivables which relate to nonfinancial assets.
Current investments Effect of hedging and interest
Non current investments Cash and cash equivalents Effect of hedging and interest
Trade and other receivables m m m m m m m m Fixed rate interest Pound sterling 3  3  19  19 Total xed rate nancial assets 3  3  25  25 Floating rate interest Pound sterling 14 342 356  1127 422 1549 Euro     215  215 Other     76  76 Total oating rate nancial assets 362 6 356  1940  1940 Total interest bearing nancial assets 365 6 359  1965  1965 Non interest bearing nancial assets Pound sterling    12    2218 Euro    1    647 US dollar    2    269 Other    2    74 Total 365 6 359 17 1965  1965 3208 Adjustment for hedging and interest reflects the effect of currency derivatives reclassifies the carrying amount to reflect interest derivatives and excludes interest recognised in carrying amounts.
The carrying amount excludes 686 million of current and 305 million of non current trade and other receivables which relate to nonfinancial assets.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 132 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151918 Date 190507
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT continued The maturity prole of interest bearing nancial assets based on contractual repricing dates is less than one year.
The oating rate nancial assets bear interest rate in their respective currencies xed in advance for periods ranging from one day to one year by reference to LIBOR quoted rates.
Additional nancial instrument disclosures required under UK GAAP for the 2005 nancial year The following information is provided in accordance with the requirements of FRS 13  Derivatives and other nancial instruments disclosures.
The nancial information excludes all of the groups shortterm receivables and payables.
Financial assets held for trading Net gain included in prot and loss account 18 The net gain was derived from government bonds commercial paper and similar debt instruments.
The average fair value of nancial assets held during the year ended 31 March 2005 did not differ materially from the year end position.
Hedges
Gains and losses on instruments used for hedging are not recognised until the exposure that is being hedged is itself recognised.
Unrecognised and deferred gains and losses on instruments used for hedging and those recognised in the year ended 31 March 2005 are as follows Gains Losses m m Gains and losses recognised in the year but arising in previous years unrecognised at the balance sheet date 47 799 carried forward in the year end balance sheet pending recognition in the prot and loss account expected to be recognised in the following year unrecognised at balance sheet date 36 51 carried forward in the year end balance sheet pending recognition in the prot and loss account Excluding gains and losses on hedges accounted for by adjusting the carrying amount of a fixed asset.
POST BALANCE SHEET EVENTS In April 2007 we announced a new structure that will deliver faster more resilient and cost effective services to customers wherever they are.
With effect from 1 July 2007 BT Design will be responsible for the design and development of the platforms systems and processes which will support our services BT Operate will be responsible for their deployment and operation.
Around 20000 employees  from design operations IT and networks  will move into these new units.
We estimate that the reorganisation and transformation activities will result in restructuring costs of around 450 million which is expected to generate a pay back within two to three years.
These activities will include developing new processes and systems reskilling and leaver costs which will be accommodated within existing policies and by voluntary means.
We expect the majority of these costs to be incurred in the 2008 nancial year and to be classied as a specic item in our 2008 results.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 133 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151919 Date 190507 Checksum tel UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES The groups consolidated nancial statements are prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRS which differ in certain respects from those applicable in the United States.
For BT there are no differences between IFRS as adopted for use in the EU and IFRS as published by the IASB.
I DIFFERENCES BETWEEN IFRS AND UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES US GAAP The following are the main differences between IFRS and US GAAP which are relevant to the groups consolidated nancial statements.
Under IFRS the sale of BTs property portfolio in 2001 is treated as a disposal and the vast majority of the subsequent leaseback is an operating lease.
Under US GAAP as BT has a continuing interest in the properties these properties are recorded on the balance sheet at their net book value a leasing obligation is recognised and the gain on disposal is deferred until the properties are sold and vacated by BT and the corresponding lease obligation is terminated.
Rental payments made by BT are reversed and replaced by a nance lease interest and a depreciation charge.
Under IFRS the group accounts for its pension benet plans according to IAS 19 Employee Benets.
Surpluses and decits of pension and other postretirement benet plans are included in the group balance sheet at their fair values and all movements in these balances are reected in the income statement except for those actuarial gains and losses which are reected in the statement of recognised income and expense.
The over or underfunded status of the dened benet plan is recorded as an asset or liability on the balance sheet.
Prior to the adoption of FAS 158 Employers Accounting for Dened Benet Pension and Other PostRetirement Plans an amendment of FASB Statements No 87 88 106 and 132 R  FAS 158  when a pension plan had an accumulated benet obligation which exceeded the fair value of the plan assets FAS 87 required the unfunded amount to be recognised as a minimum liability in the balance sheet under US GAAP.
The offset to the liability was recorded as an intangible asset up to the amount of any unrecognised prior service cost and thereafter directly in other comprehensive income.
The actuarial gains or losses recognised in other comprehensive income were transferred to net income over the average remaining service period if certain thresholds were met.
FAS 158 requires an employer to recognise the over or underfunded status of a dened benet postretirement plan as an asset or liability and to recognise changes in that funded status in other comprehensive income in the year in which the changes occur.
Because the funded status of benet plans are now fully recognised a minimum liability is no longer recognised.
Retrospective application of FAS 158 is not permitted and upon adoption of FAS 158 the recognition of the over or underfunded status of the groups dened benet pension plans is generally consistent with IAS 19.
Differences in recognition rules for actuarial gains and losses will continue to give rise to differences in periodic pension expense as measured under IFRS and US GAAP.
The group has adopted FAS 158 in full with effect from 31 March 2007.
Under IFRS the group has chosen not to capitalise interest.
Under US GAAP the estimated amount of interest incurred whilst constructing major capital projects is included in property plant and equipment and depreciated over the lives of the related assets.
The amount of interest capitalised is determined by reference to the average interest rates on outstanding borrowings.
The capitalised interest is depreciated over a period of 5 to 27 years determined by the nature of the related asset.
The group exercised the exemption available under IFRS 1 to adopt IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement from 1 April 2005.
The 2005 comparative period is therefore presented in accordance with UK GAAP.
Under UK GAAP investments are held on the balance sheet at historical cost.
Gains and losses on instruments used for hedges are not recognised until the exposure being hedged is recognised.
Certain derivative nancial instruments which qualify for hedge accounting under UK GAAP do not qualify or were not designated as hedges under US GAAP.
From 1 April 2005 the group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 which gave rise to differences in accounting treatments applied under US GAAP SFAS No.
133 Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities.
On adoption of IAS 39 all derivative nancial instruments and the fair value of the hedged risks where a hedged item is in a fair value hedge were recognised as a one time transition adjustment to equity and resulted in a transitional difference between US GAAP and IFRS.
Under IFRS certain cash ow hedges result in a hedged nonnancial asset or liability being adjusted from the equity reserve for the applicable hedged amount.
US GAAP does not allow the amounts taken to equity to be transferred to the initial carrying amount of the nonnancial asset or liability.
The amounts remain in equity and are recognised in earnings as the nonnancial asset is depreciated or disposed.
The group did not apply hedge accounting under US GAAP for certain items designated as hedges under IFRS.
As a result certain gains or losses on derivatives held in the cash ow reserve or translation reserve are credited or charged to the income statement under US GAAP.
In addition under IFRS the hedged risk associated with a hedged item is fair valued where the item has been designated in a fair value hedge.
As hedge accounting has not been claimed for those items under US GAAP this fair value adjustment will not be reected.
These differences will reverse as the derivatives or hedged items mature are sold or expire.
The fair value and book value of derivative instruments as at 31 March 2007 and 2006 is disclosed in note 33.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 134 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151919 Date 190507
UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued IFRS prescribes four investment categories namely held for trading availableforsale loans and receivables and held to maturity.
US GAAP prescribes only three categories namely held for trading availableforsale and held to maturity.
Whilst the held for trading and availableforsale categories are similar under both GAAPs items held in loans and receivables under IFRS are generally classied as held to maturity under US GAAP.
Under US GAAP on the sale of a foreign enterprise foreign exchange differences within the cumulative translation adjustment CTA are included in net income in arriving at a gain or loss on disposal.
Although IFRS also requires inclusion of the cumulative translation differences held in reserves as part of the calculation of gains or losses on disposal they were reset to zero on transition to IFRS on 1 April 2004.
Under both IFRS and US GAAP provision for deferred income tax is required on a full provision basis in accordance with IAS 12 Income taxes and SFAS No.
109 Accounting for Income Taxes.
Under IFRS deferred tax is recorded for temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that taxable prots will be available against which the deductible temporary difference can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets not recognised are disclosed in note 21.
Under US GAAP deferred taxes are recorded on all temporary differences and a valuation allowance is established in respect of those deferred tax assets where it is more likely than not that some portion will remain unrealised.
Deferred tax adjustments in the IFRS to US GAAP reconciliation are primarily the result of the deferred tax impact of the other US GAAP adjustments made in the reconciliation.
In addition IFRS and US GAAP adopt different methods for recognising deferred tax on share based payments.
Under FAS 123 R deferred tax assets are recognised over the service period based on the compensation charge.
Any realised tax deductions which exceed the related compensation expense is recognised in additional paid in capital
These benets are pooled and can be used to offset shortfalls in deductions related to other share awards.
At 31 March 2007 total deferred tax liabilities were 1447 million 2006 1291 million primarily in respect of accelerated capital allowances and total deferred tax assets were 117 million 2006 1132 million primarily in respect of pension obligations.
The total valuation allowance recognised for deferred tax assets was as follows 2007 2006 Movement in year m m m Capital losses 5279 5493 214 Operating losses not utilised 741 775 34 Total 6333 6539 206 Opening retained earnings and shareholders equity have been restated to correct a deferred tax valuation allowance of 320 million related to the groups property sale and leaseback transaction in 2001.
The adjustment has the effect of increasing US GAAP deferred tax assets and retained earnings by 320 million.
The adjustment did not have a material impact on US GAAP net income or earnings per share for any of the years presented.
Certain network assets previously impaired did not meet the US GAAP criteria for impairment under SFAS No.
144 Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of LongLived Assets.
US GAAP requires that an entity assess whether impairment has occurred based on the undiscounted future cash ows.
An impairment exists if the sum of these cash ows is less than the carrying amount of the asset.
The impairment loss recognised in the income statement is based on the assets fair value being either market value or the sum of discounted future cash ows.
The assets that were not impaired under US GAAP are continuing to be depreciated over their remaining useful lives.
Under IFRS longterm contracts to design build and operate software solutions are accounted for under IAS 18 Revenue and IAS 11 Construction Contracts under which revenue is recognised as earned over the contract period.
Under US GAAP certain of these contracts are accounted for as multiple element arrangements under EITF 0021 and SOP 972 Software Revenue Recognition.
As vendor specic objective evidence to support the fair value of the separate elements to be delivered is unavailable revenue of 214 million under certain contracts is deferred in the 2007 nancial year 2006 109 million 2005 162 million.
There was no impact on net income due to the deferral of costs on these contracts.
Total deferred revenue and costs recorded under US GAAP at 31 March 2007 was 562 million 2006 348 million.
Under IFRS IAS 18 Revenue connection and installation services revenue is recognised when it is earned upon activation.
Under
US GAAP SAB 104 Revenue Recognition such revenues are recognised over the estimated customer life and the costs directly associated with the revenue are deferred.
Accordingly an adjustment has been recognised for the rst time in the 2007 nancial year in respect of Openreach products which have a signicant connection and installation service charge.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 135 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151919 Date 190507 Checksum tel UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued i Sharebased payments Under IFRS 2 ShareBased Payment share options are fair valued at their grant date and the cost is charged to the income statement over the relevant vesting periods.
The group adopted SFAS No.
123 revised 2004 ShareBased Payment with effect from 1 April 2005 using the modied prospective transition method.
Under FAS 123R share based payments to employees are required to be measured based on their grant date fair value with limited exceptions and recognised over the related service period.
For periods prior to 1 April 2005 the group accounted for sharebased payments under Accounting Principles Board Opinion No.
25 using the intrinsic value method.
The results for the prior periods have not been restated.
Under US GAAP the fair value of the Deferred Bonus Plan award is spread over the three year vesting period but under IFRS the fair value is spread over the performance period which is four years.
For the 2007 nancial year the compensation expense for all types of share based payment arrangements was 91 million 2006 77 million.
At 31 March 2007 the group had approximately 106 million 2006 121 million of total unrecognised compensation expense related to non vested sharebased compensation arrangements of which 51 million 2006 86 million relates to share option schemes.
The total expense is expected to be recognised over a weighted average period of 1.9 years 2006 2.0 years and 2.1 years 2006 2.1 years for share option schemes.
The tax benet realised from share options exercised and share awards vested during the year was approximately 26 million 2006 9 million.
Cash proceeds received from the exercise of share options during the year was 123 million 2006 13 million.
Under UK GAAP the group wrote off goodwill arising from the purchase of subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures on acquisition prior to 1 April 1998 against retained earnings.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions completed after 1 April 1998 was capitalised and amortised on a straight line basis over its useful economic life.
Following transition to IFRS goodwill is no longer amortised but tested annually for impairment and the amount of goodwill previously recorded at the transition date was carried forward under IFRS.
Under US GAAP up to 31 March 2002 goodwill arising on the acquisition of subsidiaries associates and joint ventures was capitalised as an intangible asset and amortised over its useful life.
BT adopted SFAS No.
142 Goodwill and other intangible assets on 1 April 2002 and goodwill is no longer amortised but tested annually for impairment.
In the 2003 nancial year a provision in connection with the rationalisation of the groups London ofce property portfolio was recorded.
Under US GAAP in accordance with SFAS No 146 Accounting for costs associated with exit or disposal activities these costs are not recognised until the group fully exits and therefore ceases to use the affected properties.
All these properties were exited by 31 December 2004.
Under IFRS contingent consideration in respect of acquisitions is recorded when the outcome of the contingency is considered more likely than not.
Under US GAAP the consideration is recorded when the contingent event has occurred.
Under US GAAP the fair value of termination benets for employees who are to be retained beyond their minimum contractual retention period is recognised on a straight line basis over the future service period.
Under IFRS these costs are recognised when the employees agree to leave the group.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 136 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151921 Date 190507
UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued II NET INCOME AND SHAREHOLDERS EQUITY RECONCILIATION STATEMENTS The following statements summarise the material estimated adjustments gross of their tax effect which reconcile net income and total equity from that reported under IFRS to that which would have been reported had US GAAP been applied.
Net income Years ended 31 March Note Prot for the year in accordance with IFRS 2852 1548 1829 Prot loss attributable to minority interests 2 1 1 Prot attributable to equity shareholders in accordance with IFRS 2850 1547 1830 Adjustment for Sale and leaseback of properties a 29 18 21 Pension costs b 195 220 333 Capitalisation of interest c 5 16 13 Financial instruments d 175 436 415 Foreign exchange e  39 Deferred taxation f  33 Impairment of property plant and equipment g 16 38 24 Revenue h 82 Share based payments i 2 1 13 Property rationalisation provision k   5 Termination benets m   20 2700 860 1057 Tax effect of US GAAP adjustments 92 203 240 Net income as adjusted for US GAAP 2792 1063 1297 Basic earnings per American Depositary Share as adjusted for US GAAP Diluted earnings per American Depositary Share as adjusted for US GAAP Each American Depositary Share is equivalent to ten ordinary shares.
Shareholders equity At 31 March Note restated Total equity under IFRS 4272 1607 Attributable to minority interest 34 52 Total parent shareholders equity under IFRS 4238 1555 Adjustment for Sale and leaseback of properties a 1095 1067 Pension costs b  1228 Capitalisation of interest c 151 164 Financial instruments d 7 3 Deferred taxation f 74 Impairment of property plant and equipment g 22 40 Revenue h 82 Goodwill j 123 114 3276 419 Tax effect of US GAAP adjustments 310 581 Shareholders equity as adjusted for US GAAP 3586 162 Restatement of deferred tax valuation allowance as set out in note f on page 135.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 137 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151922 Date 190507 Checksum tel UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued
The following reclassications would need to be made in addition to those disclosed elsewhere and in the above reconciliation of shareholders equity in order to present amounts in accordance with US GAAP. h.
478 million lower in respect of the property sale and nance leaseback transaction as described in note a. million lower in respect of nancial instruments. r Prior to the adoption of FAS 158 a pension intangible asset was recognised separately from retirement benet obligations.
Due to the adoption of FAS 158 on 31 March 2007 there is no reclassication required in the current year 2006 31 million.
US GAAP.
This results in goodwill and other payables being lower by 15 million 2006 7 million. r Non current liabilities  2080 million higher 2006 3356 million higher.
III CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS The group cash ow statements are presented in accordance with IAS 7.
The statements prepared under IAS 7 present substantially the same information as that required under SFAS No.
95 Statement of Cash Flows.
If the cash ow statement had been prepared in accordance with SFAS No 95 the net movement in cash and cash equivalents would have been higher by 130 million 2006 179 million higher 2005 unchanged.
This is because under IAS 7 bank overdrafts are classied as a movement in cash and cash equivalents while under US GAAP the movements in bank overdrafts are classied as a nancing activity.
IV PENSION COSTS The net liabilities of the BTPS represent substantially all of the groups pensions obligations.
The pension cost determined under FAS 87 was calculated by reference to an expected longterm rate of return on scheme assets of 6.5% 2006 7.1% 2005 7.3%.
The components of the net periodic pension cost for the BTPS comprised Service cost 612 538 507 Interest cost 1787 1784 1745 Expected return on scheme assets 2206 2042 1897 Amortisation of prior service costs 24 24 24 Amortisation of loss 150 215 263 Net periodic pension cost under US GAAP 367 519 642 The incremental effects of adopting the provisions of FAS 158 on the groups balance sheet at 31 March 2007 as adjusted to accord with US GAAP are presented in the following table.
The adoption of FAS 158 had no effect on the groups consolidated income statement as adjusted to accord with US GAAP and will not affect the groups US GAAP net income in future periods.
Prior to adoption Effect of
As reported Intangible assets 1 1 Dened benet pension plan decit 2145 1852 293 Deferred taxes 644 556 88 Shareholders equity 1500 1295 205 Accumulated other comprehensive income  1851 1851 Deferred taxes  556 556 Accumulated other comprehensive income net of deferred tax  1295 1295 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 138 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151922 Date 190507
UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued The effect on shareholders equity retained earnings as a result of adopting the change in measurement date is 92 million.
This effect is included in the projected benet obligation in excess of scheme assets prior to the transition adjustments to reect the fully funded status of the plan.
The table below shows the amounts included in accumulated other comprehensive income at 31 March 2007 that have not yet been recognised as components of the pension benets expense in the income statement as adjusted to accord with US GAAP.
Net actuarial gain 1852 Prior service cost 1 The amounts included in accumulated other comprehensive income at 31 March 2007 which are expected to be recognised as components of the pension benets expense for the year ended 31 March 2008 in the income statement as adjusted to accord with US GAAP are shown below.
Net actuarial gain 154 Prior service cost 1 Changes in benet obligation Benet obligation at the beginning of the year 38730 34336 Service cost 612 538 Interest cost 1787 1783 Employee contributions 18 21 Actuarial movement 1732 3438 Adjustment for change in measurement date 637 Benets paid or payable 1472 1385 Translation  1 Benet obligation at the end of the year 38580 38730 The accumulated benet obligation at 31 March 2007 was 37703 million 2006 37850 million.
Changes in scheme assets Fair value of scheme assets at the beginning of the year 34293 29169 Actual return on scheme assets 3978 6039 Employer contributions 919 450 Employee contributions 18 21 Adjustment for change in measurement date 551 Benets paid or payable 1472 1385 Translation  1 Fair value of scheme assets at the end of the year 38287 34293 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 139 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151922 Date 190507 Checksum tel UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued Reconciliation of funded status under US GAAP Projected benet obligation in excess of scheme assets 293 4437 Unrecognised prior service costs  31 Other unrecognised net actuarial losses  1802 Net minimum additional pension liability  953 Net amount recognised under US GAAP 293 3557 The benet obligation and pension cost for the BTPS were determined using the following assumptions at 1 January 2006 and 1 January 2005.
For the current nancial year the group has early adopted the change in measurement date provisions of FAS 158 and have changed the measurement date to the year end date of 31 March 2007.
The current year assumptions are disclosed in note 29.
Discount rate 4.7 5.3 Rate of future pay increases 3.4 3.6 Rate of future pension increases 2.6 2.6 Contributions expected to be paid to the BTPS during the 2008 nancial year are estimated at 748 million including 320 million of deciency contributions.
Estimated future benet payments are as follows Year ending 31 March 2008 1526 Year ending 31 March 2009 1591 Year ending 31 March 2010 1671 Year ending 31 March 2011 1768 Year ending 31 March 2012 1862 1 April 2012 to 31 March 2017 10748 Asset allocation The Trustees of the BTPS approve the target asset allocation as well as deviation limits.
The objective of the investment activities is to maximise investment returns within an acceptable level of risk taking into consideration the liabilities of the BTPS.
For the 2007 nancial year the group has early adopted the change in measurement date provisions of FAS 158 and has changed the measurement date to the year end date of 31 March 2007.
Therefore the 2007 nancial year disclosure for each major category of plan assets and the percentage of the fair value of total plan assets is disclosed in note 29.
The prior year disclosures are presented below Period ended 31 December 2005 Fair value bn %
Equities 20.3 59 58 Fixed interest securities 5.4 16 16 Index linked securities 3.2 9 9 Property 4.2 12 12 Cash and other 1.2 4 5 The assumption for the expected return on scheme assets is a weighted average based on an assumed expected return for each asset class and the proportions held for each asset class at the beginning of the year.
The expected returns on bonds are based on the gross redemption yields at the start of the year.
Expected returns on equities and property are based on a combination of an estimate of the risk premium above yields on government bonds and consensus economic forecasts on future returns.
The expected return of 7.1% per annum used for the calculation of pension costs for the year ended 31 March 2006 is consistent with that adopted for IAS 19.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 140 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151922 Date 190507
UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued V INCOME STATEMENT IN US GAAP FORMAT The group income statements on page 86 comply with IFRS and the directors believe they are in the most appropriate format for shareholders to understand the results of our business.
We believe that it is important to show our results before deducting specic items because these predominantly relate to items which are signicant oneoff or unusual in nature.
For SEC reporting purposes this presentation may be considered non GAAP and therefore the group has also prepared the following income statement.
The numbers disclosed in the following income statement are prepared under IFRS.
Revenue 20223 19514 18429 Operating expenses Payroll costs 4505 4066 3832 Depreciation and amortisation 2920 2884 2844 Payments to telecommunication operators 4162 4045 3725 Other operating expenses 6328 6251 5587 Total operating expenses 17915 17246 15988 Net operating income 2308 2268 2441 Other income net 255 228 551 Net interest expense 94 472 599 Income taxes 368 492 525 Equity in earnings losses of investees 15 16 39 Minority interests 2 1 1 Net income 2850 1547 1830 Earnings per share  basic 34.4p 18.4p 21.5p Earnings per share  diluted 33.6p 18.1p 21.3p VI ADDITIONAL US GAAP INFORMATION Intangible asset amortisation The total amortisation charge expected under US GAAP in 2008 is 589 million.
As a consequence of the pattern of amortisation applied this annual charge will decrease in each of the following four years to be approximately 53 million for the year ended 31 March 2012.
US GAAP Developments In February 2006 the FASB issued SFAS No 155 Accounting for Certain Hybrid Instruments  an amendment to FASB statements No 133 and 140  FAS 155  that amends SFAS No 133 Accounting for derivative Instruments and hedging activities  FAS 133 and SFAS 140 Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishments of Liabilities  FAS 140 .
This statement resolves issues addressed in FAS 133 Implementation Issue No.
D1 Application of Statement 133 to Benecial Interests in Securitised Financial Assets.
The statement permits fair value remeasurement for any hybrid nancial instrument that contains an embedded derivative that otherwise would require bifurcation.
Additionally it claries which interestonly strips and principalonly strips are not subject to the requirements of FAS 133.
FAS 155 also establishes a requirement to evaluate interests in securitised nancial assets to identify interests that are freestanding derivatives or that are hybrid nancial instruments that contain an embedded derivative requiring bifurcation.
It claries that concentrations of credit risk in the form of subordination are not embedded derivatives.
Also FAS 155 amends FAS 140 to eliminate the prohibition on a qualifying special purpose entity from holding a derivative nancial instrument that pertains to a benecial interest other than another derivative nancial instrument.
FAS 155 is effective for BT for all nancial instruments acquired or issued after 31 March 2007.
The group does not expect this to have a material impact on the nancial statements.
In March 2006 the FASB issued SFAS No 156 Accounting for Servicing of Financial Assets an amendment of FASB No 140 FAS 156  that amends SFAS No 140 Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishment of Liabilities with respect to the accounting for separately recognised servicing assets and servicing liabilities.
FAS 156 is effective for BT from 1 April 2007.
The group does not anticipate that the adoption of this new statement at the required effective date will have a signicant effect on its results of operations nancial position or cash ows.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 141 Financial statements Filename 5138409.3d Time 151922 Date 190507 Checksum tel UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued In September 2006 the FASB issued SFAS No 157 Fair Value Measurements  FAS 157 .
FAS 157 denes fair value establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles and expands disclosures about fair value measurements.
The provisions of this standard apply to other accounting pronouncements that require or permit fair value measurements.
FAS 157 applies for the groups nancial year beginning 1 April 2008.
The group is currently evaluating the impact if any that the adoption of FAS 157 will have on the consolidated nancial statements.
In February 2007 the FASB issued SFAS No 159 The Fair value option for nancial assets and nancial liabilities  FAS 159 .
FAS 159 permits entities to choose to measure on an item by item basis specied nancial instruments and certain other items at fair value.
Unrealised gains and losses on items for which the fair value option has been elected are required to be reported in earnings at each reporting date.
FAS 159 is effective for the 2009 nancial year the provisions of which are required to be applied prospectively.
The group is currently evaluating the impact if any that the adoption of FAS 159 will have on the consolidated nancial statements.
In July 2006 the FASB issued Interpretation No 48 Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes  An Interpretation of FASB Statement No 109  FIN 48 .
FIN 48 requires tax benets from uncertain positions to be recognised only if it is  more likely than not  that the position is sustainable based on its technical merits.
The interpretation also requires qualitative and quantitative disclosures including discussion of reasonably possible changes that might occur in unrecognised tax benets over the next 12 months a description of open tax years by major jurisdiction and a rollforward of all unrecognised tax benets.
FIN 48 applies for the groups nancial year beginning 1 April 2007.
The group is currently in the process of quantifying the impact if any on the consolidated nancial statements.
In September 2006 the FASB ratied Emerging Issues Task Force No 0601 Accounting for Consideration Given by a Service Provider to Manufactures or Resellers of Equipment Necessary for an EndCustomer to Receive Service from the Service Provider EITF 0601 .
This guidance requires the application of EITF 0109 Accounting for Consideration Given by a Vendor to a Service providers end customer  EITF 0109  when consideration is given to a reseller or manufacturer for benet to the service providers end customer.
EITF 0109 requires the consideration given to be recorded as a liability at the time of the sale of the equipment and also provides guidance for the classication of the expense.
EITF 0601 is effective for the groups nancial year beginning 1 April 2008.
The group is currently in the process of quantifying the impact if any on the consolidated nancial statements.
Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 142 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138409.3d Time 151922 Date 190507 Checksum tel Term used in UK annual report US equivalent or denition Accounts Financial statements Associates Equity investees Capital allowances Tax depreciation Capital redemption reserve Other additional capital Finance lease Capital lease Financial year Fiscal year Freehold Ownership with absolute rights in perpetuity Gearing Leverage Inland calls Local and longdistance calls Interests in associates and joint ventures Securities of equity investees Leaver costs Termination benets Loans to associates and joint ventures Indebtedness of equity investees not current Own work capitalised Costs of labour engaged in the construction of plant and equipment for internal use Provision for doubtful debts Allowance for bad and doubtful accounts receivable Provisions Longterm liabilities other than debt and specic accounts payable Statement of recognised income and expense Comprehensive income Reserves Shareholders equity other than paidup capital Share premium account Additional paidin capital or paidin surplus not distributable Financial statements Glossary of terms and US equivalents BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 143 Financial statements Filename 5138410.3d Time 151923 Date 190507
Independent auditors report to the members of BT Group plc We have audited the parent company nancial statements of BT Group plc for the year ended 31 March 2007 which comprise the balance sheet accounting policies and the related notes.
These parent company nancial statements have been prepared under the accounting policies set out therein.
These parent company nancial statements are set out on pages 145 to 148.
We have also audited the information in the Report on directors remuneration that is described as having been audited.
We have reported separately on the group nancial statements of BT Group plc for the year ended 31 March 2007.
This separate report is set out on page 75.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditors The directors responsibilities for preparing the Annual Report and the parent company nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice are set out in the statement of directors responsibilities.
Our responsibility is to audit the parent company nancial statements and the part of the Report on the directors remuneration to be audited in accordance with relevant legal and regulatory requirements and International Standards on Auditing UK and
This report including the opinion has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Section 235 of the Companies Act 1985 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving this opinion accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
We report to you our opinion as to whether the parent company nancial statements give a true and fair view and whether the parent company nancial statements and the part of the report on the directors remuneration to be audited have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
We also report to you whether in our opinion the information given in the report of the directors is consistent with the parent company nancial statements.
In addition we report to you if in our opinion the company has not kept proper accounting records if we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or if information specied by law regarding directors remuneration and other transactions is not disclosed.
We read other information contained in the Annual Report and Form 20F and consider whether it is consistent with the audited parent company nancial statements.
The other information comprises only BT at a glance the Chairmans message the Chief Executives statement and the Report of the Directors.
We consider the implications for our report if we become aware of any apparent misstatements or material inconsistencies with the parent company nancial statements.
Our responsibilities do not extend to any other information.
Basis of audit opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland issued by the Auditing Practices
An audit includes examination on a test basis of evidence relevant to the amounts and disclosures in the parent company nancial statements and the part of the Report on directors remuneration to be audited.
It also includes an assessment of the signicant estimates and judgments made by the directors in the preparation of the parent company nancial statements and of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the companys circumstances consistently applied and adequately disclosed.
We planned and performed our audit so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered necessary in order to provide us with sufcient evidence to give reasonable assurance that the parent company nancial statements and the part of the Report on directors remuneration to be audited are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or other irregularity or error.
In forming our opinion we also evaluated the overall adequacy of the presentation of information in the parent company nancial statements and the part of the Report on directors remuneration to be audited.
Opinion
In our opinion r the parent company nancial statements give a true and fair view in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice of the state of the companys affairs as at 31 March 2007 r the parent company nancial statements and the part of the Report on directors remuneration to be audited have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and r the information given in the Report of the Directors is consistent with the parent company nancial statements.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors London United Kingdom 16 May 2007 Financial statements Report of the independent auditors  parent company 144 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138410.3d Time 151924 Date 190507 Checksum tel BT GROUP PLC ACCOUNTING POLICIES i Accounting basis The nancial statements are prepared on a going concern basis and under the historical cost convention as modied by the revaluation of certain nancial assets and liabilities at fair value in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and applicable United Kingdom accounting standards UK GAAP.
As permitted by Section  of the Companies Act 1985 the companys prot and loss account has not been presented.
The BT Group plc consolidated nancial statements for the year ended 31 March 2007 contain a consolidated statement of cash ows.
Consequently the company has taken advantage of the exemption in FRS 1 Revised 1996 Cash Flow Statements not to present its own cash ow statement.
The BT Group plc consolidated nancial statements for the year ended 31 March 2007 contain related party disclosures.
Consequently the company has taken advantage of the exemption in FRS 8 Related Party Disclosures not to disclose transactions with other members of the BT Group.
The BT Group plc consolidated nancial statements for the year ended 31 March 2007 contain nancial instrument disclosures which comply with FRS 25 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation.
Consequently the company has taken advantage of the exemption in FRS 25 not to present separate nancial instrument disclosures for the company.
Investments in subsidiary undertakings are stated at cost and reviewed for impairment if there are indicators that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Investments comprise an availableforsale asset.
Availableforsale nancial assets are carried at fair value with unrealised gains and losses recognised in equity until the nancial asset is derecognised at which time the cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in equity is taken to the income statement in the line item that most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
Full provision is made for deferred taxation on all timing differences which have arisen but not reversed at the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is regarded as more likely than not that there will be sufcient taxable prots from which the underlying timing differences can be deducted.
The deferred tax balances are not discounted.
Dividend distributions are recognised as a liability in the year in which the dividends are approved by the companys shareholders.
Interim dividends are recognised when they are paid nal dividends when authorised in general meetings by shareholders.
Ordinary shares are classied as equity.
Repurchased shares of the company are recorded in the balance sheet as treasury shares and presented as a deduction from shareholders equity at cost.
Cash includes cash in hand bank deposits repayable on demand and bank overdrafts.
The company does not incur a charge for share based payments.
However the issuance by the company of share options and awards to employees of its subsidiaries represents additional capital contributions to its subsidiaries.
An addition to the companys investment in subsidiaries is recorded with a corresponding increase in equity shareholders funds.
The additional capital contribution is determined based on the fair value of options and awards at the date of grant and is recognised over the vesting period.
OTHER INFORMATION i Dividends The directors are proposing that a nal dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2007 of 10.0 pence will be paid to shareholders on 17 September 2007 taking the full year proposed dividend in respect of the 2007 nancial year to 15.1 pence 2006 11.9 pence.
This dividend is subject to shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting and therefore the liability of 825 million 2006 631 million has not been included in these nancial statements.
The ve 2006 ve executive directors of BT Group plc were the only employees of the company during the 2007 nancial year.
The costs relating to qualifying services provided to the companys principal subsidiary British Telecommunications plc are recharged to that company.
The movement in the availableforsale reserve in the year was nil 2006 nil.
Financial statements Financial Statements of BT Group plc BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 145 Financial statements Filename 5138410.3d Time 151926 Date 190507
BT GROUP PLC COMPANY BALANCE SHEET Fixed assets Investments in subsidiary undertakings 10064 9971 Total xed assets 10064 9971 Current assets
Investments
Cash at bank and in hand 17 22 Total current assets 154 26 Creditors amounts falling due within one year Net current assets liabilities 114 31 Total assets less current liabilities 10178 9940 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 432 432 Share premium account 31 7 Capital redemption reserve 2 2 Prot and loss account 9713 9499 Total equity shareholders funds 10178 9940 Debtors consists of amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings of 137 million 2006 3 million.
At 31 March 2006 the company held an availableforsale asset with a book value and market value of 1 million 2006 nil.
Creditors consists of amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings of 8 million 2006 27 million and other creditors of 32 million 2006 30 million.
Capital and reserves are shown on page 147.
The nancial statements of the company on pages 145 to 148 were approved by the board of the directors on 16 May 2007 and were signed on its behalf by Sir Christopher Bland
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director Financial statements Financial Statements of BT Group plc 146 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138410.3d Time 151927 Date 190507
BT GROUP PLC COMPANY BALANCE SHEET continued Capital Prot acd Share Share premium redemption and loss capital account reserve account Total m m m m m At 1 April 647 10084 Prot for the nancial year    1108 1108 Dividends paid    912 912 Net purchase of treasury shares    344 344 Arising on share issues  4   4 At 31 March 499 9940 Prot for the nancial year    1458 1458 Dividends paid    1053 1053 Capital contribution in respect of share based payments    93 93 Net purchase of treasury shares    284 284 Arising on share issues 24  24 At 31 March 713 10178 The authorised share capital of the company throughout the years ended 31 March 2007 and 2006 was 13463 million representing 269260253468 ordinary shares of 5p each.
The allotted called up and fully paid ordinary share capital of the company at 31 March 2007 was 432 million 2006 432 million representing 8640654852 ordinary shares of 5p each 2006 8635377801.
Of the authorised but unissued share capital at 31 March 2007 21 million ordinary shares 2006 26 million were reserved to meet options granted under employee share option schemes.
The share premium account representing the premium on allotment of shares is not available for distribution.
The profit for the financial year dealt with in the profit and loss account of the company and after taking into account dividends from subsidiary undertakings was 1458 million 2006 1108 million.
As permitted by Section 230 of the Companies Act 1985 no profit and loss account of the company is presented.
During the year ended 31 March 2006 the company repurchased 147550000 2006 165772145 of its own shares of 5p each representing 2% 2006 2% of the calledup share capital for consideration including transaction costs of 404 million 2006 365 million.
At 31 March 2007 370877631 shares 2006 290047231 with an aggregate nominal value of 19 million 2006 15 million are held as treasury shares at cost.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 147 Financial statements Filename 5138411.3d Time 151929 Date 190507
BT Group plc is the parent company of the group.
Brief details of its principal operating subsidiaries and associate at 31 March 2007 other than the company all of which were unlisted unless otherwise stated were as follows Subsidiary undertakings Activity Group interest in allotted capital
British Telecommunications plc Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary UK BT Americas Inc.
Communication related services systems integration and products provider 100% common International BT Australasia Pty Limited Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary 100% preference
BT C and SI France S.
Systems integration and application development 100% ordinary France BT Centre Nominee 2 Limited Property holding company 100% ordinary UK BT Communications Ireland Limited Telecommunication service provider 100% ordinary Ireland BT Communications Management Limited Telecommunication service provider 100% ordinary UK BT ESPANA Compania de Servicios Globales de Telecommunicaciones S.
Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Spain BT Fleet Limited Fleet management company 100% ordinary UK BT France SAS Communications related services and products provider 100% ordinary France BT Germany GmbH and Co.
Communications related services and products provider 100% ordinary Germany BT Global Services Limited International telecommunication network systems provider 100% ordinary UK BT Holdings Limited Investment holding company 100% ordinary UK BT Hong Kong Limited Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary 100% preference Hong Kong BT INS Inc.
Information telecommunication consulting and software solutions provider 100% common USA BT Italia SpA df Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Italy BT Limited International telecommunication network systems provider 100% ordinary International BT Nederland NV Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Netherlands BT US Investments Limited dg Investment holding company 100% ordinary USA Communications Networking Services UK Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary UK Communications Global Network Services Limited cd Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary International Farland BV cd Provider of transborder bre network across BTs partners in Europe 100% ordinary International Infonet Services Corporation Global managed network service provider 100% common USA Infonet USA Corporation Global managed network service provider 100% common USA Radianz Americas Inc Global managed network service provider 100% preference 100% common
Syntegra Groep BV Systems integration and application development 100% ordinary Netherlands The group comprises a large number of companies and it is not practical to include all of them in this list.
The list therefore only includes those companies that have a significant impact on the profit or assets of the group.
A full list of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates will be annexed to the companys next annual return filed with the Registrar of Companies.
The proportion of voting rights held corresponds to the aggregate interest percentage held by the holding company and subsidiary undertakings.
All overseas undertakings are incorporated in their country of operations.
Subsidiary undertakings operating internationally are all incorporated in England and Wales except Farland BV BT Americas and Communications Global Network Services Limited which are incorporated in the Netherlands the USA and Bermuda respectively.
Held through intermediate holding company.
In March 2007 International Network Services Inc. changed its name to BT INS Inc.
In September 2006 Albacom SpA changed its name to BT Italia SpA.
In March 2007 BT US Investments LLC changed its name to BT US Investments Limited.
Share capital Associate Activity Issued
Country of operations Tech Mahindra Limited Telecommunications services provider 121216701 35%
Issued share capital comprises ordinary or common shares unless otherwise stated.
Incorporated in the country of operations.
Held through an intermediate holding company.
Financial statements Subsidiary undertakings and associate 148 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138411.3d Time 151931 Date 190507 Checksum tel BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 149 Year ended 31 March 2007 Unaudited Quarters 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Revenue 4864 4941 5126 5292 20223 Other operating income Operating costs 4255 4334 4626 4700 17915 Operating prot 65tel2541 Net nance expenseincome 46 55 77 70 94 Share of post tax prots of associates and joint ventures 2571 15 Prot on disposal of associate 20  2 22 Prot before taxation 61tel2484 Prot for the period 464 475 1458 455 2852 Basic earnings per share 5.6p 5.7p 17.6p 5.5p 34.4p Diluted earnings per share 5.5p 5.6p 17.1p 5.3p 33.6p Prot before specic items and taxation 61tel2495 Basic earnings per share before specic items 5.6p 5.7p 5.6p 5.8p 22.7p Diluted earnings per share before specic items 5.5p 5.6p 5.5p 5.6p 22.2p Year ended 31 March 2006 Unaudited Quarters 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Revenue 4731 4767 4882 5134 19514 Other operating income Operating costs 4137 4234 4265 4610 17246 Operating prot 63tel2495 Net nance expense 142 100 129 101 472 Share of post tax prots of associates and joint ventures 5335 16 Prot on disposal of joint venture    1 1 Prot before taxation 49tel2040 Prot for the period 37tel1548 Basic earnings per share 4.4p 4.4p 4.9p 4.7p 18.4p Diluted earnings per share 4.4p 4.3p 4.8p 4.6p 18.1p Prot before specic items and taxation 51tel2177 Basic earnings per share before specic items 4.5p 5.0p 4.9p 5.1p 19.5p Diluted earnings per share before specic items 4.5p 4.9p 4.8p 5.1p 19.2p Year ended 31 March 2005 Unaudited Quarters 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Revenue 4519 4554 4536 4820 18429 Other operating income Operating costs 3990 3909 3896 4193 15988 Operating prot 57tel2992 Net nance expense 155 154 149 141 599 Share of post tax losses prots of associates and joint ventures 7 3 35 6 39 Prot before taxation 41tel2354 Prot for the period 30tel1829 Basic earnings per share 3.5p 5.0p 7.7p 5.2p 21.5p Diluted earnings per share 3.5p 5.0p 7.7p 5.1p 21.3p Prot before specic items and taxation 42tel2080 Basic earnings per share before specic items 3.6p 4.8p 4.8p 4.9p 18.1p Diluted earnings per share before specic items 3.6p 4.7p 4.7p 4.8p 17.9p Financial statements Quarterly analysis of revenue and prot Financial statements Filename 5138411.3d Time 151932 Date 190507 Checksum tel 150 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA The group is required to prepare its audited consolidated nancial statements in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and those parts of the UK Companies Act 1985 applicable to companies reporting under IFRSs.
Prior to the 2006 nancial year the group prepared its audited nancial statements under UK GAAP.
The policies set out on pages 78 to 85 of this report have been applied consistently to all nancial years with the exception of those policies relating to nancial instruments under IAS 32 and IAS 39 which have been applied with effect from 1 April 2005.
The selected nancial data on pages 150 to 155 is shown in accordance with IFRS for 2007 2006 and 2005 and UK GAAP for 2005 to 2003.
Summary of group income statement  IFRS Year ended 31 March Revenue 20223 19514 18429 Other operating income 233 227 551 Operating costs 17915 17246 15988 Operating prot Before specic items 2713 2633 2693 Specic items 2541 2495 2992 Net nance expense Finance expense before specic items 2604 2740 2773 Finance income before specic items 2371 2268 2174 Specic items 139 Share of post tax prots losses of associates and joint ventures Before specic items Specic items Prot on disposal of associates and joint ventures Before specic items Specic items 22 1 Prot before tax Before specic items 2495 2177 2080 Specic items 2484 2040 2354
Before specic items Specic items Prot for the year Before specic items 1884 1644 1539 Specic items 2852 1548 1829 Year ended 31 Marchtel Average number of shares used in basic earnings per share millions 8293 8422 8524 Average number of shares used in diluted earnings per share millions 8479 8537 8581 Basic earnings per share 34.4p 18.4p 21.5p Diluted earnings per share 33.6p 18.1p 21.3p Dividends per share Dividends per share cents bc Basic earnings per share before specic items Diluted earnings per share before specic items A definition of specific items is provided in the accounting policies section on page 78.
The directors believe these measures provide a more meaningful analysis of the trading results of the group and are consistent with the way the financial performance is measured by management.
Based on actual dividends paid andor year end exchange rate on proposed dividends Dividends per share represents the dividend proposed in respect of the relevant financial year.
Under IFRSs dividends are recognised as a deduction from shareholders equity when they are paid.
Financial statements Selected nancial data Filename 5138411.3d Time 151934 Date 190507
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 151 Summary of group income statement  UK GAAP Year ended 31 March Total turnover 19031 18914 20182 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 408 395 1455 Group turnover 18623 18519 18727 Other operating income 171 177 215 Operating costs ab 16005 15826 16366 Group operating prot Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2864 2889 2794 Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 75 19 218 2789 2870 2576 Groups share of operating loss prot of associates and joint ventures Total operating prot 2764 2836 2905 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 358 36 1696 Prot on sale of property xed assets 22 14 11 Net interest payable 801 941 1439 Prot on ordinary activities before taxation Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2085 2013 1840 Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 258 68 1333 2343 1945 3173 Tax on prot on ordinary activities Prot on ordinary activities after taxation 1820 1406 2714 Minority interests 1 8 12 Prot for the year 1821 1414 2702 Average number of shares used in basic earnings per share millions 8524 8621 8616 Basic earnings per share 21.4p 16.4p 31.4p Diluted earnings per share 21.2p 16.3p 31.2p Dividends per share 10.4p 8.5p 6.5p Dividends per share cents Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 18.1p 16.9p 14.4p Diluted earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 18.0p 16.8p 14.3p Includes net exceptional costs 59 7 198 Includes early leaver costs 166 202 276 Includes exceptional costs release 25 26 150 Includes exceptional costs  55 293 Includes exceptional tax credit 16 29 139 Based on actual dividends paid andor year end exchange rate on proposed dividends Financial statements Filename 5138411.3d Time 151935 Date 190507
152 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Summary of group cash ow statement  IFRS Year ended 31 March Net cash inow from operating activities 5210 5387 5574 Net cash outow inow from investing activities 3035 365 1740 Net cash used in nancing activities 2898 5278 3529 Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 37 Net decrease increase in cash and cash equivalents 760 474 305 Cash and cash equivalents at the start of the year 1784 1310 1005 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 1024 1784 1310 Summary of group cash ow statement  UK GAAP Year ended 31 March Net cash ow from operating activities 5898 5389 6023 Dividends from associates and joint ventures 2 3 6 Returns on investments and servicing of nance 878 527 1506 Taxation paid 332 317 434 Capital expenditure and nancial investment 2408 2477 2381 Acquisitions and disposals 418 60 2842 Equity dividends paid 784 645 367 Cash inow before management of liquid resources and nancing 1080 1366 4183 Management of liquid resources 587 1123 1729 Financing 1485 2445 2473 Increase decrease in cash in the year 182 44 19 Decrease in net debt in the year resulting from cash ows 887 1222 4225 Summary of group balance sheet  IFRS At 31 March Intangible assets 2584 1908 1379 Property plant and equipment 14997 15222 15266 Other non current assets 759 1153 1567 18340 18283 18212 Current assets less current liabilities 3802 3063 2783 Total assets less current liabilities 14538 15220 15429 Non current loans and other borrowings 6387 7995 7744 Retirement benet obligations 389 2547 4807 Other non current liabilities 3490 3071 2783 Total assets less liabilities 4272 1607 95 Called up share capital 432 432 432 Share premium account 31 73 Capital redemption reserve 2 22 Other reserves 88 364 762 Retained earnings decit 3685 750 1154 Total parent shareholders equity 4238 1555 45 Minority interests 34 52 50 Total equity 4272 1607 95 Financial statements Selected nancial data Filename 5138411.3d Time 151935 Date 190507
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 153 Summary of group balance sheet  UK GAAP At 31 March Intangible xed assets 623 204 218 Tangible xed assets 15916 15487 15888 Fixed asset investments 115 324 457 Net current liabilities assets 2165 2027 1913 Total assets less current liabilities 14489 18042 18476 Loans and other borrowings falling due after one year 8091 12426 13456 Provisions for liabilities and charges 2497 2504 2376 Minority interests 50 46 63 Total assets less liabilities 3851 3066 2581 Called up share capital 432 432 434 Share premium account 322 Capital redemption reserve 22 Other reserves 998 998 998 Prot and loss account 2416 1632 1147 Total equity shareholders funds 3851 3066 2581 Total assets 26950 26565 28119 US GAAP Year ended 31 March Group operating prot 2448 2437 2779 2420 2693 Income before taxes 2334 1350 1576 1188 3653 Net income 2792 1063 1297 883 4134 Basic earnings per ordinary share 33.7p 12.6p 15.2p 10.2p 48.0p Diluted earnings per ordinary share 32.9p 12.5p 15.1p 10.2p 47.7p Average number of ADSs used in basic earnings per ADS millions 82tel862 Basic earnings per ADS 3.37 1.26 1.52 1.02 4.80 Diluted earnings per ADS 3.29 1.25 1.51 1.02 4.77 Total assets 25747 27030 29006 28674 31131 Total shareholders equity decit 3586 162 264 1135 1938 Restated  refer to note f on page 135.
Financial statements Filename 5138411.3d Time 151936 Date 190507
154 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F
Financial ratios Basic earnings per share before specic items  pence 22.7 19.5 18.1 Basic earnings per share  pence 34.4 18.4 21.5 Return on capital employed before specic items % unaudited 17.6 18.1 18.2 Interest cover before net pension nance income times unaudited 4.2 3.6 3.4 Expenditure on research and development Research and development expense 378 326 257 Amortisation of internally developed computer software 314 161 95 Total 692tel Expenditure on property plant and equipment and software Plant and equipment Transmission equipment 1209 1429 1488 Exchange equipment 118 80 143 Other network equipment 854 727 648 Computers and ofce equipment 149 138 187 Motor vehicles and other 877 715 474 Land and buildings 61 68 64 3268 3157 3004 Decrease increase in engineering stores 21 15 7 Total expenditure on property plant and equipment 3247 3142 3011 Decrease increase in payables 51 202 45 Cash outow on purchase of property plant and equipment and software 3298 2940 3056 The ratio is based on profit before taxation and net finance expense to average capital employed.
Capital employed is represented by total assets less current liabilities excluding corporation tax current borrowings derivative financial liabilities and finance lease creditors less deferred tax assets cash and cash equivalents derivative financial assets and investments.
The number of times net finance expense before net pension finance income is covered by total operating profit.
Interest cover including net pension finance income is 11.6 times 2006 5.6 times 2005 4.5 times.
Financial statements Financial statistics Years ended 31 March Filename 5138411.3d Time 151936 Date 190507
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 155 UK GAAPtel Financial ratios Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items  pence 18.1 16.9 14.4 Basic earning per share  pence 21.4 16.4 31.4 Return on capital employed % unaudited 15.5 Interest cover times unaudited 3.5 2.0tel m m m Expenditure on research and development 257tel 2004 2003 m m m Expenditure on property plant and equipment and software Plant and equipment Transmission equipment 1488 1324 1277 Exchange equipment 143 150 228 Other network equipment 648 585 466 Computers and ofce equipment 187 205 281 Motor vehicles and other 474 316 162 Land and buildings 64 73 40 3004 2653 2454 Increase decrease in engineering stores 7 20 9 Total expenditure on property plant and equipment 3011 2673 2445 Decrease in payables 45 11 135 Cash outow on purchase of property plant and equipment and software 3056 2684 2580 The ratio is based on profit before tax goodwill amortisation and interest on longterm borrowings to average capital employed.
The number of times net interest payable is covered by total operating profit before goodwill amortisation.
Return on capital employed before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was 16.0% 2004  15.3% Interest cover before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was 3.6 times 2004  3.3 times Financial statements Filename 5138411.3d Time 151936 Date 190507
156 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F As at 31 Marchtel 2004 2003 Broadband UK 000
Business Broadband Incl.
Major Corporates 70tel146 Residential Broadband 2758 2084 1339 680 293 PlusNet 195 Total retail broadband 3659 2668 1780 967 439
Broadband Non BT ISPs 5168 5092 3243 1248 361
Full and Shared unbundled local loops 1 Total Broadband Wholesale Retail and LLU 10737 8116 5064 2226 803 Exchange Lines UK 000 BT Retail Business VoiceISDN 7264 7797 8358 8824 9062 Residential VoiceISDN 16636 17912 19520 19870 20065 Total Retail Lines 23900 25709 27878 28694 29127
Wholesale Line Rental 4227 2874 1026 377 91 Total Exchange Lines UK 28127 28583 28904 29071 29218 Mobility Connections 000 31tel27 Average Revenue Per Consumer Household % Consumer Contracted revenues Networked IT Services Sales Order Value Worldwide m 5209 5391 7161 7012 4411 People employed Worldwide Rolling 12 month consumer revenue less mobile polos divided by average number of primary lines.
Includes line rental broadband select services and packages.
Financial statements Operational statistics Filename 5138412.3d Time 151939 Date 190507
158 Additional information for shareholders 158 Cautionary statement regarding forward looking statements 159 Listings 159 Share and ADS prices 159 Capital gains tax CGT 160 Analysis of shareholdings at 31 March 2007 160 Dividends 160 Dividend mandate 161 Dividend investment plan 161 Global invest direct 161 Total shareholder return 161 Results announcements 162 Individual savings accounts ISAs 162 Sharegift 162 Unclaimed Assets
162 Exchange rates 162 Share buy back 163 Memorandum and Articles of Association 165 Material contracts 165 Taxation US holders 167 Limitations affecting security holders 167 Documents on display 167 Publications 168 Electronic communication 168 Shareholder communication 169 Cross reference to Form 20F 172 Glossary of terms 174 BT products and services mentioned in this report 175 Index Shareholder information BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 157 Filename 5138412.3d Time 151940 Date 190507 Checksum tel 158 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARDLOOKING STATEMENTS Certain statements in this annual report are forwardlooking and are made in reliance on the safe harbour provisions of the US Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
These statements relate to analyses and other information which are based on forecasts of future results and estimates of amounts not yet determinable.
These statements include without limitation those concerning BTs transformation strategy and its ability to achieve it expected cost savings growth of and opportunities available in the communications industry and BTs positioning to take advantage of those opportunities expectations regarding competition market shares prices and growth expectations regarding the convergence of technologies growth and opportunities in new wave business such as networked IT services broadband and mobility BTs network development and plans for the 21st century network plans for the launch of new products and services network performance and quality the impact of regulatory initiatives on operations including the regulation of the UK xed wholesale and retail businesses and the impact of the Undertakings to Ofcom under the Enterprise Act BTs possible or assumed future results of operations andor those of its associates and joint ventures BTs future dividend policy capital expenditure and investment plans adequacy of capital nancing plans demand for and access to broadband and the promotion of broadband by thirdparty service providers and those preceded by followed by or that include the words aims believes expects anticipates intends will should or similar expressions.
Although BT believes that the expectations reected in these forwardlooking statements are reasonable it can give no assurance that these expectations will prove to have been correct.
Because these statements involve risks and uncertainties actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forwardlooking statements.
Factors that could cause differences between actual results and those implied by the forwardlooking statements include but are not limited to material adverse changes in economic conditions in the markets served by BT and its lines of business future regulatory actions and conditions in its operating areas including competition from others selection by BT and its lines of business of the appropriate trading and marketing models for its products and services technological innovations including the cost of developing new products networks and solutions and the need to increase expenditures for improving the quality of service the anticipated benets and advantages of new technologies products and services including broadband and other new wave initiatives not being realised developments in the convergence of technologies prolonged adverse weather conditions resulting in a material increase in overtime staff or other costs the timing of entry and protability of BT and its lines of business in certain communications markets signicant changes in market shares for BT and its principal products and services uctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates and general nancial market conditions affecting BTs performance.
Certain of these factors are discussed in more detail elsewhere in this annual report including without limitation in Group risk factors on page 27.
BT undertakes no obligation to update any forwardlooking statements whether as a result of new information future events or otherwise.
Shareholder information Additional information for shareholders Filename 5138412.3d Time 151940 Date 190507 Checksum tel
The principal listing of BT Groups ordinary shares is on the London Stock Exchange.
American Depositary Shares ADSs each representing 10 ordinary shares have been issued by JPMorgan Chase Bank as Depositary for the American Depositary Receipts ADRs evidencing the ADSs and are listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
ADSs also trade but are not listed on the London Stock Exchange.
Trading on the New York Stock Exchange is under the symbol BT.
SHARE AND ADS PRICES Pence per ordinary share US per
High pence
High
Low
Years ended 31 March Year ended 31 March 2006 1 July  30 September 2005 235.00 215.50 41.59 39.01 1 October  31 December 2005 224.75 202.50 39.56 35.34 1 January  31 March 2006 234.50 203.75 41.04 35.96 Year ended 31 March 2007 1 July  30 September 2006 268.00 226.75 50.57 41.58 1 October  31 December 2006 316.50 262.25 62.25 49.09 1 January  31 March 2007 321.75 290.00 62.96 55.37
November 2006 291.75 275.50 56.20 53.24 December 2006 316.50 287.50 62.25 57.45 February 2007 321.75 295.75 62.96 57.46 The prices are the highest and lowest closing middle market prices for BT ordinary shares as derived from the Daily Ofcial List of the London Stock Exchange and the highest and lowest closing sales prices of ADSs as reported on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape.
Fluctuations in the exchange rate between the pound sterling and the US dollar affect the dollar equivalent of the pound sterling price of the companys ordinary shares on the London Stock Exchange and as a result are likely to affect the market price of the ADSs on the New York Stock Exchange.
CAPITAL GAINS TAX CGT The rights issue in June 2001 and the demerger of O2 in November 2001 adjusted the value for capital gains tax purposes of BT shares.
Rights issue An explanatory note on the effects of the rights issue on the CGT position relating to BT shareholdings is available from the Shareholder Helpline.
See page 168 Demerger of O2  capital gains tax calculation The conrmed ofcial opening prices for BT Group and O2 shares on 19 November 2001 following the demerger were 285.75p and 82.75p respectively.
This means that of the total combined value of 368.50p 77.544% is attributable to BT Group and 22.456% to O2.
Accordingly for CGT calculations the base cost of BT Group shares and O2 shares is calculated by multiplying the acquisition cost of a BT shareholding by 77.544% and 22.456% respectively.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 159 Shareholder information Filename 5138412.3d Time 151940 Date 190507 Checksum tel ANALYSIS OF SHAREHOLDINGS AT 31 MARCH 2007 Ordinary shares of 5p each
Number of holdings
Number of shares held millions
1600  9999 162845 12.9 472 5.5 10000  99999 5103 0.4 98 1.1 5000000 and above abcd
1260784 100.0 8640 100.0 21 million shares were held in trust by Ilford Trustees Jersey Limited for allocation to employees under the employee share plans.
Under the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan 70.32 million shares were held in trust on behalf of 82811 participants who were beneficially entitled to the shares.
149 million shares were held in the corporate nominee BT Group EasyShare on behalf of 108758 beneficial owners.
306 million shares were represented by ADSs.
Analysis by size of holding is not available for this holding.
371 million shares were held as treasury shares.
12.4% of the shares were in 1238337 individual holdings of which 97571 were joint holdings and 87.6% of the shares were in 28447 institutional holdings.
So far as the company is aware the company is not directly or indirectly owned or controlled by another corporation or by the UK Government or any other foreign government or by any other natural or legal person severally or jointly.
There are no arrangements known to the company the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change in control of the company.
At 11 May 2007 there were 8640654852 ordinary shares outstanding including 368173044 shares held as treasury shares.
At the same date approximately 31 million ADSs equivalent to 310 million ordinary shares or approximately 3.6% of the total number of ordinary shares outstanding on that date were outstanding and were held by 2482 record holders of ADRs.
At 31 March 2007 there were 3591 shareholders with a US address on the register of shareholders.
DIVIDENDS
A nal dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2006 was paid on 11 September 2006 to shareholders on the register on 18 August 2006 and an interim dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2007 was paid on 12 February 2007 to shareholders on the register on 29 December 2006.
The dividends paid or payable on BT shares and ADSs for the last ve years are shown in the following table.
The dividends on the ordinary shares exclude the associated tax credit.
The amounts shown are not those that were actually paid to holders of ADSs.
For the tax treatment of dividends paid see Taxation of dividends on page 166.
Dividends have been translated from pounds sterling into US dollars using exchange rates prevailing on the date the ordinary dividends were paid.
Per ordinary share Per ADS Per ADS Years ended 31 March
Final pence
Interim
Final
Total
Interim
US
Final
US
Total
US
Qualifying holders of ADSs on record as of 24 August 2007 are entitled to receive the final dividend which will be paid on 24 September 2007 subject to approval at the AGM.
The US dollar amount of the final dividend of 100 pence per ADS to be paid to holders of ADSs will be based on the exchange rate in effect on 17 September 2007 the date of payment to holders of ordinary shares.
As dividends paid by the company are in pounds sterling exchange rate uctuations will affect the US dollar amounts received by holders of ADSs on conversion by the Depositary of such cash dividends.
DIVIDEND MANDATE Any shareholder wishing dividends to be paid directly into a bank or building society account should contact the Shareholder
See page 168 Dividends paid in this way will be paid through the Bankers Automated Clearing System BACS.
Alternatively a form may be downloaded from the Dividends page of our website at siteinvestorcentre Shareholder information Additional information for shareholders 160 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138412.3d Time 151941 Date 190507 Checksum tel DIVIDEND INVESTMENT PLAN The Dividend investment plan replaced the share dividend plan for shareholders following the 1999 interim dividend.
Under the Dividend investment plan cash from participants dividends is used to buy further BT shares in the market.
Shareholders could elect to receive additional shares in lieu of a cash dividend for the following dividends Date paid Price per share pence 2003 interim 10 February 2003 178.23 2003 nal 8 September 2003 184.41 2004 interim 9 February 2004 175.98 2004 nal 6 September 2004 183.69 2005 interim 7 February 2005 209.95 2005 nal 5 September 2005 220.25 2006 interim 13 February 2006 214.50 2006 nal 11 September 2006 250.98 2007 interim 12 February 2007 320.54 GLOBAL INVEST DIRECT Details of the direct purchase plan run by the ADR Depositary JPMorgan Chase Bank Global Invest Direct including reinvestment of dividends are available from JPMorgan Chase Bank on 1tel toll free within the USA or 1tel from outside the USA or on written request to the ADR Depositary.
TOTAL SHAREHOLDER RETURN Total Shareholder Return TSR is the measure of the returns that a company has provided for its shareholders reecting share price movements and assuming reinvestment of dividends.
It is therefore a good indicator of a companys overall performance.
Over the last ve years as shown in the rst TSR chart below BTs TSR is positive 34% compared to the FTSE 100 TSR of positive 42%.
BTs TSR has caught up considerably with that of the FTSE 100 mainly due to a strong share price performance relative to the FTSE 100 during the 20067 nancial year.
BTs share price was up 37% whilst the FTSE 100 Index was up 6% over the year.
In the period between the demerger on the 19 November 2001 and 31 March 2007 BTs TSR was a positive 29% compared to negative 3% for the FTSEurorst 300 Telco Index.
The FTSE 100 TSR over the same period was positive 42%.
The strength of BTs TSR performance over the last year is evident with a positive 44% return compared to the FTSE 100 TSR with a positive 8% and the FTSEurorst 300 Telco Index a positive 18%.
RESULTS ANNOUNCEMENTS Expected announcements of results 1st quarter 26 July 2007 2nd quarter and half year 8 November 2007 3rd quarter and nine months February 2008 4th quarter and full year May 2008 2008 Annual Report and accounts published May 2008 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 161 Shareholder information Filename 5138412.3d Time 151947 Date 190507
INDIVIDUAL SAVINGS ACCOUNTS ISAs Information about investing in BT shares through an ISA may be obtained from Halifax Share Dealing Limited Trinity Road Halifax orkshire HX1 2RG telephonetel.
ISAs are also offered by other organisations.
SHAREGIFT
The Orr Mackintosh Foundation operates a charity share donation scheme for shareholders with small parcels of shares whose value makes it uneconomic to sell them.
Details of the scheme are available from ShareGift at www. haregift. rg or telephonetel or can be obtained from the Shareholder Helpline.
UNCLAIMED ASSETS REGISTER BT along with many other UK leading companies subscribes to Experians Unclaimed Assets Register UAR a register of individuals owed unclaimed nancial assets such as shareholdings and dividends.
UAR provides members of the public with a search device to trace lost assets.
UAR donates a proportion of its income to charity.
For further information visit site or telephonetel.
EXCHANGE RATES BT publishes its consolidated nancial statements expressed in pounds sterling.
The following tables detail certain information concerning the exchange rates between pounds sterling and US dollars based on the noon buying rate in New York City for cable transfers in pounds sterling as certied for customs purposes by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York the Noon Buying Rate.
Year ended 31 Marchtel 2006 2007
The average of the Noon Buying Rates in effect on the last day of each month during the relevant period.
Month
November
December
January
February
March
April
High 1.9693 1.9794 1.9847 1.9699 1.9694 2.0061 Low 1.8883 1.9458 1.9305 1.9443 1.9235 1.9608 On 11 May 2007 the most recent practicable date for this annual report the Noon Buying Rate was US1.9824 to 1.00.
SHARE BUY BACK The following table gives details of the purchase by BT of its own shares during the 2007 nancial year.
Calendar month Total number of shares purchased Average price paid per share pence  net of dealing costs Total number of shares purchased as part of publicly announced plans or programmes Maximum number of shares that may yet be purchased under the plans or programmes April 2006 Nil NA Nil 695977855 May 9850000 223 9850000 686127855 June 12000000 233 12000000 674127855 July 4000000 238 4000000 830000000 August 25250000 241 25250000 804750000 September 18250000 255 18250000 786500000 October 2000000 267 2000000 784500000 November 14500000 280 14500000 770000000 December 16100000 301 16100000 753900000 January 2007 3000000 314 3000000 750900000 February 21650000 311 21650000 729250000 March 20950000 301 20950000 708300000 Total 147550000 269.5 147550000 708300000 Purchases from April to June 2006 were made in accordance with a resolution passed at the AGM held on 13 July 2005.
Purchases from July 2006 to March 2007 were made in accordance with a resolution passed at the AGM on 12 July 2006.
There are no plans or programmes BT has determined to terminate prior to expiration or under which BT does not intend to make further purchases.
Authority was given to purchase up to 850 million shares on 13 July 2005 and 834 million shares on 12 July 2006.
These authorities expire at the close of the following AGM or 15 months following the date of approval if earlier.
The authority given in July 2005 expired on 12 July 2006.
Shareholder information Additional information for shareholders 162 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138412.3d Time 151948 Date 190507
MEMORANDUM AND ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION The following is a summary of the principal provisions of BTs memorandum and articles of association Memorandum and Articles a copy of which has been led with the Registrar of Companies.
Memorandum
The Memorandum provides that the companys principal objects are among other things to carry on any business of running operating managing and supplying telecommunication systems and systems of any kind for conveying receiving storing processing or transmitting sounds visual images signals messages and communications of any kind.
Articles
In the following description of the rights attaching to the shares in the company a holder of shares and a shareholder is in either case the person entered on the companys register of members as the holder of the relevant shares.
Shareholders can choose whether their shares are to be evidenced by share certicates i. in certicated form or held in electronic i. in CREST the electronic settlement system in the UK.
Subject to the restrictions described below on a show of hands every shareholder present in person or by proxy at any general meeting has one vote and on a poll every shareholder present in person or by proxy has one vote for each share which they hold.
Voting at any meeting of shareholders is by a show of hands unless a poll is demanded by the chairman of the meeting or by at least ve shareholders at the meeting who are entitled to vote or their proxies or by one or more shareholders at the meeting who are entitled to vote or their proxies and who have between them at least 10% of the total votes of all shareholders who have the right to vote at the meeting.
No person is unless the Board decide otherwise entitled to attend or vote at any general meeting or to exercise any other right conferred by being a shareholder if he or any person appearing to be interested in those shares has been sent a notice under section 793 of the Companies Act 2006 which confers upon public companies the power to require information with respect to interests in their voting shares and he or any interested person has failed to supply to the company the information requested within 14 days after delivery of that notice.
These restrictions end seven days after the earlier of the date the shareholder complies with the request satisfactorily or the company receives notice that there has been an approved transfer of the shares.
Whenever the share capital of the company is split into different classes of shares the special rights attached to any of those classes can be varied or withdrawn either i with the sanction of an extraordinary resolution passed at a separate meeting of the holders of the shares of that class or ii with the consent in writing of the holders of at least 75% in nominal value of the issued shares of that class.
At any separate meeting the necessary quorum is two persons holding or representing by proxy not less than onethird in nominal amount of the issued shares of the class in question but at any adjourned meeting any person holding shares of the class or his proxy is a quorum.
The company can issue new shares and attach any rights and restrictions to them as long as this is not restricted by special rights previously given to holders of any existing shares.
Subject to this the rights of new shares can take priority over the rights of existing shares or existing shares can take priority over them or the new shares and the existing shares can rank equally.
The company may by ordinary resolution i consolidate and divide all or any of its share capital into shares of a larger amount ii divide all or part of its share capital into shares of a smaller amount iii cancel any shares which have not at the date of the ordinary resolution been taken or agreed to be taken by any person and reduce the amount of its share capital by the amount of the shares cancelled and iv increase its share capital.
The company may also i buy back its own shares and ii by special resolution reduce its share capital any capital redemption reserve and any share premium account.
The companys shareholders can declare dividends by passing an ordinary resolution provided that no dividend can exceed the amount recommended by the directors.
Dividends must be paid out of prots available for distribution.
If the directors consider that the prots of the company justify such payments they can pay interim dividends on any class of shares of the amounts and on the dates and for the periods they decide.
Fixed dividends will be paid on any class of shares on the dates stated for the payments of those dividends.
The directors can offer ordinary shareholders the right to choose to receive new ordinary shares which are credited as fully paid instead of some or all of their cash dividend.
Before they can do this the companys shareholders must have passed an ordinary resolution authorising the directors to make this offer.
Any dividend which has not been claimed for ten years after it was declared or became due for payment will be forfeited and will belong to the company unless the directors decide otherwise.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 163 Shareholder information Filename 5138412.3d Time 151949 Date 190507
If the company is wound up whether the liquidation is voluntary under supervision of the court or by the court the liquidator can with the authority of an extraordinary resolution passed by the shareholders divide among the shareholders all or any part of the assets of the company.
This applies whether the assets consist of property of one kind or different kinds.
For this purpose the liquidator can place whatever value the liquidator considers fair on any property and decide how the division is carried out between shareholders or different groups of shareholders.
The liquidator can also with the same authority transfer any assets to trustees upon any trusts for the benet of shareholders which the liquidator decides.
The liquidation of the company can then be nalised and the company dissolved.
No past or present shareholder can be compelled to accept any shares or other property under the Articles which could give that shareholder a liability.
Certicated shares of the company may be transferred in writing either by an instrument of transfer in the usual standard form or in another form approved by the Board.
The transfer form must be signed or made effective by or on behalf of the person making the transfer.
The person making the transfer will be treated as continuing to be the holder of the shares transferred until the name of the person to whom the shares are being transferred is entered in the register of members of the company.
The Board may refuse to register any transfer of any share held in certicated form i which is in favour of more than four joint holders or ii unless the transfer form to be registered is properly stamped to show payment of any applicable stamp duty and delivered to the companys registered ofce or any other place the Board decide.
The transfer must have with it the share certicate for the shares to be transferred any other evidence which the Board ask for to prove that the person wanting to make the transfer is entitled to do this and if the transfer form is executed by another person on behalf of the person making the transfer evidence of the authority of that person to do so.
Transfers of uncerticated shares must be carried out using a relevant system as dened in the Uncerticated Securities Regulations 2001 the Regulations.
The Board can refuse to register a transfer of an uncerticated share in the circumstances stated in the Regulations.
If the Board decide not to register a transfer of a share the Board must notify the person to whom that share was to be transferred no later than two months after the company receives the transfer or instruction from the operator of the relevant system.
The Board can decide to suspend the registration of transfers for up to 30 days a year by closing the register of shareholders.
The register must not be closed without the consent of the operator of a relevant system as dened in the Regulations in the case of uncerticated shares.
BT may sell any shares after advertising its intention and waiting for three months if the shares have been in issue for at least ten years during that period at least three dividends have become payable on them and have not been claimed and BT has not heard from the shareholder or any person entitled to the dividends by transmission.
The net sale proceeds belong to BT but it must pay those proceeds to the former shareholder or the person entitled to them by transmission if that shareholder or that other person asks for them.
Every year the company must hold an annual general meeting.
The Board can call an extraordinary general meeting at any time and under general law must call one on a shareholders requisition.
The only limitation imposed by the Articles on the rights of nonresident or foreign shareholders is that a shareholder whose registered address is outside the UK and who wishes to receive notices of meetings of shareholders or documents from BT must give the company an address within the UK to which they may be sent.
Directors remuneration Excluding remuneration referred to below each director will be paid such fee for his services as the Board decide not exceeding 50000 a year and increasing by the percentage increase of the UK Retail Prices Index as dened by Section  Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 for any 12 month period beginning 1 April 1999 or an anniversary of that date.
The company may by ordinary resolution decide on a higher sum.
This resolution can increase the fee paid to all or any directors either permanently or for a particular period.
The directors may be paid their expenses properly incurred in connection with the business of the company.
The Board can award extra fees to a director who holds an executive position acts as chairman or deputy chairman serves on a Board committee at the request of the Board or performs any other services which the Board consider extend beyond the ordinary duties of a director.
The directors may grant pensions or other benets to among others any director or former director or persons connected with them.
However BT can only provide these benets to any director or former director who has not been an employee or held any other ofce or executive position in the company or any of its subsidiary undertakings or to relations or dependants of or people connected to those directors or former directors if the shareholders approve this by passing an ordinary resolution.
Shareholder information Additional information for shareholders 164 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138412.3d Time 151950 Date 190507 Checksum tel BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 165 Directors votes A director need not be a shareholder but a director who is not a shareholder can still attend and speak at shareholders meetings.
Unless the Articles say otherwise a director cannot vote on a resolution about a contract in which the director has a material interest this will also apply to interests of a person connected with the director.
The director can vote if the interest is only an interest in BT shares debentures or other securities.
A director can however vote and be counted in a quorum in respect of certain matters in which he is interested as set out in the Articles.
Subject to the relevant legislation the shareholders can by passing an ordinary resolution suspend or relax among other things the provisions relating to the interest of a director in any contract or arrangement or relating to a directors right to vote and be counted in a quorum on resolutions in which he is interested to any extent or ratify any particular contract carried out in breach of those provisions.
Directors interests If the legislation allows and the director has disclosed the nature and extent of the interest to the Board the director can i have any kind of interest in a contract with or involving BT or in which BT has an interest or with or involving another company in which BT has an interest ii have any kind of interest in a company in which BT has an interest including holding a position in that company or being a shareholder of that company iii hold a position other than auditor in BT or another company in which BT has an interest on terms and conditions decided by the Board and iv alone or through some rm with which the director is associated do paid professional work other than as auditor for BT or another company in which BT has an interest on terms and conditions decided by the Board.
A director does not have to hand over to BT any benet received or prot made as a result of anything permitted to be done under the Articles.
When a director knows that they are interested in a contract with BT they must tell the other directors.
Retirement of directors No one is prevented from being or becoming a director because they have reached the age of 70.
At every annual general meeting any director who was elected or last reelected a director at or before the annual general meeting held in the third year before the current year must retire by rotation.
Any director appointed by the directors automatically retires at the next following annual general meeting.
A retiring director is eligible for reelection.
Directors borrowing powers To the extent that the legislation and the Articles allow the Board can exercise all the powers of the company to borrow money to mortgage or charge its business property and assets present and future and to issue debentures and other securities and give security either outright or as collateral security for any debt liability or obligation of the company or another person.
The Board must limit the borrowings of the company and exercise all the companys voting and other rights or powers of control exercisable by the company in relation to its subsidiary undertakings so as to ensure that the aggregate amount of all borrowings by the group outstanding net of amounts borrowed intragroup among other things at any time does not exceed 35 billion.
MATERIAL CONTRACTS Excluding contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business no contracts have been entered into in the two years preceding the date of this document by BT or another member of the group which are or may be material to the group or contain a provision under which a member of the group has an obligation or entitlement which is or may be material to BT or such other member of the group.
TAXATION US HOLDERS This is a summary only of the principal US federal income tax and UK tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs by US Holders as dened below who hold their ordinary shares or ADSs as capital assets.
It does not address all aspects of US federal income taxation and does not address aspects that may be relevant to persons who are subject to special provisions of US federal income tax law including US expatriates insurance companies taxexempt organisations banks regulated investment companies nancial institutions securities brokerdealers traders in securities who elect a marktomarket method of accounting persons subject to alternative minimum tax investors that directly indirectly or by attribution own 10% or more of the outstanding share capital or voting power of BT persons holding their ordinary shares or ADSs as part of a straddle hedging transaction or conversion transaction persons who acquired their ordinary shares or ADSs pursuant to the exercise of options or otherwise as compensation or persons whose functional currency is not the US dollar amongst others.
Those holders may be subject to US federal income tax consequences different from those set forth below.
For the purposes of this summary a US Holder is a benecial owner of ordinary shares or ADSs that for US federal income tax purposes is a citizen or individual resident of the United States a corporation or other entity taxable as a corporation for US federal income tax purposes created or organised in or under the laws of the United States or any political subdivision thereof an estate the income of which is subject to US federal income taxation regardless of its source or a trust if a US court can exercise primary supervision over the administration of the trust and one or more United States persons are authorised to control all substantial decisions of the trust.
If a partnership holds ordinary shares or ADSs the US tax treatment of a partner generally will depend upon the status of the partner and the activities of the partnership.
A partner in a partnership that holds ordinary shares or ADSs is urged to consult its own tax advisor regarding the specic tax consequences of owning and disposing of the ordinary shares or ADSs.
Shareholder information Filename 5138412.3d Time 151951 Date 190507 Checksum tel In particular this summary is based on i current UK tax law and the practice of Her Majestys Revenue and Customs HMRC and US law and US Internal Revenue Service IRS practice including the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended existing and proposed Treasury regulations rulings judicial decisions and administrative practice all as currently in effect and available ii the United KingdomUnited States Convention relating to estate and gift taxes and iii the United KingdomUnited States Tax Convention that entered into force on 31 March 2003 and the protocol thereto the Convention all as in effect on the date of this annual report all of which are subject to change or changes in interpretation possibly with retroactive effect.
US Holders should consult their own tax advisors as to the applicability of the Convention and the consequences under UK US federal state and local and other laws of the ownership and disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs.
Taxation of dividends Under current UK tax law BT will not be required to withhold tax at source from dividend payments it makes.
For US federal income tax purposes a distribution will be treated as ordinary dividend income.
The amount of the distribution includible in gross income of a US Holder will be the US dollar value of the distribution calculated by reference to the spot rate in effect on the date the distribution is actually or constructively received by a US Holder of ordinary shares or by the Depositary in the case of ADSs.
A US Holder who converts the British pounds into US dollars on the date of receipt generally should not recognise any exchange gain or loss.
A US Holder who does not convert the British pounds into US dollars on the date of receipt generally will have a tax basis in the British pounds equal to their US dollar value on such date.
Foreign currency gain or loss if any recognised by the US Holder on a subsequent conversion or other disposition of the British pounds generally will be US source ordinary income or loss.
Dividends paid by BT to a US Holder will not be eligible for the US dividends received deduction that may otherwise be available to corporate shareholders.
For purposes of calculating the foreign tax credit limitation dividends paid on the ordinary shares or ADSs will be treated as income from sources outside the United States and generally will constitute passive income or for certain Holders nancial services income for tax years beginning before 1 January 2007 and for tax years beginning after 31 December 2006 will be treated as passive category income or general category income.
The rules relating to the determination of the foreign tax credit are very complex.
US Holders who do not elect to claim a credit with respect to any foreign taxes paid in a given taxable year may instead claim a deduction for foreign taxes paid.
A deduction does not reduce US federal income tax on a dollar for dollar basis like a tax credit.
The deduction however is not subject to the limitations applicable to foreign credits.
There will be no right to any UK tax credit or to any payment from HMRC in respect of any tax credit on dividends paid on ordinary shares or ADSs.
Certain US Holders including individuals are eligible for reduced rates of US federal income tax currently at a maximum rate of 15% in respect of qualied dividend income received in taxable years beginning before 1 January 2011.
For this purpose qualied dividend income generally includes dividends paid by a nonUS corporation if among other things the US Holders meet certain minimum holding periods and the nonUS corporation satises certain requirements including that either i the shares or ADSs with respect to which the dividend has been paid are readily tradeable on an established securities market in the United States or ii the nonUS corporation is eligible for the benets of a comprehensive US income tax treaty such as the Convention which provides for the exchange of information.
BT currently believes that dividends paid with respect to its ordinary shares and ADSs should constitute qualied dividend income for US federal income tax purposes.
Each individual US Holder of ordinary shares or ADSs is urged to consult his own tax advisor regarding the availability to him of the reduced dividend tax rate in light of his own particular situation and regarding the computations of his foreign tax credit limitation with respect to any qualied dividend income paid by BT to him as applicable.
Taxation of capital gains Unless a US Holder of ordinary shares or ADSs is resident in or ordinarily resident for United Kingdom tax purposes in the United Kingdom or unless a US Holder of ordinary shares or ADSs carries on a trade profession or vocation in the United Kingdom through a branch agency or permanent establishment in the UK and the ordinary shares andor ADSs have been used held or acquired for purposes of that trade the holder should not be liable for UK tax on capital gains on a disposal of ordinary shares andor ADSs.
A US Holder who is an individual and who has ceased to be resident or ordinarily resident for tax purposes in the United Kingdom on or after 17 March 1998 or who falls to be regarded as resident outside the United Kingdom for the purposes of any double tax treaty Treaty nonresident on or after 16 March 2005 and continues to not be resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom or continues to be Treaty nonresident for a period of less than ve years of assessment and who disposes of his ordinary shares or ADSs during that period may also be liable on his return to the United Kingdom to United Kingdom tax on capital gains subject to any available exemption or relief even though he is not resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom or is Treaty nonresident at the time of disposal.
For US federal income tax purposes a US Holder generally will recognise capital gain or loss on the sale exchange or other disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs in an amount equal to the difference between the US dollar value of the amount realised on the disposition and the US Holders adjusted tax basis determined in US dollars in the ordinary shares or ADSs.
Such gain or loss generally will be US source gain or loss and will be treated as longterm capital gain or loss if the ordinary shares have been held for more than one year at the time of disposition.
Longterm capital gains recognised by an individual US Holder generally are subject to US federal income tax at preferential rates.
The deductibility of capital losses is subject to signicant limitations.
Passive foreign investment company status A nonUS corporation will be classied as a Passive Foreign Investment Company for US federal income tax purposes a PFIC for any taxable year if at least 75% of its gross income consists of passive income or at least 50% of the average value of its assets consist of assets that produce or are held for the production of passive income.
BT currently believes that it did not qualify as a PFIC for the tax year ending 31 March 2007.
If BT were to become a PFIC for any tax year US Holders would suffer adverse tax Shareholder information Additional information for shareholders 166 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138412.3d Time 151951 Date 190507 Checksum tel consequences.
These consequences may include having gains realised on the disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs treated as ordinary income rather than capital gains and being subject to punitive interest charges on certain dividends and on the proceeds of the sale or other disposition of the ordinary shares or ADSs.
Furthermore dividends paid by BT would not be qualied dividend income which may be eligible for reduced rates of taxation as described above.
US Holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the potential application of the PFIC rules to BT.
US information reporting and backup withholding Dividends paid on and proceeds received from the sale exchange or other disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs may be subject to information reporting to the IRS and backup withholding at a current rate of 28% which rate may be subject to change.
Certain exempt recipients such as corporations are not subject to these information reporting requirements.
Backup withholding will not apply however to a US Holder who provides a correct taxpayer identication number or certicate of foreign status and makes any other required certication or who is otherwise exempt.
Persons that are United States persons for US federal income tax purposes who are required to establish their exempt status generally must furnish IRS Form W9 Request for Taxpayer Identication Number and Certication.
Holders that are not United States persons for US federal income tax purposes generally will not be subject to US information reporting or backup withholding.
However such holders may be required to provide certication of nonUS status in connection with payments received in the United States or through certain USrelated nancial intermediaries.
Backup withholding is not an additional tax.
Amounts withheld as backup withholding may be credited against a holders US federal income tax liability.
A holder may obtain a refund of any excess amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules by timely ling the appropriate claim for refund with the IRS and furnishing any required information.
UK stamp duty A transfer of an ordinary share will generally be subject to UK stamp duty or UK stamp duty reserve tax SDRT at 0.5% of the amount or value of any consideration provided rounded up in the case of stamp duty to the nearest 5.
SDRT is generally the liability of the purchaser.
It is customarily also the purchaser who pays UK stamp duty.
A transfer of an ordinary share to or to a nominee or agent of a person whose business is or includes issuing depositary receipts gives rise to a 1.5% charge to stamp duty or SDRT of either the amount of the consideration provided or the value of the share issued rounded up in the case of stamp duty to the nearest 5.
No UK stamp duty will be payable on the transfer of an ADS assuming it is not registered in the UK provided that the transfer documents are executed and always retained outside the UK.
Transfers of ordinary shares into CREST will generally not be subject to stamp duty or SDRT unless such a transfer is made for a consideration in money or moneys worth in which case a liability to SDRT will arise usually at the rate of 0.5% of the value of the consideration.
Paperless transfers of ordinary shares within CREST are generally liable to SDRT at the rate of 0.5% of the value of the consideration.
CREST is obliged to collect SDRT from the purchaser of the shares on relevant transactions settled within the system.
UK inheritance and gift taxes in connection with ordinary shares andor ADSs The rules and scope of domicile are complex and action should not be taken without advice specic to the individuals circumstances.
A lifetime gift or a transfer on death of ordinary shares andor ADSs by an individual holder who is US domiciled for the purposes of the UKUS Estate and Gift Tax Convention and who is not a UK national as dened in the Convention will not generally be subject to UK inheritance tax if the gift is subject to US federal gift or US estate tax unless the tax is not paid.
LIMITATIONS AFFECTING SECURITY HOLDERS There are no limitations under the laws of the United Kingdom restricting the right of nonresidents to hold or to vote shares in the company.
DOCUMENTS ON DISPLAY All reports and other information that BT les with the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC may be inspected at the SECs public reference facilities at Room 1580 100 F Street NE Washington DC 20549 USA.
These reports may be accessed via the SECs website at www. ec.
PUBLICATIONS
BT produces a series of reports on the companys nancial economic compliance social and environmental performance.
Most of these reports as well as the EAB Annual Report on BTs compliance with the Undertakings are available to shareholders on request and can be accessed on the internet at siteaboutbt More detailed disclosures on BTs implementation of social ethical and environmental policies and procedures are available online through our independently veried sustainability report at sitebetterworld Document Publication date Annual Review and Notice of Meeting May Annual Report and Form 20F May Changing World Sustained Values 2007 BTs sustainability opportunities challenges and performance May EAB Annual Report May Quarterly results releases July November February and May Current Cost Financial Statements September Statement of Business Practice July 2004 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 167 Shareholder information Filename 5138412.3d Time 151954 Date 190507 Checksum tel For printed copies when available contact the Shareholder Helpline on Freefonetel or alternatively contact the Registrar in the UK at the address below.
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION Shareholders can now choose to receive their shareholder documents electronically rather than by post.
Shareholders may elect to receive documents in this way by going to sitesignup and following the online instructions or by calling the Shareholder
SHAREHOLDER COMMUNICATION BT is committed to communicating openly with each of its stakeholder audiences in the manner most appropriate to their requirements.
All investors can visit our website at siteinvestorcentre for more information about BT.
There are direct links from this page to sites providing information particularly tailored for shareholders institutional investors and analysts industry analysts and journalists.
An online version of this document is available at siteannualreport Private shareholders If private shareholders have any enquiries about their shareholding they should contact the Registrar at the address below.
Lloyds TSB Registrars maintain BT Groups share register and the separate BT Group EasyShare register.
They also provide a Shareholder Helpline service on Freefonetel.
Institutional investors and analysts Institutional investors and equity research analysts may contact Investor Relations on tel
Industry analysts may contact tel
Shareholder Helpline Tel Freefonetel
Textphone Freefonetel From outside the UK Tel 44tel Fax tel71 Textphone 44tel email email The Registrar ADR Depositary Lloyds TSB Registrars The Causeway Worthing West Sussex BN99 6DA United Kingdom
JPMorgan Chase Bank NA PO Box 3408 South Hackensack NJ 076063408 United States Tel 1tel toll free or 1tel from outside the USA email email Website site General enquiries BT Group plc BT Centre 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ United Kingdom tel
From overseas Tel 44tel Fax 44tel A full list of BT contacts and an electronic feedback facility is available at sitetalk Shareholder information Additional information for shareholders 168 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138412.3d Time 151955 Date 190507 Checksum tel The information in this document that is referred to in the following table shall be deemed to be led with the Securities and Exchange Commission for all purposes Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 1 Identity of directors senior management and advisors Not applicable 2 Offer statistics and expected timetable Not applicable 3 Key information 3A Selected nancial data Selected nancial data 150 Additional information for shareholders Exchange rates 162 3B Capitalisation and indebtedness Not applicable 3C Reasons for the offer and use of proceeds Not applicable 3D Risk factors Business review Group risk factors 27 4 Information on the company 4A History and development of the company Contents page
Business review
Introduction to the Business Review 9 Our operational structure 9 Acquisitions and disposals Acquisitions and disposals prior to the 2007 nancial year 19 Acquisitions and disposals in the 2007 nancial year 19
Financial review
Capital expenditure 45 Acquisitions 46 4B Business overview Business review 9
Financial review
Line of business results for 2007 and 2006 33 Our commitment to society 24 Operational statistics 156 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 158 4C Organisational structure Business review Introduction to the Business Review 9 Subsidiary undertakings and associate 148 4D Property plants and equipment Business review
Property 24 Financial statistics 154 5 Operating and nancial review and prospects 5A Operating results Financial review 30 Consolidated nancial statements Accounting policies 78 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 158 5B Liquidity and capital resources Financial review 30 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 158 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements Loans and other borrowings 107 Financial commitments and contingent liabilities 113 Financial instruments and risk management 126 5C Research and development patents and licences Business review Pursue protable growth in new wave markets Develop our global networked IT services capability 9 Research and development 24 IT support 24 Financial statistics 154 5D Trend information Financial review 30 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 158 Shareholder information Cross reference to Form 20F BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 169 Shareholder information Filename 5138412.3d Time 151956 Date 190507 Checksum tel Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 5E Offbalance sheet arrangements Financial review Offbalance sheet arrangements 44 5F Tabular disclosure of contractual obligations Financial review Capital resources 44 6 Directors senior management and employees Corporate governance 6A Directors and senior management Board of directors and Operating Committee 49 6B Compensation Report on directors remuneration 56 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements Retirement benet plans 117 Share based payments 121 6C Board practices Board of directors and Operating Committee 49 Report of the directors Board composition and role 52 Report on directors remuneration 56 6D Employees Financial review Group results 32 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements Employees 121 Operational statistics 156 6E Share ownership Report on directors remuneration 56 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements Share based payments 121 7 Major shareholders and related party transactions 7A Major shareholders Report of the directors Substantial shareholdings 72 Additional information for shareholders Analysis of shareholdings at 31 March 2007 160 7B Related party transactions Report of the Directors Directors information Interest of management in certain transactions 69 Report on directors remuneration 56 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements Related party transactions 113 7C Interests of experts and counsel Not applicable 8 Financial information 8A Consolidated statements and other nancial information See Item 18 below
Business review
Legal proceedings 22
Financial review
Dividends 42 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements Financial commitments and contingent liabilities 113 Additional information for shareholders Dividends 160 Dividend investment plan 161 Memorandum and Articles of Association
Dividends 163 8B Signicant changes Financial review Capital resources 44 Shareholder information Cross reference to Form 20F 170 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138412.3d Time 151956 Date 190507 Checksum tel Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 9 The offer and listing 9A Offer and listing details Additional information for shareholders Share and ADS prices 159 9B Plan of distribution Not applicable 9C Markets Additional information for shareholders Listings 159 9D Selling shareholders Not applicable 9E Dilution Not applicable 9F Expenses of the issue Not applicable 10 Additional information 10A Share capital Not applicable 10B Memorandum and articles of association Additional information for shareholders Memorandum and articles of association 163 10C Material contracts Additional information for shareholders Material contracts 165 10D Exchange controls Additional information for shareholders Limitations affecting security holders 167 10E Taxation Additional information for shareholders Taxation US Holders 165 10F Dividends and paying agents Not applicable 10G Statement by experts Not applicable 10H Documents on display Additional information for shareholders Documents on display 167 10I Subsidiary information Not applicable 11 Quantitative and qualitative Financial review disclosures about market risk Treasury policy 44 Financial risk management 45 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements Accounting Policies Financial instruments from 1 April 2005 81 Financial instruments to 31 March 2005 83 Financial instruments and risk management 126 12 Description of securities other than equity securities Not applicable 13 Defaults dividend arrearages and delinquencies Not applicable 14 Material modications to the rights of security holders and use of proceeds Not applicable 15 Controls and procedures Report of the Directors US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 71 16A Audit committee nancial expert Report of the Directors US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 71 16B Code of ethics Report of the Directors US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 71 16C Principal accountants fees and services Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the consolidated nancial statements Audit and nonaudit services 126 Report of the Directors Report of the Audit Committee 54 16E Purchases of equity securities by the issuer and afliated purchasers Additional information for shareholders Share buy back 162 17 Financial statements Not applicable 18 Financial statements Report of the independent auditors 75 Consolidated nancial statements 78 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 134 Quarterly analysis of revenue and prot 149 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 171 Shareholder information Filename 5138412.3d Time 151957 Date 190507 Checksum tel r 21CN an endtoend nextgeneration IP network designed to transform the customer experience by delivering new converged services rapidly and cost effectively.
It is one of the largest investments in the UKs communications infrastructure by a private sector company. voice.
3G wireless is digital and includes such enhanced features as highspeed transmission global roaming and advanced multimedia access. the Americas and the Asia Pacic region.
It also serves wholesale customers outside the UK. r BT Ireland a wholly owned subsidiary of BT Group plc and a fully integrated division of BT Retail.
It operates in the consumer business major business and wholesale markets throughout the island of Ireland. length of service and nal pensionable pay.
1 April 2001 r BT Wholesale a BT line of business providing network services and solutions within the UK.
It services more than 700 communications companies including other BT businesses. r convergence has various interpretations.
It can mean the delivery of voice video and data across all networks.
It also refers to the integration of xed and mobile solutions sometimes on a single handset. communications providers.
It can process up to 100000 orders a day.
Shareholder information Glossary of terms 172 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Filename 5138412.3d Time 151958 Date 190507 Checksum tel r IFRS International Financial Reporting Standards r IP internet protocol  a packetbased protocol for delivering data  including voice and video  across networks r IPO initial public offering  the rst issue of shares when launching a company onto the stock market r IPVPN internet protocol virtual private network r ISDN integrated services digital network  an all digital network that enables a host of services to be carried together on the same circuits.
It makes it possible for any two compatible pieces of connected equipment to talk to each other. r LAN local area network  a network that operates within a limited geographical area such as in a building.
It connects a variety of data devices such as PCs servers and printers at a very high data rate. r MVNO mobile virtual network operator.
A mobile operator does not own its own spectrum and usually does not have its own network infrastructure.
Instead MVNOs have business arrangements with traditional mobile operators to buy minutes of use for sale to their own customers. r Openreach Openreach looks after the rst mile of network from the exchange through to homes and businesses.
Its role is to provide services to all communications providers  including other BT lines of business  on a fair equal and open basis. r reusable capabilities a set of reusable components for use in product and service development.
Instead of creating new systems and deploying new hardwaresoftware to build a product product managers network and systems designers will increasingly pick from a catalogue of common capabilities. to the regulation of the telecommunications industry in the UK.
They led to the formation of Openreach.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 173 Shareholder information Filename 5138412.3d Time 151958 Date 190507 Checksum tel 174 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F r BT Assurance Plus offers the benets of BT Assurance plus some additional ones.
BT Assurance is a support service for BT business customers offering roundtheclock fault reporting a simplied calling process and one point of contact for repair issues on all of BTs key products. plugged into the router or BT Home Hub.
Customers on BT Broadband Talk get a separate phone number.
January 2007 by BT Business Total Broadband r BT Business Broadband Voice enables business customers to make and receive calls over a broadband line using a normal telephone r BT Business IT Manager a selection of services to meet all small and medium businesses IT needs  from hardware supply and set up to advice on and support for systems r BT Business IT Support Manager a support service  BTs IT experts take remote control of your PC to x problems.
Available as payasyougo or unlimited support options. r BT Business Plan a call package for small and medium businesses offering capped rates.
It costs nothing to sign up. r BT Corporate Fusion a groundbreaking premisesbased xedmobile convergence service for large organisations.
It enables organisations to take advantage of xedmobile convergence and their increasing deployment of IP telephony and wi coverage. that provided by the BT IPstream product. r BT Home Hub a stylish powerful featurepacked ADSL router designed to sit at the heart of the digital home.
It can connect to up to 15 devices wirelessly and supports BTs full range of services including BT Total Broadband and BT Broadband Talk. against viruses hackers and other online threats.
Its compatible with new Microsoft Windows Vista. r BT Openzone a convenient easy to use broadband internet access service using wireless technology WiFi.
Users can access email or surf the internet from around 40000 hot spots throughout the UK and around the world. r BT Privacy at Home includes caller display which enables the user to see the number of the person calling.
BT Privacy at Home is free but customers need to sign up for it.
Customers can also be added to the Telephone Preference Service register which cuts out unwanted telemarketing calls. r BT Softphone an easy to download service giving free global PCtoPC chat at any time of day. r BT Text enables users to send and receive text messages from their home phone. r BT Total Broadband the most comprehensive broadband packages yet seen in the UK.
Powered by ultrafast download speeds of up to 8Mb it offers free internet voice calls free video calls and a suite of security software  all brought together through the BT Home Hub.
BT Total Broadband even gives freedom to roam outside the home with WiFi via free BT Openzone wireless minutes.
There are no connection charges and the package comes with aroundtheclock helpdesk support. r BT Vision next generation TV service combining the appeal of TV with the interactivity of broadband.
Customers can watch what they want when they want and not be tied to TV schedules.
The service does not require a regular monthly subscription. r BT Workspace Lite a feature of BT Business Total Broadband.
It provides small and medium businesses with one place to store documents online on an extranet allowing them to share information and work collaboratively with customers and suppliers. connected to other operators networks.
This enables operators other than BT to use the companys local loop to provide services to customers. between two or more sites for data communications.
The two services offer a range of distinct features. r VBox BT Vision is delivered through a settop box  the Vbox.
This contains a personal digital recorder able to store up to 80 hours of content pause or rewind live TV and record programmes at the touch of a button.
Shareholder information BT products and services mentioned in this report Filename 5138412.3d Time 152002 Date 190507 Checksum tel Accounting policies 7585 Acquisitions 45 114116 Acquisitions and disposals 1920 Additional information for shareholders 158 168 Articles of Association 163165 Associates and joint ventures 41 106 Audit Committee Report of the 54 Audit and non audit services 126 Balance sheet 45 89 146147 153 Board of directors and Operating Committee 4951 BT Global Services 1112 3435 3738 BT Retail 1215 3536 3839 BT Wholesale 1617 3637 39 Business review 828 Capital expenditure 45 92 93 105 Capital gains tax 159 Capital resources 44 Cash and cash equivalents 88 101 152 Cash ow statement Group 88 152 Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 158 Chairmans message 45 Chief Executives statement 67 Competition and the UK economy 21 Consolidated Financial Statements 77143 Create longterm partnerships with our customers 10 Critical accounting policies 47 Cross reference to Form 20F 169171 Defend our traditional business 10 14 15 17 Deferred taxation 110 135 Derivative nancial instruments 8184 108 126133 Directors remuneration report on 5668 Directors responsibility statement of 74 Directors Report of the 872 Dividend investment plan 161 Dividend mandate 160 Documents on display 167 Earnings per share 3 9 42 100 Electronic communication 168 Employees plans 121126 Environment 2426 Exchange rates 162 Foreign exchange 127 135 Financial commitments and contingent liabilities 113 Financial data selected 150153 Financial instruments and risk management 126133 Financial review 2947 Financial review introduction 30 Financial risk management 4445 Financial statements of BT Group plc 144147 Financial statistics 154155 Financing 4344 Free cash ow 2 44 102 Geographical information 47 95 Global Invest Direct 161 Glossary of terms and US equivalents 143 Group income statement summarised 31 Group results 3234 Group risk factors 2728 IFRS and United States generally accepted accounting principles differences between 134 Income statement group 8687 149 150151 Independent auditors Report of the 7576 144 Individual savings accounts ISAs 162 Intangible assets 7980 102103 Investments 105106 Shareholder information
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 175 Shareholder information Filename 5138412.3d Time 152006 Date 190507 Checksum tel Legal proceedings 22 Line of business results 3339 Listings 159 Loans and other borrowings 8283 107108 Material contracts 165 Memorandum 163 Minority interests 111 Net debt 2 101 Nominating Committee Report of the 55 Offbalance sheet arrangements 44 Openreach 1718 37 59 125 Operating and nancial review 828 3047 Operating costs 40 96 Operating prot 41 8687 Operational statistics 156 Other operating income 40 95 Other reserves and retained earnings 112 Our commitment to society 2425 Our customers 3 Our strategy 3 Outlook 10 Pensions 24 28 46 5960 64 117121 134 Prot before taxation 2 42 8687 Property plant and equipment 80 84 104105 Provisions 81 109 Publications 167 Pursue protable growth in new wave markets 910 Quarterly analysis of revenue and prot 149 Reconciliation of movements in equity 111 Regulation competition and prices 2022 Related party transactions 113 Relationship with HM Government 22 Resources 2224 Results announcements 161 Retirement benet plans 117121 Return on capital employed 46 154 155 Segmental analysis 9095 Share and ADS prices 159 Share buy back 162 Share capital 83 111 145 Sharebased payment 121126 ShareGift 162 Shareholder communication 168 Shareholdings analysis of 160 Specic items 30 31 4041 78 97 Statement of recognised income and expenses Group 87 Subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associate 148 Taxation 42 81 9899 Taxation US Holders 165167 Total shareholder return 161 Trade and other payables 82 109 Trade and other receivables 82 107 Transform our networks systems and services for the twentyrst century 10 Treasury Policy 44 Unclaimed Assets Register 162 US GAAP 46 134142 US GAAP developments 47 141142 Shareholder information Index 176 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F BT GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FORM 20F 2007 BT Group plc Registered office 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ Registered in England and Wales No.
Produced by BT Group Designed by Greentarget London Typeset by Bowne Printed in England by Pindar Graphics Printed on Revive 5050 Silk which is produced using 50% recovered waste fibre and 50% virgin wood fibre.
All pulps used are elemental chlorine free ECF.
PHME 52340 By Appointment to Her Majesty The Queen Suppliers of Communications Broadband and Networked Services
London
