Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Growth through transformation BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 BT Group plc Registered ofce 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ Registered in England and Wales No.
Produced by BT Group Designed by Paufey Ltd London Typeset by St Ives Financial Printed in England by Pindar plc Printed on elemental chlorinefree paper sourced from sustainably managed forests site PHME 47821 BT is one of the worlds leading providers of communications solutions serving customers in Europe the Americas and Asia
Its principal activities include networked IT services local national and international telecommunications services and highervalue broadband and internet products and services.
In the UK BT serves over 20 million business and residential customers as well as providing network services to other operators.
Contents
2 Financial headlines 3 Chairmans message 4 Chief Executives statement 6 Operating and nancial review 6 Business review 23 Fiveyear nancial summary 25 Financial review 44 Our commitment to society 46 Board of directors and Operating Committee 48 Report of the directors 50 Corporate governance 56 Report on directors remuneration 69 Statement of directors responsibility 70 Report of the independent auditors 71 Consolidated nancial statements 112 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 122 Subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates 123 Quarterly analysis of turnover and prot 124 Financial statistics 125 Operational statistics 126 Risk factors 127 Additional information for shareholders 140 Glossary of terms and US equivalents 141 Cross reference to Form 20F 144 Index BT Group plc is a public limited company registered in England and Wales with listings on the London and New York stock exchanges.
This is the annual report for the year ended 31 March 2005.
It complies with UK regulations and is the annual report on Form 20F for the Securities and Exchange Commission to meet US regulations.
This annual report has been sent to shareholders who have elected to receive a copy.
A separate annual review and summary nancial statement for the year ended 31 March 2005 has been issued to all shareholders.
In this annual report references to BT Group BT the group the company we or our are to BT Group plc which includes the continuing activities of British Telecommunications plc and its subsidiaries and lines of business or any of them as the context may require.
References to the nancial year are to the year ended 31 March of each year eg the 2005 nancial year refers to the year ended 31 March 2005.
Unless otherwise stated all nonnancial statistics are at 31 March 2005.
Please see cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 128.
BT was incorporated in England and Wales on 30 March 2001 as Newgate Telecommunications Limited with the registered number .
The company changed its name to BT Group plc on 11 September 2001.
Following the demerger of O2 in November 2001 the continuing activities of BT were transferred to BT Group.
BT Groups registered ofce address is 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 r Group turnover of 18.6 billion New wave turnover of 4.5 billion up 32% Prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 2.1 billion up 4% Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 18.1 pence up 7% Net debt reduced from 8.4 billion to 7.8 billion Dividends of 10.4 pence per share for the year up 22% Years ended 31 March In  million unless otherwise stated 2005 2004 Group turnover 18623 18519 18727 Exceptional operating costs 84 33 48 Total operating prot 2764 2836 2905 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 358 38 1705 Loss on sale of group undertakings  2 9 Prot on sale of property xed assets 22 14 11 Prot before taxation 2343 1945 3173 Prot after taxation 1820 1406 2714 Basic earnings per share 21.4p 16.4p 31.4p Dividends per share 10.4p 8.5p 6.5p Prot before goodwill amortisation exceptional items and taxation 2085 2013 1840 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 18.1p 16.9p 14.4p Net cash inow from operating activities 5898 5389 6023 Capital expenditure on property plant and equipment 3011 2673 2445 Restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see note 1 on page 81 The nancial information above is discussed in the Financial review on pages 25 to 43 together with the reasons for focusing on the results from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
The Consolidated nancial statements are on pages 71 to 122.
Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items bc pence years ended 31 March from continuing activities restated  see note 1 Financial headlines 2BTGroup plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Our results for the 2005 nancial year were strong.
New wave revenues grew by 32% to 4.5 billion and now represent nearly a quarter of our business.
Earnings per share have more than doubled over the past three years and net debt is more than 20 billion lower than in 2001.
Chairmans message BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 3 Earnings per share in the 2005 nancial year before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items grew by 7% to 18.1 pence.
While continuing to invest for the future we generated free cash ow of 2.3 billion up 10%.
The news on dividends is positive.
We are recommending a fullyear dividend of 10.4 pence per share a pay out ratio of 57% of earnings before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items compared to 50% last year.
We continue with our progressive dividend policy.
The dividend for the 2006 nancial year will be at least 60% of underlying earnings subject to the groups overall nancial position we expect our pay out ratio to rise to around twothirds of underlying earnings by the 2008 nancial year.
We continued with our share buy back programme in the 2005 nancial year.
This is being funded from cash generated over and above that required for servicing our debt.
We have reduced net debt to below 8 billion a level with which we are comfortable.
Business progress In support of our strategy for transformation and growth your Board gave backing during the year for a targeted series of acquisitions that will help to build our capabilities as one of the worlds foremost global networked IT services companies.
These acquisitions offered value for money had a compelling strategic t and brought capabilities to strengthen BT globally.
In addition passing the ve million mark for broadband connections in the UK in early April was a key moment in the history of your company.
Regulation
BT welcomed the Strategic Review of Telecommunications by Ofcom.
During the year we have worked to help inuence and shape their thinking and made a radical proposal for a new regulatory landscape in the UK.
We continued to argue strongly that structural separation was not in shareholders or customers interests.
We look forward to the published outcome.
Our position remains that a strategic and exible regulatory regime together with rapid deregulation wherever possible is vital to meeting customers developing needs and creating the conditions in which we and others can continue to invest with condence.
Board membership There were a number of changes to your Board during the 2005 nancial year.
I would like to welcome Hanif Lalani as our new Group Finance Director.
Ian Livingston who had occupied the nance role with distinction for three years was appointed Chief Executive BT Retail with effect from February 2005.
It is a testament to the strength of BTs management team generally that we were able to appoint people from inside the company to such key roles.
I would also like to thank Pierre Danon who left the Board in February for his signicant contribution as Chief Executive of BT Retail for the last four years.
Wider responsibilities It is increasingly important that companies such as BT continue to be good corporate citizens living up to our responsibilities to the communities in which we operate and to the environment.
Im proud to be able to report that for the fourth year in a row BT was the highest placed telecommunications company in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index.
Our community programmes focus on those issues where communications really can make the difference we have provided longterm support for example for a dramabased education programme to help develop young peoples communications skills and for the work of the childrens charity ChildLine.
Like so many other companies and individuals we wanted to respond to the devastating Asian tsunami in December 2004.
We made a donation of 500000 to the Disasters Emergency Committee DEC and we provided a live call centre for the unprecedented number of calls coming into the DEC.
Im particularly proud of the fact that so many of our employees were involved in fundraising activities and that 16 of our engineers travelled to the affected area to help reestablish communications.
Outlook
The process of transformation on which your company embarked in 2001 is accelerating.
That process is increasingly reected in your companys results.
We are well set for further success in the years ahead.
Id like to thank shareholders for the loyalty theyve shown.
Your continued condence  coupled with the loyalty of our customers and suppliers and the imagination and commitment of our employees  is fundamental to our transformation for growth.
Sir Christopher Bland
18 May 2005 Today BT is a very different company from the one that I joined three years ago.
As our customers needs have changed and continue to change so we have found and continue to nd new ways of meeting those needs investing in innovative products and services which add value to our customers and to BT.
That after all is what being a service company means.
Chief Executives statement 4BTGroup plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 In 2005 convergence is at the heart of BTs strategy.
By convergence we mean the ability to bring together our capabilities and capacities in new ways to make life better simpler and cheaper for our customers.
For our business customers this means productivity improvements for consumers its about new easier to use services.
For customers of all kinds it means a more joinedup communications experience.
So for example we offer our major corporate customers around the world a unique marriage of our networking experience and infrastructure with IT services.
These used to be separate offerings often supplied by different companies but were bringing them together in one place.
This means that however much their operations are dispersed around the globe our customers can communicate and operate as one anytime anywhere and at lower cost.
What were doing in the mobile market is similarly about convergence  we aim to offer customers a converged combination of the best of xed and the best of mobile.
Ultimately our customers shouldnt have to worry about xed or mobile when what they really want is freedom and exibility.
This means that we have to nd ways of helping them communicate wherever they are using whatever device they choose at the right price.
And convergence is also what our twentyrst century network 21CN programme is all about.
What our customers need to know is that the 21CN can support a range of technologies and services that will enable them to do the things they want to do  faster more seamlessly and more cost efciently.
And because this new network will support a wide range of innovative services which are currently run on separate networks it will be much more cost efcient for BT.
Global networked IT services We have raised our global prole through targeted acquisitions including Infonet and Radianz and by increasing our holding in Albacom to 100%.
We continued to play to our strengths in the networked IT services market.
A few years ago our position in this market was aspirational today we are competing with the best  and winning.
The BT brand is now a powerful presence in the global networked IT services market.
Its a brand that stands for excellent networking skills and a genuine commitment to nding innovative ways of delivering what our customers want end to end leaving them free to do what theyre good at running their businesses.
Our ICT information and communications technology revenues were 3 billion in the year and the major contracts weve won indicate the condence that our customers are prepared to put in us.
We now have a track record of meeting the needs of public and private sector customers in for example the nancial services and government arenas.
Our networked IT services order intake for the year was over 7 billion.
Broadband
Broadband has been an enormous success story not just for BT but for the UK as a whole which now has the highest levels of broadband access of any country in the G7 group of nations.
We hit our ve million broadband lines target a year early.
As broadband access becomes a fact of life for most people in the UK our focus is shifting further towards the retail market where we have fantastic scope to drive further growth.
Having got broadband people now want to do more and more with it.
We are increasing speeds by up to four times at no extra cost to our retail customers.
Convergent mobility services The launch in partnership with Vodafone of our mobile virtual network operator in both the business and consumer markets is the key to building a mobility customer base and a path to mobile convergence.
We now have over 372000 contract connections.
Our strategy is to build a foundation for the delivery of highvalue xedmobile convergent solutions for consumers and businesses.
An early example of this will be Project Bluephone which will give customers the convenience of a mobile phone with the quality and cost advantage of xedline services.
Twentyrst century network Our 21CN will help to make the UK one of the most advanced telecommunications countries in the world transform our wholesale business and support the next generation of exible costefcient services.
At the end of April 2005 we announced the eight preferred suppliers who will help us to implement the 21CN.
The capital expenditure involved is signicant but the 21CN will lead to a radical simplication of our networks making it easier to offer compelling propositions to all our customers.
The real challenge is to ensure that we invest in a way that meets customers needs.
Traditional business We are experiencing major changes in our traditional markets as a result of regulation growing competition and signicant shifts in our customers buying patterns as they discover the possibilities of technologies such as instant messaging and voice over IP.
Chief Executives statement BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 5 Fixedvoice telephone calls may no longer be the only way to measure the success of a communications company but they remain fundamental to our business.
We may have lost some market share to competitors but we will continue to compete aggressively by offering new and better services and improved customer value.
Cost efciency Taking a leadership position on costs is critical.
Earnings per share is a key measure which means that we have to continue to look at every cost line in the business and challenge it.
Weve made excellent progress on improving our cost efciency in the past few years and in the 2005 nancial year our cost efciency programmes achieved savings of around 400 million and we aim to deliver at least 300 million to 400 million of savings in each of the next three years.
Relentless customer focus Our 20 million customers are a wonderful asset and we have to continue to show how much we value every one of them.
A key target for us was driving down customer dissatisfaction  weve reduced dissatisfaction levels by 23% on a compound annual basis over the past three years.
There is still more to be done and we must continue this focus.
Our people People bring strategies to life people deliver worldclass customer experiences people make convergence happen.
Two years ago we introduced our new brand values trustworthy helpful inspiring straightforward heart.
Since then BT people have embraced these values and turned the business inside out and upside down to deliver our strategy nding innovative ways to reinvent BT in our traditional markets at the same time as establishing our BT brand in new markets all the while driving down customer dissatisfaction.
Iam constantly amazed by their commitment and by what they have achieved.
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive 18 May 2005 The Business review is divided into the following sections 7 Introduction 8 Group structure 9 Group strategy 9 Build on our networked IT services capability 10 Deliver on broadband 11 Create convergent mobility solutions 12 Defend our traditional business vigorously 13 Drive for cost leadership 13 Keep a relentless focus on improving customer satisfaction 13 Transform our network for the twentyrst century 13 Motivate our people and live the BT values 14 Research and development and IT support 15 Property 15 Regulation competition and prices 22 Relationship with HM Government 22 Legal proceedings Please see cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 128.
All customer numbers are given as at 31 March 2005 unless stated otherwise.
The denition reconciliation and reasons for disclosing EBITDA earnings before interest taxation depreciation and amortisation are discussed in the Financial review.
Operating and nancial review
Business review
6BTGroup plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Introduction BT Group plc is the listed holding company for an integrated group of businesses which together form one of the worlds leading providers of communications solutions serving customers in Europe the Americas and the Asia Pacic region.
British Telecommunications plc is a whollyowned subsidiary of BT Group plc and holds virtually all businesses and assets of the BT group.
Our aim is to increase shareholder value through service excellence an effective brand our largescale networks and our existing customer base and also through innovation in products services and solutions.
Our principal activities include networked IT services local national and international telecommunications services and highervalue broadband and internet products and services.
In the UK BT is the UKs largest communications service provider by market share to the residential and business markets supplying over 20 million customers with a wide range of communications products and services including voice data internet and multimedia services and offering a comprehensive range of managed and packaged communications solutions.
Our core portfolio covers traditional telephony products such as calls analoguedigital lines and private circuits.
New wave revenue generation is focused on networked IT services broadband and mobility.
In the UK wholesale market we provide network services and solutions to over 600 communications companies including xed and mobile network operators ISPs internet service providers and other service providers.
We interconnect with more than 180 other operators as well as carrying transit trafc between telecommunications operators.
Our aim in these markets is to continue to increase protable revenues from data and advanced broadband and internet services further reducing our dependence on revenues and prot generated by traditional xedline voice services.
In the 2005 nancial year 91% of our revenues were derived from operations within the UK.
Globally
We supply managed services and solutions to multisite organisations worldwide  our core target market is 10000 multisite organisations including major companies with signicant global requirements together with large organisations in target local markets.
We provide them with global reach and a complete range of networked IT services.
Our extensive global communications network and strong partnerships enable us to serve customers in the key commercial centres of Europe North America and the Asia Pacic region.
We own operations in the Americas Africa the Asia Pacic region Belgium France Germany Ireland the Netherlands Spain Italy Scandinavia Switzerland and Central and Eastern Europe.
In a small number of countries we use a combination of direct sales and services capabilities and strategic partners to deliver the services our customers want.
We currently have employees in 12 countries in Asia Pacic and operate multiple sales ofces in the Americas.
Our global communications services portfolio includes desktop and network equipment and software transport and connectivity managed LAN local area network WAN wide area network and IPVPN internet protocol virtual private network services managed mobility applications hosting storage and security services and business transformation and change management services.
Governance
BTs policy is to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity in all our operations in line with our published statement of business practice  The Way We
This includes a commitment to maintaining the highest standards of corporate governance throughout the group see Corporate governance.
Corporate social responsibility We are committed to enhancing our positive impact on society through leadership in CSR corporate social responsibility.
In our view a well managed CSR programme supports the delivery of strategy and is in the best interests of customers shareholders employees and the community see Our commitment to society.
Ofcoms Strategic Review of Telecommunications Shortly after assuming its regulatory functions in December 2003 the Ofce of Communications Ofcom began conducting a Strategic Review of Telecommunications the aim of which is to consider the scope for the further development of effective competition in the telecommunications sector.
The Review has found that although the UK telecommunications market has delivered signicant benets for consumers and businesses the current market situation is not acceptable or desirable going forward.
Consequently Ofcoms second consultation put forward three options and withdrawal from regulation in favour of reliance on competition law and a market investigation reference to the Competition Commission under the Enterprise Act or and the delivery by BT to other industry participants of real equality of access.
BT supports the concept of a settlement based on equality of access which would in our view be an ideal opportunity to focus regulation on economic bottlenecks and reduce it elsewhere sweep away the regulatory mesh that has grown up since 1984 and deliver regulatory stability and certainty promoting the condence that market participants need if they are to invest and innovate.
Consequently in our response to Ofcoms second consultation we put forward a package of proposals under which BT would make signicant organisational and other changes to address issues of market condence and transparency.
We stressed that as part of this package we would need Ofcom to take certain measures notably to make a commitment to rapid and signicant deregulation.
Ofcom is currently involved in discussions with BT and others aimed at assessing whether a settlement based on equality of access would be feasible.
If it concludes it is not it will consider adopting the second of the three options outlined above ie an Enterprise Act reference.
See Regulation competition and prices for more information on Ofcoms proposals and BTs response.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 7 Group structure
British Telecommunications plc the successor to the statutory corporation British Telecommunications was incorporated in England and Wales as a public limited company wholly owned by the UK Government as a result of the Telecommunications Act 1984.
Between
November 1984 and July 1993 the UK Government sold all of its shareholding in three public offerings.
In the 2002 nancial year BT undertook a radical restructuring including the UKs largestever rights issue raising 5.9 billion the demerger of O2 comprising BTs whollyowned mobile assets in Europe the disposal of signicant noncore businesses and assets the unwind of Concert BTs joint venture with ATandT and the creation of customerfocused lines of business.
Acquisitions and disposals prior to the 2005 nancial year In the 2003 nancial year we completed the sale of our 26% stake in Cegetel Groupe SA the leading alternative xedline operator in France for 2.6 billion in cash.
In addition we disposed of a number of noncore investments including our stakes in BSkyB Mediaset Blu and SmarTone.
In the 2004 nancial year we sold our stake in Inmarsat a global mobile satellite communications services company and monetised our shareholding in LG Telecom a wireless telecommunications service provider in the Republic of Korea.
We also acquired the UK operations of NSB Retail Systems a supplier of software products and services and Transcomm a provider of dataonly wireless services in the UK.
Acquisitions and disposals in the 2005 nancial year In February 2005 we completed the acquisition of Infonet one of the worlds leading providers of international managed voice and data network services for 520 million including acquisition costs.
Excluding
Infonets net cash balance the net value of the deal was 315 million.
The acquisition of Infonet rebranded BT Infonet is a signicant step forward in our strategy of addressing the networked IT services needs of multisite organisations.
It will signicantly extend our global reach and will deepen our presence in North America and the Asia Pacic region.
BT Infonet has local operations andor distributors in 70 countries remote network access in approximately 180 countries and strong sales and support partnerships around the world.
Also in February 2005 we acquired the 74% of Albacom that we did not already own from our three joint venture partners  ENI BNL and Mediaset  for a minimum of 80 million.
Including acquisition costs and settlement of BTs share of Albacoms bank loan the total acquisition cost was 131 million.
BT has been active in the Italian business communications market since 1995 and Albacom provides data transmission voice and internet services to more than 170000 customers in that market.
We also signed outsourcing contracts with our former joint venture partners.
In October 2004 there was an IPO initial public offering of the Singapore telecommunications and media company StarHub in which BT held an 11.9% stake.
By
November 2004 we had disposed of our entire holding through the IPO for 78 million in cash.
Also in October 2004 we acquired BIC Systems Group Limited for a cash consideration of 17 million consolidating our position in the networked IT services sector in Northern Ireland.
In December 2004 we completed the sale of our 15.8% stake in Eutelsat to GS Capital Partners  an investment partnership afliated with Goldman Sachs for 357 million in cash.
In January 2005 we completed the sale of our 4% stake in Intelsat to a consortium of private equity investors for 65 million in cash.
This followed the sale in June 2004 of our 4.8% stake in New Skies Satellites for 24 million in cash.
In July 2004 we disposed of our 27.7% stake in PayPoint Limited a bill payment collection network operator to various institutional investors for 34 million in cash.
Post balance sheet acquisitions In April 2005 we completed the acquisition of Radianz the leading nancial services extranet provider from Reuters for a cash consideration of 107 million.
The purchase of Radianz is another vital step in our transformation into a global provider of networked IT services.
Radianz will continue to provide highquality extranet services for Reuters and the global nancial services market.
How BT operates BT consists principally of three lines of business BT Retail BT Wholesale and BT Global Services.
BT Retail and BT Wholesale operate almost entirely within the UK addressing the consumer business and wholesale markets and offer a broad spectrum of communications products and services.
BT Global Services addresses the networked IT services needs of multisite organisations including major companies with signicant global requirements and large organisations in target local markets.
Group turnover by customer segment year ended 31 March 2005 Wholesale UK and global carrier Major corporate 24% 30% 13% 33%
Business
Further analysis of group turnover is provided in the Financial review.
Consumer customers As at 31 March 2005 BT had approximately 19 million UK consumer customers with around 20 million residential customer lines exchange line connections.
In the 2005 nancial year consumer revenues declined by 6% to 5637 million primarily reecting the impact of CPS carrier preselection and regulatory price reductions to mobile termination rates.
8BTGroup plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review Our strategy in the consumer market is to defend traditional revenues and market share vigorously through innovative service offerings backed by innovative marketing and excellent quality of service.
At the same time we are driving for new wave revenues particularly in the areas of broadband and mobility.
In the consumer market new wave revenues grew by 85% from 223 million in the 2004 nancial year to 412 million in the 2005 nancial year driven principally by broadband and mobility.
Residential broadband customers increased by 96% in the year to more than 1.3 million and mobility connections increased to 187000 as at 31 March 2005.
Major corporate and business customers As at 31 March 2005 we had around 1.5 million business customers worldwide with nine million exchange lines in the UK.
In the 2005 nancial year major corporate revenues increased by 4% to 6101 million.
The increase in new wave turnover of 19% to 2926 million was driven by networked IT services broadband and by mobility not only in the UK but also globally.
Our strategy in the major corporate market is to continue to migrate from traditional voiceonly services to networked IT services.
This enables us to build closer more integrated longterm highvalue relationships with our customers enabling them to manage their communications spend more effectively and gain competitive advantage in their markets.
Such relationships will we believe deliver longterm sustainable predictable and protable revenues more than offsetting the decline in our traditional business revenues.
As at 31 March 2005 new wave turnover accounted for 48% of our total turnover in the major corporate market.
In the SME market typically companies with up to 500 employees our strategy is to provide business customers with tailored communications products and services that enable them to manage their businesses more simply and efciently.
Overall in the SME market during the 2005 nancial year revenues reduced by 5% to 2464 million primarily reecting the impact of CPS and WLR wholesale line rental.
Wholesale customers Our strategy in the UK wholesale market is to continue to generate protable revenues from our core market and from new wave products in broadband networked IT services and mobility.
In the 2005 nancial year turnover from our wholesale activities increased by 9% to 4396 million.
In the UK external turnover from BTs wholesale activities was 3812 million in the 2005 nancial year compared with 3473 million in the 2004 nancial year.
New wave revenues were 664 million up 84% on the 2004 nancial year.
This increase was driven by the success of broadband as well as a strong emphasis on customers as we aim to build innovative solutions that help our wholesale customers grow their businesses.
In our global carrier business revenues were 584 million in the 2005 nancial year compared with 557 million in the 2004 nancial year.
Our global carrier business customers include other xedline telecommunications operators mobile operators and selected ISPs.
Report structure For the purposes of this Business reviewwe are reporting on each of our strategic imperatives.
For nancial reporting purposes we continue to report by line of business see Financial review.
Group strategy Our strategy is to build longterm partnerships with our customers.
With their support we aim to maximise the potential of our traditional business  through a combination of enhanced quality of service creative marketing innovative pricing and cost efciency  while pursuing protable growth by migrating our customers to new wave products and services such as networked IT services broadband mobility and managed services.
We are also exploring new ways of doing business and have for example set up a number of ventures to deliver new revenue streams by taking an innovative and entrepreneurial approach to our core business.
We have eight strategic imperatives ve of which are focused on generating new wave revenues defending revenue in traditional markets and operating with maximum efciency and build on our networked IT services capability and deliver on broadband and create convergent mobility solutions and defend our traditional business vigorously and drive for cost leadership.
These are underpinned by three further imperatives and keep a relentless focus on improving customer satisfaction and transform our network for the twentyrst century and motivate our people and live the BT values.
Build on our networked IT services capability Our strategy in the networked IT services market is to reinforce BTs position as a global player capable of competing with the worlds best in selected growth markets.
Our portfolio of services covers a number of key areas including IP infrastructure CRM customer relationship management security applications managed mobility hosting and outsourcing.
Networked IT services for major corporate customers As business applications are increasingly being networked networks are seen as increasingly vital to productivity and competitive advantage.
ICT revenues for the 2005 nancial year were 2753 million a rise of 18% on the 2004 nancial year.
We aim to deliver networked IT services globally to large business customers and other organisations including the public and government sectors giving them the communications tools they need for productivity andor business improvement.
In the 2005 nancial year we secured networked IT services orders worth more than 7 billion.
Major contracts included and Our highest prole success in the global market came in March 2005 when it was announced that BT will be Reuters supplier of network services under a contract expected to be worth up to 1.5 billion over eight and a half years.
BT will provide and manage secure data networks for Reuters products and services worldwide.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 9 UK operations.
The value of these services including existing business is expected to be in excess of 500 million over the sevenyear term. capability.
For example we signed an outsourcing contract with French company THALES Group an international electronics and systems group serving the defence aeronautics security and services markets.
The veyear contract covers the management of xedvoice and data network services for THALES and its subsidiaries in up to 42 countries. infrastructure globally.
As part of the agreement BT will migrate these services to a stateoftheart high speed IPbased global MPLS multiprotocol label switching infrastructure. subsidiary of Hanjin Shipping.
With a sales order value of 18 million this is one of the largest contracts won by BT in the Asia Pacic region. and air trafc control centre sites and its IT network.
2005 nancial year. armed forces.
Between April 2005 and July 2012 the Defence Fixed Telecommunications Systems public private partnership contract between the MoD and BT will be worth up to 1.5 billion bringing the total value of the contract to more than 2.7 billion. campaign in September 2004.
The campaign ran in multiple languages in international and local media across Europe the Americas and the Asia Pacic region.
Networked IT services for wholesale customers We believe that the convergence of IT and communications technologies creates commercial opportunities for communications providers and our strategy is to enable these providers to take full advantage of such opportunities.
We have a long and successful tradition of delivering networkbased connectivity to the carrier and intermediate telecommunications markets throughout the UK and have developed valueenhancing services and solutions.
We have a number of agreements with service providers and mobile operators to upgrade their IP capability.
In addition we have used our expertise and geographic reach to provide ubiquitous bespoke data housing solutions.
Our plans for our twentyrst century network 21CN will enable the delivery of further integrated network and communications solutions to our customers and their enduser customers.
Deliver on broadband In the 2005 nancial year we continued our drive to enhance the awareness availability and attractiveness of broadband and we are on target to bring broadband to exchanges serving 99.6% of UK homes and businesses by the summer of 2005.
The UK now has the most extensive broadband network of all the countries in the G7 Group according to telecommunications analyst Ovum.
We believe that the key issues in todays broadband markets are speed and price but that going forward applications will increasingly prove to be a competitive differentiator.
Broadband for wholesale customers In early April 2005 we reached our target of ve million broadband lines one year ahead of schedule.
Since we rst announced the target takeup has continued to accelerate  whereas it took a year to reach our rst million the fth million took just four months.
Since
September 2004 we have been connecting someone to broadband every ten seconds of every day.
In total 4419 exchanges had been upgraded by the end of the 2005 nancial year reaching almost 97% of the UKs homes and businesses.
Broadband is now one of the fastest growing consumer products of all time.
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4tel 27tel1058 BT Wholesale DSL broadband connections thousands and In February 2005 Northern Ireland became the rst UK region outside London to have all its exchanges enabled for broadband.
As at 1 March 2005  as a result of a 10 million partnership between BT and One Northeast the regional development agency for northeast England  all 181 exchanges in the region had been upgraded.
In April 2005 we won the 16.5 million public tender with the Scottish Executive to bring broadband to the most remote communities in the UK.
We will enable 378 exchanges to deliver broadband to 51000 households and 5400 businesses. and businesses within reach of broadband. increasing speed.
Since April 2005 we have been testing speeds of between 2Mbits and 8Mbits with a 10 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review view to launching higherspeed wholesale services in the second half of 2005.
In addition we are trialling a variant of ADSL asynchronous digital subscriber line broadband known as ADSL2 which may support speeds of more than 20Mbits.
DataStream ADSL products by an average of 8% in areas of high demand. subscriber line services.
SDSL offers the same rate upstream and downstream and is particularly suitable for the SME market.
By April 2006 we aim to SDSL enable 1300 exchanges covering more than two thirds of UK businesses.
Local Loop Unbundlingbyupto 70% in a phased series of price cuts which will we believe make it easier for LLU operators to invest in broadband infrastructure with condence.
As at 31 March 2005 LLU operators were providing service to 40000 lines from more than 600 exchanges many of which were multioperator sites.
Broadband for consumers As at 31 March 2005 in the highly competitive retail market our share of consumer and business DSL broadband connections in the UK was 36% 1.75 million connections.
BT is the UKs leading service provider of broadband offering a family of broadband packages designed to meet the diverse needs of our customers.
Key packages include BT Broadband Basic and BT Broadband which offer rapid alwayson internet access BT Yahoo Broadband which also provides a fuller range of benets including multiple email addresses virus protection personalised music parental controls protection against unsolicited email and evolving applications and content and BT Communicator with Yahoo Messenger. superfast standard beginning in February 2005.
Most consumer and business customers will have their broadband speed increased to up to 2Mbits  up to four times faster than previous speeds  at no extra cost.
The introduction of 2Mbits as standard will enable customers to get more from their broadband link and paves the way for a range of new services. customers.
Yahoo Messenger.
This integrated software package downloadable from the internet gives customers a truly convergent multimedia communications experience enabling them to manage all their home communications  phone calls emails texts instant messaging and webcam  together in one place on their PC.
Broadband for business customers We believe that the introduction of 2Mbits ADSL broadband as standard will help business customers maximise the major opportunities offered by online trading and teleworking.
BT Business Broadband remained the leading ISP for SMEs in the UK.
At the end of the 2005 nancial year we had over 340000 BT Business Broadband customers and were adding 250 a day.
More than half opt for such value added services as the Internet Security Pack and the Internet Business Pack. between them.
The new business will offer an extensive range of payment solutions to the rapidly growing online retail market.
2004 gives small businesses throughout the UK access to VOIP voice over IP services and enables them to use their broadband connections to reduce costs for multiple business lines.
On average BT Broadband Voice offers customers savings of more than 60% compared with second line rental.
Create convergent mobility solutions In a convergent world individuals and businesses increasingly need to connect and communicate whenever and wherever they happen to be using whatever devices they choose.
Our aim is to offer all our customers the right combination of the quality reliability cost advantages and bandwidth associated with xedline communications and the convenience personalisation and mobility associated with mobile communications.
In the 2005 nancial year we launched BT Mobile as an MVNO mobile virtual network operator running over the Vodafone network.
Becoming an MVNO is fundamental to building our mobility customer base driving the wireless broadband market and developing and delivering compelling convergence propositions and one converged customer experience.
Project Bluephone is a converged mobile service enabling customers to use a single device that can switch seamlessly between xed and mobile networks.
This will provide customers with the convenience of mobile combined with the cost and quality advantages of a xed line phone.
We plan to launch Project Bluephone shortly.
We believe that a partnership strategy is fundamental to our success and we are working hard through the FMCA Fixed Mobile Convergence Alliance to develop open industry standards and through the WBA Wireless Broadband Alliance to drive WiFi public wireless broadband hotspot proliferation global roaming and user satisfaction.
Revenue in the mobility market in the 2005 nancial year was 205 million an increase of 107% on the 2004 nancial year.
As at 31 March 2005 BT Mobile had over 372000 business and consumer connections.
Mobility for consumers In the consumer mobility market our strategy is to build a foundation for the delivery of addedvalue xedmobile convergent solutions. with Vodafone in the consumer market.
BT Mobile is costeffective for families offering up to ve additional Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 11 handsets.
Other benets include free short calls from a BT Mobile phone to a designated home number and a single consolidated mobile bill.
Mobility for business customers BT is a service provider in the business mobility market with more than 185000 business connections at 31 March 2005.
We provide a range of managed mobile services to UK and global customers who either outsource their mobile communications entirely or rely on BT to provide specic managed services. service BT Business Circle and mobile conferencing. and We are a leading UK provider of WiFi services.
BT
Openzone offers customers a highspeed wireless broadband connection over which they can access the internet send and receive emails with attachments and connect to a corporate network.
As at 31 March 2005 our customers had access to more than 7500 hotspots throughout the UK and more than 20000 globally.
Mobility for wholesale customers In the 2005 nancial year we continued to implement our strategy in the UK wholesale mobile arena  to maximise the volume and value of wireless trafc by developing and launching innovative products and services. and mobile and mobile and xed line.
SMS which enables customers to send and receive multiple text messages via the internet to and from their customers mobile telephones.
Defend our traditional business vigorously We face continued challenges in our traditional markets as a result of regulatory intervention competition and a shift in our customers buying patterns as we provide them with higherspecication highvalue new wave products.
Total xedtoxed voice call minutes in the UK market as a whole declined by 3% in the 2005 nancial year.
This was driven by customers making use of alternatives such as mobile calls email instant messaging corporate IPVPNs and VOIP.
However the measurement of call minutes is less important to BT as customer takeup of pricing packages continues and we actively encourage the migration of customers to new wave services such as broadband.
Traditional services for consumers and On 1 July 2004 we abolished the standard rate and switched all existing standard rate customers to BT Together Option 1 offering them better value for money and making it easier for them to compare our prices with those of our competitors.
We also reduced the price of Option 1 by 1 a month offering savings to the ve million customers who were already on this option. strategy in the 2005 nancial year. savings on all xedtomobile calls. internet dialler problems.
BT Modem Protection is a free software download which will prevent a customers computer dialling highcost premium rate or international numbers.
We have also developed an early warning alert  in the form of a text or voice message to their mobile or xedline phone  for customers whose bill rises signicantly above the usual daily pattern.
We can then put in place an immediate premium rate bar on the line andor suggest other barring options.
As at 31 March 2005 around one million BT customers had signed up for one or more of these barring services. more than 1400 textphones throughout the UK.
Although we remain committed to ensuring that public payphones are available in communities throughout the UK future growth opportunities will focus on maximising returns from existing sites and capabilities including ekiosks and content services as well as hosting CCTV closed circuit TV facilities and mobile antennae. editions now including a new classied section.
A new milestone will be reached in midJune 2005 from which date all editions will include classied advertising in colour.
Traditional services for business customers and In the 2005 nancial year we made a number of enhancements to our BT Business Plan.
In May 2004 in response to EU enlargement we extended the benets of BT Business Plan by including ten new entrant countries in the 20 pence cap on calls to Europe lasting less than one hour.
In August 2004 we extended BT Business Plan to cover all business customers irrespective of size or spend.
And from September 2004 we cut the cost of xedtomobile calls by 25% to 30% and offered BT Business Plan customers the chance to opt for a 30 pence cap on all xedtomobile calls lasting less than one hour.
At
31 March 2005 BT Business Plan had over 440000 locations up 67% on the 2004 nancial year. position as a key player in the SME market.
At the end of the 2005 nancial year BT Local Business was active in 83 locations around the country managing 1.2 billion of annual billed turnover.
Traditional services for wholesale customers In the 2005 nancial year despite average price reductions of 7% and growing competitive pressure in the UK market wholesale revenues from traditional activities in the UK grew by 1% overall.
We continued to invest in improvements to our processes and systems reducing both provision and repair times.
12 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review and We continued to develop our capability as a supplier of network facilities management.
For example we are providing maintenance support to the physical eld and core switching elements of O2s 3G network.
51 million in the 2005 nancial year. and higher bandwidth circuits.
This has enabled us to grow revenues from the provision of infrastructure to other network providers.
Wholesale Extension Service  a highspeed pointto point data circuit providing a secure link between a third party customer site and a communication providers networks  and BT Enterprise Ethernet  a low bandwidth variant of the MegaStream Ethernet product offering many of the characteristics of a traditional private circuit but with the added benet of lowcost Ethernet interface.
Drive for cost leadership We remain focused on nancial discipline and our cost efciency programmes achieved savings of around 400 million in the year.
This has enabled us to invest in growing our new wave activities.
We aim to deliver at least 300 million to 400 million of savings in each of the next three years.
We aim to deliver this by focusing on the cost of failure complexity and duplication and by working smarter.
For example at 31 March 2005 we had 6. ite and almost two million customers receiving ebills.
We continue to benchmark ourselves against the best in the industry and set targets accordingly.
Keep a relentless focus on improving customer satisfaction Reducing customer dissatisfaction by 25% a year over three years on a compound annual basis to the 2005 nancial year was a key target in our drive to deliver the highest levels of customer satisfaction.
In the 2005 nancial year for the third year in a row all lines of business reduced customer dissatisfaction levels.
This result is based on quantitative customer research conducted by independent external agencies and represents a groupwide reduction of 23% on a compound annual basis over the past three years.
The quality of service we provide to our customers is key to improving customer satisfaction.
Much of our training and development activity remains focused on removing any barriers to the delivery of excellent customer service and a highquality customer experience.
Our core people engagement initiative is the my customer programme which aims to enable all BT people to deliver great customer service through teamwork.
Over 3000 issues have been identied and resolved.
More than 4000 people are members of teams tasked with making further improvements as part of the 2005 my customer Challenge Cup.
Transform our network for the twentyrst century Our UK network today BT has the most comprehensive communications network in the UK with 684 local and 135 trunk processor units more than 121 million kilometres of copper wire and more than seven million kilometres of optical bre and we have the most extensive IP backbone network in the UK.
The network services we provide include Frame Relay ATM asynchronous transfer mode and IPVPN.
Our global reach BT has one of the broadest IPenabled networks in Europe and our networkbased services extend to and across North and South America and the Asia Pacic region and are delivered locally through interconnect and supply agreements with regional carriers.
As at 31 March 2005 our agship MPLS product provided coverage and support to 72 countries from over 1000 points of presence.
MPLS revenues grew by 48% during the 2005 nancial year.
Global customer service is provided via service and network management centres around the world 24 hours a day seven days a week.
Transforming our networks systems and services for the twentyrst century Our 21CN programme will lead to the simplication of BTs complex multiple networks making it easier for us and other operators who interconnect with BTs network to deliver compelling converged services.
The 21CN programme has three broad goals and to enhance the service experience exibility and value we provide to all our customers and to accelerate the delivery of innovative new products and services to market and and to reduce costs radically.
Technical trials began in the 2005 nancial year.
For example we launched a voice transformation trial moving voice trafc from the traditional PSTN public switched telecommunications network onto an IP network.
We made signicant progress towards completing the detailed technical and architectural designs to support the implementation of 21CN.
In April 2005 we announced the preferred suppliers that we expect will help to build and implement the 21CN.
This was the culmination of two years of discussions and negotiations with over 300 potential technology suppliers and is one of the largest procurement programmes ever undertaken in the communications industry.
The eight preferred suppliers chosen are Alcatel Ciena Cisco Ericsson Fujitsu Huawei Lucent and Siemens.
We expect to conclude contractual discussions with these preferred suppliers in summer 2005.
A programme of industry consultation  Consult21 was launched in the 2005 nancial year to promote a shared understanding with industry of the 21CN vision and the progress we are making giving our wholesale customers an opportunity to input and inuence its development.
Motivate our people and live the BT values Our customers have a right to expect that we will understand their needs and live our brand values.
This presents the 102100 people employed by BT at 31 March 2005 with opportunities to develop innovative solutions generate new business drive efciencies and experience personal growth.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 13 Our vision is of highperforming engaged and motivated people who can make a difference for customers shareholders the company and themselves.
Only by living our values  trustworthy helpful straightforward inspiring and heart  will we deliver our strategy keep our promises to our customers seize new opportunities in new markets and reinvent our traditional business.
Developing leaders The quality of leadership in the company is key to the successful delivery of our strategy for transformation and growth and we have updated and rened our approach to using selection agencies for key posts while the core leadership development programme introduced in 2003 continues to drive our management development initiatives.
Engaging and motivating our people Our annual employee attitude survey was conducted most recently in February 2005.
Among the key results were that 89% of our people have a clear understanding of how their work contributes to BTs success and seven out of ten employees are willing to try new ways of doing things.
The survey generates around 5000 feedback reports for managers and their teams across the business helping to promote effective team working.
Employees are kept informed about our business through a wide range of communications channels including our online news service monthly newspaper regular email bulletins and senior management web chats and web cast briengs.
In the UK two main trade unions are recognised by the company.
In continental Europe we work closely with the works councils both on an operational basis and as strategic stakeholders.
Rewarding and recognising achievement In the 2005 nancial year we introduced a new reward framework for our managers.
Salary ranges are now aligned with the going rate for equivalent jobs across a range of comparable organisations geographies and skill sets.
This ensures we remain competitive and are able to recruit and retain the people we need.
We also continued to provide our employees with opportunities to acquire a stake in the company.
Under the BT Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP BT can provide free shares to employees and in addition employees can purchase shares in the company from their pretax salaries.
In the 2005 nancial year 11 million was allocated to provide free shares to employees under the ESIP.
Employees outside the UK receive a cash payment equivalent to the value of the shares.
This allocation of prots was linked to the achievement of corporate performance measures determined by the
In addition employees can buy shares at a discount under our savingsrelated share option plans.
Over 98% of eligible employees participate in one or more of these plans.
Pensions
Most of our employees are members of the BT Pension Scheme or the BT Retirement Plan both of which are controlled by independent trustees.
The BT Pension Scheme was closed to new members on 31 March 2001.
The majority of new employees are eligible to join the BT Retirement Plan.
Health and safety The health and safety of our people is of paramount importance.
We have a zero tolerance of workplace accidents and have reduced the number of reportable employee accidents from 146 cases per 10000 employees in the 2001 nancial year to 61 cases per 10000 employees in the 2005 nancial year.
In the 2005 nancial year we launched the Health and Wellbeing Forum to promote ways of working that help people balance the demands of their work and personal lives as well as focusing on specic healthcare issues.
We also developed an inhouse process to help BT people manage stress.
Learning now and for the future Our successful companywide reaccreditation to Investors in People in February 2005 rst achieved in 1998 demonstrates our continuing commitment to the effective alignment of our communications training and development with our business strategy.
To improve the effectiveness and efciency of our training delivery we conducted a strategic review of our training suppliers in the 2005 nancial year reducing them to a core group of 36.
This will contribute to year onyear savings of at least 3.4 million.
The development opportunities available to our people range from onetoone coaching using a combination of internal and external professional coaches to the BT sponsored MBA programme which has produced 54 graduates in the past three years.
Embedding exibility and diversity The changing nature of the markets in which we operate our focus on cost leadership and our investment in new services have impacted the shape of our permanent workforce.
During the 2005 nancial year 3903 2004  2287 people joined BT natural attrition was running at 2.6% 2004  2.4% and in the UK 2685 2004  4814 people left BT under our voluntary paid leaver package.
We are committed to helping our people optimise their worklife balance.
At the end of March 2005 for example more than 8900 people were working mainly from home.
We continue to create a working environment that actively supports all our employees  regardless of gender race sexual orientation disability or age.
Research and development and IT support Through our IT division BT Exact we offer the services of thousands of IT professionals with knowledge of leading edge network design and IT systems and application development together with skills in innovation change management and IT operations.
Over the last year we have transformed our approach to internal and external systems development through the establishment of 90day design development and delivery cycles accelerating our ability to deliver systems which support product development and all our customers to much tighter timescales and much higher levels of right rst time delivery.
We are also developing new high quality online ways for customers to deal with us in an intuitive and comprehensive manner.
14 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review The GCTO Group Chief Technology Ofce sets and drives the innovation and technology strategy for BT.
GCTO includes a global technology intelligence scouting unit teams focused on innovative new wave service opportunities an innovation design and media team strategic technology analysis units a network and systems architecture team and worldclass research and venturing facilities in Adastral Park England and Malaysia.
The work undertaken by GCTO is part of BTs 257 million investment in research and development in the 2005 nancial year.
This compares with 334 million and 380 million invested in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
We continue to focus our innovation work on key areas which support our business and technology strategies ling 109 new patent applications in the 2005 nancial year and maintaining a total patent portfolio of 7400 patents and applications.
Among the awards won by our technology research team was the British Computing Societys IT Developer of the Year.
BT is a limited partner in the independent corporate venturing partnership NVP Brightstar which generates value by launching key innovations as new high technology businesses.
Property
At 31 March 2005 BT occupied approximately 6600 properties located principally in the UK.
Most of this property portfolio is owned by Telereal Group a 5050 joint venture between Land Securities Trillium and William Pears Group.
The majority of these properties are specialised operational buildings.
They mainly house exchange equipment and are needed as part of BTs continuing activities.
Other general purpose properties consist chiey of ofces depots and computer centres.
Our property strategy is to continue to reduce costs at the same time as increasing usage and income generation.
In the 2005 nancial year we sublet an additional 21000sqm of ofce space vacated 158000sqm of space ready for disposal and successfully disposed of Mondial House in London for 51 million.
Regulation competition and prices The commercial environment in the UK and in the countries in which BT operates is increasingly competitive and dynamic.
However we remain subject to extensive regulation particularly in the UK which can materially affect the way in which we carry out our business.
We also use inputs such as networks and services from other regulated operators largely outside the UK and the availability and price of these inputs may change from time to time which in turn affects our business.
Regulation in the UK It is our policy to be fully compliant with the regulatory framework in which we operate.
During the 2005 nancial year we continued to strengthen our compliance activities and in addition we have worked closely with compliance professionals in the telecommunications and other regulated industries in the UK to establish best practice.
We have been in contact with European telecommunications companies with the intention of sharing ideas and best practice and bringing improvements to the UK market.
Our compliance policy remains focused on ensuring that we continue to meet the obligations imposed by or under the UKs Communications Act 2003 the Communications Act and the Competition Act 1998 the Competition Act while competing fairly and vigorously within the rules.
We publish an annual compliance report which can be found in our social and environment report at site betterworld
The UK regulatory environment changed materially in July 2003 when the Communications Act came into force bringing in a new regulator the Ofce of Communications Ofcom and a new regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services.
Ofcom was set up as a result of the increasing convergence between telecommunications broadcasting and radio to provide a single seamless approach to regulation across the whole converging marketplace.
It amalgamated the roles of ve former regulatory agencies the Director General of Telecommunications Oftel the Independent Television Commission the Broadcasting Standards Commission the Radio Authority and the Radiocommunications Agency.
Ofcom is headed by a board consisting of a chairman executive and nonexecutive members.
Currently the chairman is Lord Currie and the chief executive is Stephen
Ofcom has a wide range of general and specic duties laid down in the Communications Act.
Below is a summary of those duties and functions of particular relevance to BTs activities and the principal duty to further the interests of citizens in relation to communications matters and secondly to further the interests of consumers where appropriate by promoting competition.
In doing so Ofcom must secure among other things the availability of a wide range of electronic communications services in the UK and the duty to have regard to the principles under which its regulatory activities should be transparent accountable proportionate consistent and appropriately targeted and the duty to review regulatory burdens on a regular basis and ensure that they do not involve the imposition or maintenance of unnecessary burdens and and the functions of setting conditions of entitlement see Regulatory conditions and enforcing those conditions see Enforcement.
Ofcoms decisions are subject to appeal on the merits see Appeals.
In carrying out its duties Ofcom must consider promoting competition and the use of effective selfregulation encouraging investment and innovation and encouraging the availability and use of highspeed data services including broadband.
Regulatory conditions Under the new framework based on 2003 EU Directives providers may no longer be required to obtain licences before offering telecommunications services.
Individual
Instead there is a general authorisation for the provision of electronic communications networks and services.
Regulation is applied through separate sets of conditions made by Ofcom of which some apply to all relevant communications providers.
Others are imposed Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 15 individually on particular providers which following a review of the relevant markets are found to have Signicant Market Power SMP or are designated as Universal Service Providers.
Other general obligations are set out in the Communications Act.
The general and specic obligations that form BTs regulatory environment are described below.
Conditions applying to all providers of electronic communications networks or services General conditions The foundation of the new regulatory framework is the set of general obligations referred to in the Communications Act as General Conditions.
These apply to all providers of electronic communications networks or services including systemless service providers and internet service providers.
These conditions are mainly concerned with consumer protection but also address matters such as general access and interconnection obligations standards emergency planning and numbering.
In addition a separate condition has been set regulating the provision of premium rate services.
Electronic Communications Code conditions The Electronic Communications Code deals with powers to carry out streetworks and similar activities for the purposes of providing networks and its application is subject to conditions made by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.
Other general obligations Other obligations corresponding to former licence conditions under the old framework now apply directly through provisions of the Communications Act.
These are and the payment of administrative charges broadly the equivalent of licence fees under the old framework and and the provision of information to Ofcom when required to do so.
Conditions applying to BT only Universal Service Obligation conditions BT has been designated as the supplier of Universal Service for the UK excluding the Hull area where Kingston Communications is the designated provider.
The services covered by the Universal Service Obligation USO are dened in an Order issued by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.
Our basic obligation is to provide a single narrowband connection to the xed telephone network but additional USO conditions relate to issues such as schemes for consumers with special social needs and the provision of payphone services.
Ofcom is currently reviewing the USO.
The review is focused on delivering the current Universal Service arrangements and is being carried out alongside Ofcoms Strategic Review of Telecommunications see Other signicant changes and issues  Strategic Review of Telecommunications which looks at longerterm Universal Service issues.
Signicant Market Power conditions The Communications Act implementing the EU Directives on which the regulatory framework is based requires Ofcom to dene and analyse markets market review and to determine whether any communications provider has SMP which is aligned with the competition law concept of dominance.
Economic regulation can only be imposed following a market review and nding of SMP.
In markets where Ofcom nds that a provider has SMP it must impose appropriate additional obligations in the form of SMP conditions as specied in the Communications Act.
These may include obligations to meet reasonable requests to supply certain services to other communications providers not to unduly discriminate and to notify price changes.
In some cases additional obligations relating to for example price control and regulatory accounting have also been imposed.
The market reviews relevant to xed telecommunications that Oftel and Ofcom have conducted are listed below.
For each review the markets in which BT has been determined to have SMP are shown.
All references to UK markets except wholesale trunk segments and broadband conveyance exclude the Hull area.
30 lines residential local calls residential national calls residential calls to mobile residential operator assistance calls residential international directdialled calls business local calls business national calls business calls to mobile business operator assistance calls.
30 lines call origination localtandem conveyance and transit intertandem conveyance and transit single transit. other members of the BT group of companies. wholesale international services on 108 country routes.
BT was not found to have SMP in any market considered in this market review.
8Mbits and up to and including 155Mbits wholesale alternative interface symmetric broadband origination at all bandwidths.
Wholesale trunk segments at all bandwidths. conveyance. wholesale local access services.
The Communications Act allows Ofcom to review markets for enduser apparatus and impose conditions on any provider designated with SMP.
The conditions which may be imposed are limited to conditions relating to accounting separation cost accounting and price control for hardwired telephone rental charges.
Ofcom has decided that BTs price controls in respect of rental of hardwired telephone 16 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review apparatus brought forward from the old regulatory regime should be removed and replaced by written undertakings rather than by SMP apparatus conditions.
The Act obliges Ofcom to carry out further analyses of markets which have been reviewed at such intervals as it considers appropriate.
In the Phase 2 consultation document in the Strategic Review of Telecommunications Ofcom has made proposals for a number of market reviews over the coming years.
Ofcom is currently carrying out a review of the Number Translation Services NTS Call Termination market.
Enforcement
The Communications Act sets out the enforcement process to be followed in relation to breaches of conditions.
Where a breach is not remedied following preliminary notication by Ofcom Ofcom may take legally enforceable enforcement action andor impose a penalty of up to 10% of relevant turnover.
In addition a person who suffers loss or damage as a result of a breach may with Ofcoms consent sue for damages and in the case of serious and repeated contraventions Ofcom may restrict or suspend the providers entitlement to provide electronic communications networks or services.
The Communications Act contains similar enforcement procedures though with much smaller penalties for matters such as noncompliance with a request for information or nonpayment of an administrative charge.
Appeals
One of the main features of the new regulatory framework is that full appeals on the merits are now available against regulatory decisions.
Consequently appeals can be made against matters such as and the making of SMP SMP apparatus and USO determinationsdesignations and the setting modication and revocation of conditions and enforcement actions including the imposition of a penalty.
Any person affected by a decision may appeal to the Competition Appeals Tribunal.
However the Tribunal must refer any matters in any appeal relating to price controls on to the Competition Commission for determination.
In November 2003 Ofcom issued a notication nding that BT was acting in contravention of the General Conditions by using customerspecic information acquired from other communications providers in connection with the provision of Carrier PreSelection
In May 2004 Ofcom issued a second notication nding that BT was similarly contravening the General Conditions in relation to Wholesale Line Rental WLR.
BT appealed both notications and the Tribunal adjourned the WLR appeal pending the outcome of the CPS appeal.
In December 2004 the Tribunal dismissed BTs CPS appeal and upheld that notication although this was subject to a clarication of the denition of marketing activity as set out in the notication.
Subsequently
Ofcom withdrew the contested WLR notication indicating that it would issue a new notication in light of the CPS decision.
The Tribunal has suspended the WLR appeal pending the new notication which is expected shortly.
Competition
The competitive environment The UK telecommunications market is fully open and highly competitive.
Although it is some years since the Telecommunications Act 1984 abolished the monopoly of the former statutory corporation British Telecommunications obligations placed on BT including pricing regulation network access nondiscrimination the provision of universal service and cost accounting accounting separation are generally more onerous than for other providers of electronic communications networks and services.
Competition and the UK economy The growth of mobile over the past decade has been a major factor in shaping the UKs telecommunications landscape.
Mobile now accounts for approximately 30% of total UK voice minutes.
BTs market share of the total UK voice market including mobile is estimated to have fallen by about 4% in the 2005 nancial year to approximately 40%.
BTs share of the residential xedvoice market as measured by the volume of xedtoxed voice minutes declined to an estimated 64% for the 2005 nancial year compared with an estimated 70% and 74% for the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
CPS has been one of the contributors to the loss of share in the xedvoice market.
We estimate that BT had 42% of the market for business xedvoice calls in the 2005 nancial year compared with an estimated 44% and 47% in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
Estimated market shares are based on our actual minutes market data provided by Ofcom and an extrapolation of the historical market trends.
We also estimate that BT supplied approximately 79% of exchange lines in the UK at the end of the 2005 nancial year compared with 82% and 83% in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
The growth in cable operators networks in the UK has historically had an adverse effect on BTs share of the residential market.
Current and future wholesale line rental arrangements will allow BTs xedline customers to move PSTN lines to other operators which are expected to be the source of more competition in the future.
Since 2000 we have been required to provide other operators with the use of the lines connecting BTs local exchanges to our customers and to other operators to install equipment in our exchanges see Local Loop
Competition Law In addition to telecommunications industry regulation BT is subject to general competition law including the Competition Act in the UK and the competition law provisions of the EC Treaty.
UK and European Union competition law both prohibit anticompetitive agreements concerted practices and the abuse of a dominant market position.
In the application of UK and EU competition law to electronic communications Ofcom has concurrent investigatory and enforcement powers with the Ofce of Fair Trading OFT.
The EC has jurisdiction to apply the EU rules.
Breach of the relevant prohibitions in the UK or EU rules could lead to nes of up to 10% of worldwide turnover in a companys previous nancial year andor result in claims for damages in Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 17 national courts.
A company may also be ordered to cease an infringing activity.
There is an independent mechanism for appeals to the Competition Appeal Tribunal against decisions taken by Ofcom or the OFT and to the European Court of First Instance against EC decisions.
In July 2005 the Tribunal is due to hear Wanadoos appeal against Ofcoms November 2003 nding that BT had not infringed the prohibition on abuse of a dominant position in relation to the pricing of BT Openworlds consumer broadband products.
Separately in August 2004 Ofcom claimed that BT had abused a dominant position in relation to its pricing of consumer broadband products.
BT has responded arguing that its pricing does not amount to an abuse of dominance.
Ofcom has indicated that it will issue either a new statement of objections or a decision of noninfringement in relation to this case in June 2005.
Enterprise Act The Enterprise Act 2002 aims to give more independence to the competition authorities to reform insolvency and bankruptcy laws and to tackle trading practices that harm consumers.
The key provisions of the Enterprise Act including the new cartel offence and the section on director disqualication entered into force on 20 June 2003.
It is now a criminal offence punishable by imprisonment or a ne or both to engage in cartel activity.
In addition where companies infringe UK or EU competition law company directors can be disqualied from being concerned in the management of a company for a maximum period of 15 years.
The Enterprise Act also gives the OFT power to make a market investigation reference to the UKs Competition Commission where the OFT has reasonable grounds for suspecting that any feature of a market prevents restricts or distorts competition in the supply or acquisition of goods or services in the UK.
Once the OFT exercises its power to make such a reference the Competition Commission is required to decide whether any feature of the market prevents restricts or distorts competition adverse effect and if so to take action to remedy the adverse effects.
Market investigations are intended to address competition issues in markets as a whole and not merely the behaviour of individual players.
In relation to electronic communications markets Ofcom has concurrent powers with the OFT to make a market investigation reference.
Pricing regulation Fixed network We are subject to price controls on our xed network services in the UK at two levels retail and network.
Fixed network competitors are generally not subject to direct price controls although there are some controls on mobile network operators.
Retail price controls We are subject to two sets of UK retail price controls one on certain publicswitched telephony call charges and exchange line rentals and one on certain private circuits.
Each price control is based on a formula calculated by reference to the UK Retail Prices Index RPI and a factor X.
For services covered by the controls the weighted average of base prices cannot increase in each year beginning 1 August by more than the annual change in RPI minus X.
The current retail price control for public switched telephony applying from August 2002 to July 2006 is RPI minus RPI ie the value of X is RPI and prices cannot increase.
It is measured on services used by the lowest 80% of our residential customers classied by bill size.
From August 2002 the services covered by the control were extended to include BTs share of the revenue for calls to all four mobile networks replacing the previous separate control on BT for calls to Vodafone and
The price control formula and our performance against the formula are set out in the table below.
Under the price controls for private circuits that applied from August 1997 to July 2001 prices for domestic analogue and lowspeed digital private circuits could not increase by more than the change in the RPI in any year.
For all retail analogue private circuits and 8Mbits digital private circuits BT has also given an assurance to adhere to a RPI0% price cap from 30 June 2003 until 30 June 2006.
As part of the review of price controls in 2002 BT was required to provide a costbased wholesale line rental product to other service providers at a regulated price and in a way that does not unduly discriminate between BTs retail business and service providers.
This product Wholesale Access has been available from BT since 1 September 2002.
Further consultation by Ofcom resulted in an enhanced wholesale access product being available from 29 March 2004.
When Ofcom noties BT that it is satised in relation to the introduction and provision of Wholesale Access it may direct that the retail price control be adjusted to RPI0%.
Price Control RPIX Years commencing 1 Augusttel 2003 2004 % RPI movement for the relevant period Xon price control formula ab % required change in base prices cd % change in base prices overall 1.20 2.50 0.22 0.19 0.46 Annual increase in RPI to previous June From 1 August 1997 the RPI formula covers the main switched telephone services provided to the lowest 80% of BTs residential customers by bill size After permitted carry forward of any unused allowance or shortfall from previous years From 1 August 2002 the RPI formula covers the change in average prices including residential discount packages Full year forecast based on price changes implemented up to January 2005 for residential customers.
There is an unused allowance of 0.41% carried forward from the previous year which would allow prices to rise by this amount in 2005.
Further price changes during this year could eliminate the current variance but if not the amount may be carried forward.
18 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review Network Charge Control We operate under interconnection agreements with most other operators.
Our charges for a range of interconnect services are controlled by Ofcom under the Network Charge Control NCC regime.
The current NCC period began on 1 October 2001 and will last until 30 September 2005.
The controls are designed to ensure that our charges are reasonably derived from costs plus an appropriate return on capital employed.
Depending on the degree of competition for these services charges are capcontrolled each year by RPI minus X where X ranges from 7.5% to 13% for services Ofcom considers unlikely to become competitive in the near future and safeguard capcontrolled ie no increases above RPI during any relevant year of the overall control period for services likely to become competitive.
Those services considered fully competitive are not subject to direct charge controls.
The main network price caps are listed below
X Factor in RPI  X formula Duration Call termination 10 30 Sept 2005 Call origination 10 30 Sept 2005 Tandem layer 13 30 Sept 2005 Safeguard cap 0 30 Sept 2005 Interconnect specic 8.25 30 Sept 2005 Local exchange FRIACO 7.5 30 Sept 2005 BT must publish a notication to Ofcom and other operators if we intend to amend existing charges or to offer new services.
Notice periods range from 28 to 90 days for regulated services depending on the degree to which they are judged to be competitive.
In 2004 Ofcom began a review of the NCC to determine the controls to apply from 1 October 2005.
On
23 March 2005 Ofcom issued a consultation document Review of BTs Network Charge Controls proposing a further fouryear NCC regime with a review of BTs market power in two specic markets deregulation being proposed for one of these markets.
Ofcom is also proposing some redenitions of basket services and consulting on a range of values of X for these services reecting the fact that some of the relevant factors in setting X are yet to be resolved.
We will respond to Ofcoms proposals by 1 June Ofcom is expected to publish a statement by the end of July 2005.
The various services and proposed ranges of X within Ofcoms 23 March consultation document are listed below
X Factor in RPI  X formula Call termination 2.25 to 6.25 Call origination 0.5 to 4.5 Single transit 11 to 14 Localtandem conveyance 0 safeguard Interconnection circuits 1.5 to 5.5 Product management policy and planning 2.5 to 6.5 Local exchange FRIACO 7.5 to 11.25 Single tandem FRIACO 8.5 to 12.25 Intertandem conveyance  transit No control propose to deregulate Number portability The number portability charge control runs from 1 August 2002 until 31 July 2006.
The charges are controlled by a RPI minus X formula with X set at 5%.
This control is not contained in an SMP condition but in a nonbinding undertaking given by BT to Ofcom.
Under the new regime General Condition 18 requires all providers to offer number portability among other things on reasonable terms and for charges to be costorientated.
Wholesale access charge control The charges for wholesale access services both analogue and digital are also subject to price control.
The charges for the line rental residential and business products line transfer and new line installations have been set by Ofcom and are subject to a price control of RPI minus 2% effective from 1 September 2002 for four years.
The control applies to the aggregate of all charges rental transfer and installation as well as to line transfers separately.
We are also under an obligation to notify Ofcom and service providers if we intend to amend existing charges or introduce new charges.
Notice periods range from 28 to 90 days depending on the specic service.
On 28 November 2003 Oftel published its statement on the xed narrowband wholesale exchange line market.
This statement contained new obligations on BT to provide Wholesale Business ISDN2 Line Rental with cost oriented prices and to provide residential ISDN2 and
We launched the required products but the price level was referred to Ofcom as a dispute by Energis on 25 October 2004.
On 2 February 2005 Ofcom determined that BTs price was set at too high a level and that BT must refund Energis an amount for each line rented during the period from 23 November 2003 to 30 September 2004.
Additionally during the year a smallscale consultation was carried out which aligned the price control formulae for Wholesale Access NCC and PPC Partial Private Circuits but this did not affect the Wholesale Access control in a material way.
Partial Private Circuit Charge Control PPCs are leased lines that BT sells to other network operators.
On 1 October 2004 Ofcom introduced a PPC charge control to replace the annual determinations previously carried out by Oftel.
The control arises from regulation established in the Leased Lines Market Review LLMR and deals with PPC terminating segments the access part of the leased line network.
The control is a four year RPIX type control with three separate baskets and Low Bandwidth Basket RPI4% and High Bandwidth Basket RPI6.5% and and Equipment Basket RPI8.9%.
Charges prior to the control were maintained as starting charges and BT is required to make price reductions each year which comply with the controls.
However control formulae are constructed to allow BT some discretion in the timing of the price changes and the ability to meet the control by rebalancing different elements of the PPC charges.
PPCs are also subject to obligations to notify operators and Ofcom if we intend to revise charges or other contractual conditions.
The notication periods range Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 19 from same day to 90 calendar days depending on the nature of the change.
NonUK regulation BT must comply with the regulatory regimes in the countries in which we operate or wish to operate.
The obligations placed on us and our suppliers continue to be relevant to our business models and have cost implications for our enduser services.
These rules are generally applied by national regulatory authorities operating under a government mandate.
The decisions of these bodies can have a material impact on our business models from time to time.
European Union The degree to which the European Directives have been implemented varies by country.
The general move towards the new regime continues in the original EU15 member states before enlargement although in some of these countries the implementation of the directives is progressing slowly.
In most but not all of these EU15 member states the primary legislation that will enable the introduction of the new regulatory regime is going through or has been through the legislative process.
The processes of identication of operators with SMP and the subsequent setting of regulatory obligations on those operators are mostly in progress.
The EU10 accession member states are in the early stages of implementing these directives.
BT will not have universal service obligations outside the UK although in certain member states we may be required to contribute towards an industry fund to pay for the cost of meeting universal service obligations in those countries.
Any ndings that BT has SMP in any nonUK market are not expected to have a material impact.
We are lobbying the European Commission and other EU bodies with responsibility for electronic communications for consistent and timely implementation of the new directives and associated regulation.
The availability of costoriented access products from regulated incumbents remains an important element of our strategy around the world and we continue to press these incumbents their national regulatory authorities and at the EU level for such access.
Availability varies by country.
The European Commission is formally investigating the way the UK Government has set BTs property rates and those paid by Kingston Communications.
The
Commission is examining whether the Government has complied with EC Treaty rules on state aid in assessing BTs rates.
BTs rates were set by the Valuation Ofce after lengthy discussions based on well established principles in a transparent process.
In BTs view any allegation of state aid is groundless and BT is condent that the Government will demonstrate the fairness of the UK ratings system.
A nding against the UK Government could result in BT having to repay any state aid it may be determined to have received.
Rest of the world The vast majority of the markets in which we operate around the world are regulated and in the majority of these we have to obtain licences or other authorisations and comply with applicable conditions.
The degree to which these markets are liberalised varies widely while many are fully open to competition others place restrictions on market entrants such as the extent to which foreign ownership is permitted or restrictions on the services which may be provided.
The extent to which the national incumbent operator is effectively regulated also varies considerably.
BTs ability to compete fully in some countries is therefore constrained.
Other signicant changes and issues Strategic Review of Telecommunications Ofcom is carrying out a Strategic Review of the UK telecommunications sector the Strategic Review.
The rst consultation document was published in April 2004 and the second in November 2004.
The Strategic Review is comprehensive and wide ranging.
It aims to assess the options for enhancing value and choice in the UK telecommunications sector while having regard to investment and innovation.
The rst consultation document focused on ve fundamental issues the key attributes of a well functioning telecoms market for citizenconsumers the achievement of sustainable competition the possibility of a signicant reduction in regulation incentivising efcient and timely investment in nextgeneration networks and the relevance of the issue of structural or operational separation of BT.
The second consultation set out three options for the outcome of the Strategic Review.
These were as follows and Option 1  full deregulation with reliance on competition law to address competition concerns and Option 2  a market investigation reference to the Competition Commission under the Enterprise Act to determine whether any feature of the market prevents or distorts competition in the supply of communications services.
One possible result of such an investigation could be enforced separation of BT and and Option 3  delivery by BT to its competitors of real equality of access to its networks with the onus on BT to bring forward prompt and clear proposals.
Option 3 which was supported by most of the respondents to Ofcoms Phase 2 consultation would entail introducing more effective regulation focused on enduring economic bottlenecks.
Ofcom also proposed that when BT had delivered equality of access in these areas it would withdraw many additional layers of regulation from wholesale and retail markets.
In our response to the Phase 2 consultation BT put forward proposals for a package of measures which could form the basis for a new regulatory settlement.
Under these proposals we would and make signicant organisational changes that demonstrated our commitment to transparency and exemplary governance including the creation within BT of a new Access Services Division based on the assets and people associated with the access network from the customers premises to the main distribution frame in the local exchange and create an Equality of Access Board to monitor the performance of the Access Services Division and to oversee delivery of equality of access by BT and introduce equality of access in a phased and effective manner and ensure that BTs Wholesale Access product is demonstrably t for purpose with effective operational performance and an increased margin enabling rapid consumer takeup 20 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review and keep Local Loop Unbundling LLU at the heart of BTs wholesale broadband portfolio building on the work already done on industrialising LLU operations and taking forward our previous commitment to cut the price of fully unbundled loops and make sure the rest of BTs broadband products keep pace so that all service providers have a wide choice of offerings to suit their business models and agree on the enduring economic bottlenecks assets that are not replicable in the medium term and work to ensure that regulation is focused around them and and set out the ground rules that underpin the development of BTs 21st Century Network.
Equally as part of this package BT would need Ofcom to and commit to rapid signicant and ongoing deregulation in certain key markets and create a stable investment environment with the Strategic Review and the associated studies concluded successfully so that investors are able to invest with certainty and and enable BT to compete on a level playing eld with other operators in the market.
Cost of copper Ofcom issued two consultation documents in late 2004 and early 2005 concerning the valuation of the local access network assets with the intention of issuing a statement in summer 2005.
The review considered the valuation of the copper local access circuits and the duct through which these circuits pass.
Ofcom considers the local access network to be a bottleneck meaning that other xed line telecommunications operators wishing to serve the majority of UK customers need to use BTs local access network to do so and wishes to ensure customers continue to be charged fair prices for the use of these assets.
The regulator considered alternative ways of valuing these assets and Ofcom anticipated that it would conclude that the assets should be revalued at a lower level.
Such an outcome would result in lower wholesale charges for the use of local access network assets.
Cost of capital During its review of the PPC price control Ofcom concluded that it should amend the allowed rate of return it should use based on an updated calculation of BTs overall cost of capital.
The September 2004 statement used an allowed rate of return of 13.0% on a pretax nominal basis specically for PPC prices compared with the 13.5% rate that the regulator had previously allowed in other price controls.
In January 2005 Ofcom issued a consultation document that examined various aspects of risk and reward including aspects of the allowed return that should be used by Ofcom in setting regulated prices.
The consultation proposed to review the calculation of BTs overall cost of capital and also considered whether to allow different rates of return for different parts of BT.
The regulator proposed to reduce BTs overall cost of capital from the general current rate of 13.5% and also suggested that the local access network was less risky than the rest of BT and BT should therefore be allowed a lower rate of return in regulated prices.
Such an outcome would result in lower wholesale charges for local access network services.
Radio base station backhaul circuits and wholesale extension services During the 2005 nancial year we also launched two new products in line with regulations contained in the Leased Lines Market Review and RBS radio base station backhaul circuits  these are circuits provided by BT to enable a mobile communications provider to connect a radio base station to its mobile switching centre and and WES wholesale extension services  these are circuits provided over bre typically using Ethernet technology to enable a telecoms operator to connect a customer site to its own switching site.
Neither product is currently part of a price control but Ofcom has imposed various regulatory conditions on the products including notication and cost orientation obligations.
Local Loop Unbundling Local Loop Unbundling LLU enables operators to connect directly to the consumer via BTs copper local loops and then add their own equipment to offer broadband and other services.
There are two types of unbundled line and a fully unbundled line gives operators the exclusive use of the copper line and and a shared access line only gives operators the use of the highfrequency channel used for broadband and will also be used by the customers xedline voice provider.
During the 2005 nancial year Ofcom extensively reviewed LLU regulation as it believed that development of the LLU market allowing operators to target infrastructure investment and develop scale in the creation of highspeed data services would be critical in ensuring a fully competitive and innovative telecoms market for the long term.
However while LLU does offer the potential for downstream service and price competition in broadband it also requires substantial facilities and network investment by competitors.
Ofcoms latest approach to regulating LLU focused on process and price and in July 2004 Ofcom appointed the independent Telecoms Adjudicator to handle process issues and and Ofcom completed its review of LLU prices in December 2004 as part of the wholesale local access market review.
On 16 December 2004 Ofcom announced nal charges for most connection and rental prices for LLU services.
The charge reductions follow consultations published on 13 May 2004 and 26 August 2004 and the price ceilings came into effect from 1 January 2005.
Ofcom has published a full list of price ceilings at www. fcom.
Funds for liabilities Under conditions relating to the Electronic Communications Code an electronic communications provider with apparatus on or in the public highway is required to make nancial provision to cover any damage suffered by highway or other relevant authorities resulting from works carried out by the communications provider and for the removal of its network if necessary in the event of the liquidation or bankruptcy of the company.
The conditions require the company to provide Ofcom annually with a certicate that in the company boards Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 21 opinion the company has fullled its obligations to ensure the availability of the required funds.
This has been done by BT.
Relationship with HM Government The UK Government collectively is our largest customer but the provision of services to any one department or agency of the UK Government does not comprise a material proportion of our revenues.
Except as described below the commercial relationship between BT as a supplier and the UK Government as customer has been on a normal customer and supplier basis.
We can however be required by law to do certain things and provide certain services for the UK
General conditions made under the Communications Act 2003 require all providers of public telephone networks andor publicly available telephone services including BT on the request of and in consultation with the authorities to make and if necessary implement plans for the provision or restoration of services in connection with disasters.
Furthermore the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 contains provisions enabling obligations to be imposed on providers of public electronic communications networks including BT in connection with civil contingency planning.
In addition the Secretary of State has statutory powers to require us to take certain actions in the interests of national security and international relations.
Legal proceedings The company does not believe that there are any pending legal proceedings which would have a material adverse effect on the nancial position or operations of the group.
Proceedings have been initiated in Italy against 21 defendants including a former BT employee in connection with the Italian UMTS auction.
Blu in which BT held a minority interest participated in that auction process.
The hearings are continuing in Rome.
If the proceedings are successful BT could be held liable with others for any damages.
The company has concluded that it would not be appropriate to make a provision in respect of any such potential claim.
22 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review Prot and loss account Years ended 31 March Total turnover Continuing activities 21068 21815 20182 18914 19031 Discontinued activities 8598 2827 29666 24642 20182 18914 19031 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 9937 4764 1455 395 408 Trading between group and principal joint venture 698 681 Group turnover Continuing activities 17141 18447 18727 18519 18623 Discontinued activities 3286 2112 20427 20559 18727 18519 18623 Other operating income 35tel171 Operating costs bc 20764 21387 16366 15826 16005 Group operating prot loss Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 3252 2593 2794 2889 2864 Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 3230 3059 218 19 75 22 466 2576 2870 2789 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures Total operating prot loss Continuing activities 2451 1476 2905 2836 2764 Discontinued activities 2826 371 375 1847 2905 2836 2764 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 619 4389 1696 36 358 Prot on sale of property xed assets 34 1Amounts written off investments  535 Net interest payable 1314 1622 1439 941 801 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2067 1126 1840 2013 2085 Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 3103 348 1333 68 258 1036 1474 3173 1945 2343 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities Prot loss on ordinary activities after taxation 1748 1031 2714 1406 1820 Minority interests 127 23 12 8 1 Prot loss for the nancial year 1875 1008 2702 1414 1821 Average number of shares used in basic earnings per share millions 7276 8307 8616 8621 8524 Basic earnings loss per share 25.8p 12.1p 31.4p 16.4p 21.4p Diluted earnings loss per share 25.8p 12.0p 31.2p 16.3p 21.2p Basic earnings loss per share from continuing activities 20.6p 34.6p 31.4p 16.4p 21.4p Diluted earnings loss per share from continuing activities 20.3p 34.6p 31.2p 16.3p 21.2p Dividends per share 7.8p 2.0p 6.5p 8.5p 10.4p Dividends per share cents Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 17.5p 6.2p 14.4p 16.9p 18.1p Diluted earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 17.2p 6.2p 14.3p 16.8p 18.0p Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items on continuing activities 19.2p 9.0p 14.4p 16.9p 18.1p Restated following adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see note 1 on page 81 Operating costs include net exceptional costs 2857 2c Includes redundancy and early leaver costs 11tel166 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures includes exceptional costs release 332 1294 150 26 25 Net interest payable includes exceptional costs credits 25 162 293 55 Includes exceptional tax charge credit 22 143 139 29 16 Based on actual dividends paid andor year end exchange rate on proposed dividends Fiveyear nancial summary Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 23 Cash ow statement Years ended 31 March Net cash ow from operating activities 5887 5257 6023 5389 5898 Dividends from associates and joint ventures Returns on investments and servicing of nance 727 1695 1506 527 878 Taxation paid 669 562 434 317 332 Capital expenditure and nancial investment 8442 1354 2381 2477 2408 Acquisitions and disposals 13754 5785 2842 60 418 Equity dividends paid 1432  367 645 784 Cash outow inow before management of liquid resources and nancing 19127 7433 4183 1366 1080 Management of liquid resources 480 1864 1729 1123 587 Financing 19735 5479 2473 2445 1485 Increase decrease in cash in the year 128 90 19 44 182 Increase decrease in net debt in the year resulting from cash ows 18942 13930 4225 1222 887 Balance sheet At 31 March Intangible xed assets 1838tel623 Tangible xed assets 21625 16078 15888 15487 15916 Fixed asset investments 5107 104telNet current assets liabilities 11111 757 1913 2027 2165 Total assets less current liabilities 34001 18131 18476 18042 14489 Loans and other borrowings falling due after one year 18775 16245 13456 12426 8091 Provisions for liabilities and charges 2738 2324 2376 2504 2497 Minority interests 499 72 63 46 50 Total assets less liabilities 11989 510 2581 3066 3851 Called up share capital 757tel432 Share premium account  Capital redemption reserve    2 2 Other reserves 2848 102telProt and loss account 7264 1971 1147 1632 2416 Total equity shareholders funds deciency 11989 510 2581 3066 3851 Total assets 54702 27496 28119 26565 26950 Restated following adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see note 1 on page 81 US GAAP Years ended 31 March Group operating prot loss 633 337 2693 2420 2779 Income loss before taxes 1959 1025 3653 1188 1576 Net income loss Continuing activities 809 1680 4134 883 1297 Discontinued activities 3166 948 2357 732 4134 883 1297 Basic earnings loss per ordinary share 32.4p 8.8p 48.0p 10.2p 15.2p Diluted earnings loss per ordinary share 32.4p 8.8p 47.7p 10.2p 15.1p Basic earnings loss per ordinary share from continuing activities 11.1p 20.2p 48.0p 10.2p 15.2p Diluted earnings loss per ordinary share from continuing activities 11.0p 20.2p 47.7p 10.2p 15.1p Basic loss earnings per ordinary share from discontinued activities 43.5p 11.4p Diluted loss earnings per ordinary share from discontinued activities 43.5p 11.3p Average number of ADSs used in basic earnings per ADS millions 72tel852 Basic earnings loss per ADS 3.24 0.88 4.80 1.02 1.52 Diluted earnings loss per ADS 3.24 0.88 4.77 1.02 1.51 Total assets as at 31 March 55361 30428 31131 28674 29006 Ordinary shareholders equity deciency as at 31 March 10231 4247 2258 1455 584 24 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review The review is divided into the following sections 26 Introduction 27 Summarised prot and loss account 28 Group results 30 Line of business results 30 BT Retail 32 BT Wholesale 33 BT Global Services 33 Other operating income 33 Operating costs 34 Group operating prot loss 34 Associates and joint ventures 35 Total operating prot loss 35 Prot on sale of group undertakings and xed asset investments 35 Interest charge 36 Prot loss before taxation 36 Taxation 36 Earnings loss per share 36 Dividends 36 Financing 37 Treasury policy 38 Offbalance sheet arrangements 38 Capital resources 38 Foreign currency and interest rate exposure 38 Capital expenditure 39 Acquisitions 39 Balance sheet 39 Return on capital employed 39 Pensions 40 Geographical information 40 Regulatory nancial information 40 Regulation competition and prices 40 Competition and the UK economy 40 Environment 40 Critical accounting policies 41 Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS 43 US GAAP Please see cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 128.
Financial review
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 25 Introduction The nancial results for the 2005 and 2004 nancial years reect the continuing strong growth in new wave services as we derive value from transforming the business.
Our
We are driving the change by providing our customers with new technology and services with greater capabilities and lower cost.
The focus on delivering the strategy continued and the groups performance beneted from the growth in new wave activities such as networked IT services broadband mobility and managed services and continued cost efciency programmes.
Our global networked IT services business is growing strongly and our global capabilities have been strengthened by the successful completion of the acquisitions of Albacom and Infonet in the 2005 nancial year.
Subsequent to the year end we also completed the acquisition of Radianz.
The 2003 nancial year was characterised by a focus on implementing and delivering the strategy announced in April 2002 and further corporate transactions in the continued restructuring of the group and reduction of net debt.
The corporate transactions included the unwind of the Concert joint venture on 1 April 2002 and the disposal of our interest in Cegetel for 2.6 billion.
In this Financial review the commentary is focused principally on the trading results of BT Group before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items by virtue of their size or nature are excluded because they predominantly relate to corporate transactions rather than the trading activities of the group.
This is also consistent with the way that nancial performance is measured by management and we believe allows a meaningful comparison to be made of the trading results of the group during the period under review.
The goodwill amortisation and exceptional items are therefore analysed and discussed separately from the line of business results in this Financial review because they are considered to be a reection of the corporate activity rather than the trading activity of the lines of business.
The following table shows the summarised prot and loss account which includes a reconciliation of the key performance measures before and after goodwill amortisation and exceptional items and is discussed further in this Financial review.
The operating results by line of business are discussed in addition to the overall group results as we believe the activities and markets they serve are distinct and this analysis provides a greater degree of insight to investors.
26 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review Summarised prot and loss accounttel m m Total turnover 19031 18914 20182 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 408 395 1455 Group turnover 18623 18519 18727 Other operating income 171 177 215 Operating costs 16005 15826 16366 Group operating prot loss Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2864 2889 2794 Goodwill amortisation 16 12 20 Exceptional items 59 7 198 2789 2870 2576 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures 25 34 329 Total operating prot loss Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2864 2881 2975 Goodwill amortisation 16 12 22 Exceptional items 84 33 48 2764 2836 2905 Prot on sale of group undertakings and xed asset investments 358 36 1696 Prot on sale of property xed assets 22 14 11 Net interest payable 801 941 1439 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2085 2013 1840 Goodwill amortisation 16 12 22 Exceptional items 274 56 1355 2343 1945 3173 Prot after taxation 1820 1406 2714 Minority interests 1 8 12 Prot for the nancial year 1821 1414 2702 Basic earnings loss per share Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 18.1p 16.9p 14.4p Goodwill amortisation 0.2p 0.1p 0.3p Exceptional items 3.5p 0.4p 17.3p Restated following adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see note 1 on page 81 Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 27 Group results Whilst driving the transformation of the business the group has continued to make progress in growing earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items which at 18.1 pence was 7% ahead of the 2004 nancial year and 26% ahead of the 2003 nancial year.
The pace of our transformation was demonstrated by the 32% growth of new wave turnover to 4471 million compared to an increase of 30% in the 2004 nancial year.
New wave turnover represented 24% of group turnover in the 2005 nancial year compared to 18% and 14% in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
New wave turnover is mainly generated from ICT solutions broadband mobility and managed services.
In the 2005 nancial year the growth in new wave turnover of 32% more than offset the 7% decline in traditional turnover.
The continued decline in traditional turnover reects regulatory intervention competition price reductions and also technological changes that we are using to drive customers from traditional services to new wave services such as broadband and IPVPN.
Turnover of 123 million was generated from acquisitions in the year.
In the 2004 nancial year the growth in new wave turnover of 30% was more than offset by a 6% decline in turnover from the groups traditional businesses.
In the 2005 and 2004 nancial years mobile operators were required to reduce their fees for terminating calls and these regulatory reductions were passed on to BT customers resulting in lower revenues but are prot neutral as payments to mobile operators were reduced by the same amount.
In the 2005 nancial year group turnover was up 3% 2004  maintained after excluding the 397 million 2004  219 million impact of these regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates.
The table below analyses the group turnover by customer segment.
Consumer includes the external turnover of BT Retail from consumer customers.
Business includes the external turnover of BT Retail from SME smaller and medium sized enterprise customers.
Major corporate includes the external turnover of BT Retail major corporate customers and the external turnover of BT Global Services excluding global carrier.
Wholesale includes the external turnover of BT Wholesale and BT Global Services global carrier business.
Group turnover by customer segment Consumer 5637 5974 6067 Business 2464 2600 2716 Major corporate 6101 5881 5794 Wholesale 4396 4030 4110 Other 25 34 40 18623 18519 18727 Consumer turnover in the 2005 nancial year was 6% lower 4% excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates at 5637 million.
New wave consumer turnover increased by 85% to 412 million driven by the continuing growth of broadband and mobility.
Residential broadband connections almost doubled to 1330000 at 31 March 2005 and mobility connections increased by more than four fold to 187000 at 31 March 2005.
BT has introduced several price cuts to its broadband packages throughout the year to ensure it remains a key player in this highly competitive market.
In February 2005 we announced that our retail broadband customers would be able to receive broadband at speeds of up to 2Mbits up to four times faster at no extra cost.
Traditional consumer turnover declined by 9% reecting the impact of CPS Carrier Pre Selection and broadband substitution.
BTs estimated residential market share as measured by the volume of xed to xed voice minutes declined by 6 percentage points to 64% compared to the 2004 nancial year.
The estimated market share as measured by the volume of xed to xed voice minutes is based on our actual minutes market data provided by Ofcom and an extrapolation of the historical market trends.
The proportion of contracted revenues has been increasing now approaching 63% 2004  58% of total revenues with the success of the BT Together packages and broadband.
There are now 17.6 million BT Together customers and the number of customers on the frequent user packages continues to grow.
The underlying 12 months rolling average revenue per customer household net of mobile termination charges of 256 in the 2005 nancial year was 4% lower than the 2004 nancial year.
Consumer turnover in the 2004 nancial year was 2% lower 1% excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates at 5974 million when compared to the 2003 nancial year.
Turnover from smaller and medium sized enterprise customers in the 2005 nancial year reduced by 5% to 2464 million compared to a reduction of 4% in the previous year.
This decline reects the continued penetration of CPS and the impact of customers switching from traditional telephony services to new wave services including broadband.
New wave turnover in this customer segment increased by 34% year on year driven mainly by the 40% growth in Business Broadband customers to 347000 at 31 March 2005.
The expansion of the BT Business Plan portfolio continued during the year with the number of locations increasing by 67% against last year to 445000.
This together with our 83 BT Local Businesses defended against some of the decline in traditional turnover.
Major corporate UK and international turnover increased by 4% to 6101 million in the 2005 nancial year 2% excluding the effect of acquisitions and the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination 28 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review rates with the growing new wave turnover more than offsetting the decline in traditional services.
This reects the continued migration from traditional voice only services to managed ICT solutions contracts and an increase in mobility and broadband turnover.
New wave turnover now represents almost half 48% of all major corporate turnover compared to 42% in the 2004 nancial year.
ICT contract wins amounted to more than 7 billion in both the 2005 and 2004 nancial years.
The largest win in 2005 was a contract with Reuters expected to be worth up to 1.5 billion over eight and a half years and in 2004 the major wins were three NHS contracts expected to be worth more than 2 billion and forming an integral part of the National Programme for Information Technology in the NHS.
In the 2004 nancial year major corporate turnover increased by 2% to 5881 million.
This reects the migration of traditional voice only services to managed ICT solutions contracts from which turnover grew by 19% to 2546 million in the 2004 nancial year.
Wholesale UK and global carrier turnover in the 2005 nancial year increased by 9% 16% excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates to 4396 million.
New wave turnover in the UK wholesale business increased by 84% driven by broadband and managed services after growing by 54% in the 2004 nancial year.
The global carrier business turnover increased by 5% in the 2005 nancial year following a decline of 5% in the 2004 nancial year.
This reects the increases in termination revenues in Europe partly offset by the anticipated decline in ATandT revenues.
In the 2004 nancial year Wholesale turnover fell by 2% up 1% excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates to 4030 million.
We reached 5 million broadband DSL connections in early April 2005 which is a year ahead of our target and represents an increase of 126% from 31 March 2004.
Group operating costs before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items increased by 1% to 15930 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The operating costs from acquisitions were 134 million in the 2005 nancial year.
Excluding acquisitions group operating costs before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items were at.
Our cost efciency programmes achieved savings of about 400 million in the 2005 nancial year which enabled us to invest in growing our new wave activities.
In the 2004 nancial year group operating costs before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items reduced by 2% to 15807 million when compared to the prior year.
Net staff costs in the 2005 nancial year excluding leaver costs of 166 million increased by 27 million to 3563 million due to the additional staff required to service ICT contracts.
Net staff costs in the 2004 nancial year excluding leaver costs of 202 million increased by 145 million to 3536 million due to the impact of increased pay and national insurance rates and the higher SSAP 24 pension charge offset by improved efciency.
Payments to other telecommunications operators in the 2005 nancial year were 3725 million a decrease of 6% mainly reecting the impact of mobile termination rate reductions offset partly by higher volumes.
In the 2004 nancial year payments to other telecommunications operators were 3963 million an increase of 1% on the 2003 nancial year as both UK and overseas payments increased.
Other operating costs before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items in the 2005 nancial year increased by 9% to 5636 million.
This reects not only the cost of supporting new ICT contracts but also investment in new wave activities including strengthening our networked IT services delivery capabilities outside the UK higher marketing costs and higher subscriber acquisition costs.
Other operating costs before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items reduced by 6% in the 2004 nancial year largely due to efciency cost savings offset by the adverse impact of currency movements.
Group operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items at 2864 million for the 2005 nancial year was 1% lower than the prior year mainly reecting the cost of supporting new ICT contracts and investment in new wave activities.
Group operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items at 2889 million for the 2004 nancial year was 3% higher than the prior year.
This reected cost efciencies achieved during the year the improved performance of BT Global Services and a 74 million decrease in leaver costs offset by the decline in turnover.
Group operating prot margins before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items were relatively steady year on year at 15.4% and 15.6% in the 2005 and 2004 nancial years respectively.
BTs share of associates and joint ventures operating results before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was nil in the 2005 nancial year compared to losses of 8 million in the 2004 nancial year and a 181 million prot in the 2003 nancial year.
The 2003 nancial year includes the results of our interest in Cegetel which was sold in January 2003.
Net interest payable before exceptional items was 801 million for the 2005 nancial year an improvement of 85 million against the 2004 nancial year following an improvement of 260 million in the 2004 nancial year.
This reects the reduction in net debt in both years.
The above factors resulted in the group achieving a prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 2085 million in the 2005 nancial year an increase of 4% compared to the 2004 nancial year.
In the 2004 nancial year the prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 2013 million was 173 million higher than the 2003 nancial year.
The improvement in both years reects the underlying operating performance of the group and lower net interest costs.
The taxation charge for the 2005 nancial year was 539 million on the prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items an effective rate of 25.9% compared to 28.2% and 32.5% in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
The improvement in the effective tax rate reects the tax efcient investment of surplus cash and continued improvement in the tax efciency within the group.
Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items were 18.1 pence for the 2005 nancial year an increase of 7% from 16.9 pence in the 2004 nancial year and were 14.4 pence in the 2003 nancial year.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 29 Line of business results In the following commentary we discuss the operating results of the group for the 2005 2004 and 2003 nancial years in relation to the lines of business.
There is extensive trading between the lines of business and their protability is dependent on the transfer price levels.
The intragroup trading arrangements and operating assets are subject to review and have changed in certain circumstances.
Where that is the case the comparative gures have been restated to reect those changes.
The table below analyses the trading relationships between each of the lines of business for the 2005 nancial year.
The majority of the internal trading is BT Wholesale selling calls access lines and other network products to BT Retail.
This trading relationship also reects the pass through of termination charges on other telecom operator networks and the sale of wholesale broadband ISP products.
BT Retail also trades with BT Wholesale selling apparatus operator assistance and directory enquiries services and conferencing for onward sale to other telecom operators.
BT Global Services turnover with BT Retail mainly reects the sales of BT Global Services products in the UK.
BT Global Services trades with BT Wholesale mainly for use of the IPATM network International Direct Dial trafc settlements and certain dial IP revenue share arrangements.
BT
Wholesales turnover with BT Global Services reects the use of the network infrastructure for BT Global Services products.
Internal cost recorded by Internal turnover recorded by
Retail
BT
Wholesale
BT Global
Other
Total
BT Retail  BT Wholesale 4689  475 3 5167 BT Global Services 3028 663  19 3710 Total 7324 The line of business results are presented and discussed before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items for the reasons set out above to provide a meaningful comparison of the trading results between the nancial years under review.
Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items are discussed separately in a group context in this Financial review.
In addition to measuring nancial performance of the lines of business based on the operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items management also measure the operating nancial performance of the lines of business based upon the EBITDA before exceptional items.
EBITDA is dened as the group operating prot loss before depreciation and amortisation.
This may not be directly comparable to the EBITDA of other companies as they may dene it differently.
EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortisation both being non cash items from group operating prot and is a common measure particularly in the telecommunications sector used by investors and analysts in evaluating the operating nancial performance of companies.
EBITDA before exceptional items is considered to be a good measure of the operating performance because it reects the underlying operating cash costs by eliminating depreciation and amortisation and excludes nonrecurring exceptional items that are predominantly related to corporate transactions.
EBITDA is not a direct measure of the groups liquidity which is shown by the groups cash ow statement and needs to be considered in the context of the groups nancial commitments. the group is provided in the table across the page above.
Trends in EBITDA before exceptional items are discussed for each line of business in the following commentary.
BT Retail 2005 Group turnover 12562 12940 13217 Gross margin 3300 3517 3621 Sales general and administration costs 2051 2123 2204 Group operating prot 1120 1232 1216
1249 1394 1417 Capital expenditure 154 118 109 Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items BT Retails results demonstrated a continued strategic shift towards new wave products with growth in networked IT services broadband and mobility products.
Despite the substitution by new wave products traditional turnover was defended by changes in pricing structure and packages to benet frequent users and marketing campaigns focusing on key customer service promises.
In the consumer market BT changed the basic voice offering on 1 July 2004 so that all standard customers were placed onto BT Together option 1 thereby lowering call prices to approximately 9 million customers.
As at 31 March 2005 17.6 million customers were on BT Together packages.
In the business market the focus remains on placing customers on commitment packages whereby lower call prices are received for annual committed spend.
By 31 March 2005 there were 445000 Business Plan sites up 67% in the year.
Cost transformation continues to successfully reduce the cost 30 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review Line of business summary Group turnover Group operating prot loss Goodwill amortisation Exceptional charges credits BT Retail 12562 12940 13217 1115 1231 1215 5 11 BT Wholesale 8979 8883 9251 1940 1884 2070    1 BT Global Services 6381 5782 5417 4 116 394 11 11 19 Intragroup 9324 9121 9199 Group totals 18623 18519 18727 2789 2870 2 Restated following adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see note 1 on page 81 base of the traditional business allowing investment in new wave products and services.
BT Retails turnover decreased by 3% in the 2005 nancial year to 12562 million after declining by 2% in the 2004 nancial year.
The growth in new wave turnover of 28% in the 2005 nancial year 2004  29% was more than offset by the decline in traditional turnover driven by the impact of regulation and competition.
After adjusting for the regulatory impact of the reduction in mobile termination rates turnover declined by 2% in the 2005 nancial year 2004  1%.
Turnover for the three years is summarised as follows BT Retail turnovertel m m m Voice services 8054 8906 9552 Intermediate products 1728 1868 1982 Traditional 9782 10774 11534 ICT 1978 1734 1502 Broadband 541 307 131 Mobility 184 84 42 Other 77 41 8 New wave 2780 2166 1683 Total 12562 12940 13217 Voice services comprise calls made by customers on the BT xed line network in the UK analogue lines equipment sales rentals and other business voice products.
Overall turnover from voice services was 10% lower in the 2005 nancial year 8% excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates after a decrease of 7% in the 2004 nancial year.
The reduction includes the effect of continued migration to broadband with a 25% fall in dial up minutes over the year a reduction in market share reecting regulatory and competitive pressure and a decline in the overall xed to xed calls market.
Turnover from intermediate products in the 2005 nancial year of 1728 million decreased by 7% after decreasing by 6% in the 2004 nancial year.
The reduction was mainly driven by the continued decline in private circuits and ISDN as customers migrate to new wave products including broadband and IPVPN.
As a result of regulatory changes partial private circuits used by UK xed network operators are no longer provided by BT Retail but are provided as a BT Wholesale product.
Private circuit revenues declined by 68 million in the 2005 nancial year and by 88 million in the 2004 nancial year.
New wave turnover grew by 28% to 2780 million in the 2005 nancial year compared to growth of 29% in the 2004 nancial year.
New wave turnover accounted for 22% of BT Retails turnover in the 2005 nancial year compared to 17% and 13% in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
ICT solutions are the main component and increased by 14% in the 2005 nancial year to 1978 million after an increase of 15% in the 2004 nancial year reecting the growth in new IP based services and solutions contracts.
Broadband turnover grew by 76% to 541 million in the 2005 nancial year after an increase of 134% in the 2004 nancial year.
The growth of broadband continues to accelerate with 1752000 BT Retail connections at 31 March 2005 an increase of 81% over last year.
BT Retail had net additions of 785000 broadband customers in the year a 29% share of the broadband DSL market additions.
Turnover from mobility services increased by 119% in the 2005 nancial year after doubling in the 2004 nancial year.
BT Mobile had over 372000 contract mobile connections at 31 March 2005 an increase of 158% from 31 March 2004.
BT Openzone has grown signicantly this year with paid minutes across the network almost four times higher and the number of access sites is now over 20000 worldwide.
Other new wave turnover has grown by 88% primarily driven by revenues from BT Phone Books now covering 171 different regions increasing to 65 million.
The total number of BT Retail lines which includes voice digital and broadband were at at 30 million at 31 March 2005 reecting the continued growth in broadband offset by the declining PSTN lines.
The gross margin percentage decreased by 0.9 percentage points in the 2005 nancial year after a decrease of 0.2 percentage points in the 2004 nancial year.
The decline primarily reects the change in revenue mix from traditional business to lower margin new wave services.
As the broadband and mobility customer base grows the additional subscriber acquisition costs are written off as incurred.
In addition the creation and development of new value added services resulted in increased development costs.
Gross margin is turnover less costs directly attributable to the provision of the products and services reected in turnover in the period.
Selling general and administration costs are those costs that are ancillary to the business processes of providing products and services and are the general business operating costs.
BT Retail analyses its costs in this manner for management purposes in common with other retail organisations and it has set target savings for selling general and administration costs.
Cost transformation programmes in the 2005 nancial year generated selling general and administration cost savings of 124 million before leaver costs in the traditional business 27 million net of new wave investment.
The savings in the year were driven by cost Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 31 Group operating prot loss before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items Depreciation Amortisation of intangible assets EBITDA before exceptional itemsteltelteltel m m m m m m m m m m 1120 1232 121tel  1249 1394 1417 BT Retail 1940 1883 2070 1909 1919 1923   3849 3802 3993 BT Wholesale 7 105 375 telBT Global Services
2864 2889 2794 2834 2921 3011 6 34 5704 5813 5809 Group totals reduction programmes focused on Elimination of Failure in end to end processes particularly through initiatives in the customer contact centres.
Additionally sustainable cost reduction programmes targeted the identication and removal of inefciencies and duplication.
The majority of these initiatives were targeted at people related costs with signicant savings in billing IT operations and other support functions.
In the 2004 nancial year savings of 228 million before leaver costs were also driven by cost reduction programmes.
The number of employees in BT Retail at 31 March 2005 and 31 March 2004 was 39500 and 41500 respectively.
BT Retails EBITDA before exceptional items and goodwill amortisation declined by 10% to 1249 million in the 2005 nancial year after showing a decline in the 2004 nancial year of 2% to 1394 million.
The increased rate of decline in the 2005 nancial year is due to a 9% fall compared to 7% in 2004 nancial year in traditional turnover coupled with increased investment in new wave activities particularly in mobility and broadband that laid the foundations for further growth in new wave activities.
In the 2004 nancial year cost savings more than offset the decline in turnover and the impact on margins of the product mix.
Capital expenditure for the 2005 nancial year was 154 million an increase of 31% from the 2004 nancial year mainly due to increased expenditure on software.
BT Wholesaletel m m m Group turnover 8979 8883 9251 Gross variable prot 6817 6791 7241 Group operating prot 1940 1883 2070
3849 3802 3993 Capital expenditure 1973 1809 1652 Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items BT Wholesale is the line of business within BT that provides network services and solutions within the UK.
Its
The customer base includes BTs lines of business BT Retail and BT Global Services.
The majority of BT Wholesales turnover is internal 2005  58% 2004 61% 2003  62% and mainly represents trading with BT Retail.
External turnover is derived from providing wholesale products and solutions to other operators interconnecting with BTs UK xed network.
In the 2005 nancial year turnover totalled 8979 million an increase of 1% over the 2004 nancial year after a reduction of 4% to 8883 million in the 2004 nancial year.
External turnover increased by 10% to 3812 million in the 2005 nancial year an increase of 17% excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates.
This follows a decline of 1% in the 2004 nancial year to 3473 million an increase of 2% excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates.
The increase in the 2005 nancial year reects particularly strong growth in new wave revenues mainly broadband.
The regulatory price reductions on mobile termination rates have no impact on protability.
External turnover from traditional products increased by 1% in the 2005 nancial year compared to a decline of 5% in the 2004 nancial year.
Excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates turnover was up 10% in the 2005 nancial year and down 2% in the 2004 nancial year.
The growth in traditional turnover was mainly driven by growth in private circuits wholesale access and interconnect trafc.
Turnover from partial private circuits of 191 million increased by 26% in the 2005 nancial year after an increase of 43% in the 2004 nancial year to 152 million.
This reects the continuing trend of customers migrating from lower bandwidth products to less expensive alternatives such as partial private circuits and short haul data services.
Substitution to broadband has resulted in the continued declining trend in Flat Rate Internet Access Call Origination revenues with turnover of 57 million in the 2005 nancial year 2004  78 million 2003  84 million.
Wholesale access revenues have increased by 65 million in the 2005 nancial year as a result of increased volumes from other service providers.
Conveyance and low margin transit revenues of 2014 million decreased by 2% compared to the 2004 nancial year and at 2054 million decreased by 1% in the 2004 nancial year with the impact of regulatory price reductions being offset by increased call volumes.
New wave turnover including broadband and managed services at 664 million in the 2005 nancial year showed strong growth of 84% following growth of 54% in the 2004 nancial year.
Broadband revenues grew by 158% year on year.
Wholesale broadband DSL lines more than doubled during the 2005 nancial year and reached 5 million DSL lines in the rst week of April 2005 which is a year ahead of our target.
In the 2004 nancial year wholesale DSL lines grew by 177% to over 2.2 million lines.
Internal turnover decreased by 4% to 5167 million in the 2005 nancial year after a decrease of 6% to 5410 million in the 2004 nancial year.
The reduction reects the impact of lower volumes of calls lines and private circuits and lower regulatory prices being reected in internal charges.
Gross variable prot of 6817 million marginally increased compared to 6791 million for the 2004 nancial year after a decrease of 6% compared to the 2003 nancial year reecting sales volume changes and changes in sales mix.
In the 2005 nancial year network and selling general and administration costs excluding leaver costs decreased by 20 million following a decrease of 174 million in the 2004 nancial year.
Activity levels in the network driven by broadband volumes have increased in both the 2005 and 2004 nancial years.
The nancial impact of this increased activity has been mitigated by a series of cost reduction programmes focusing on efciency discretionary cost management and process improvements.
The number of employees in BT Wholesale at 31 March 2005 and 31 March 2004 was 28300 and 27800 respectively.
EBITDA before exceptional items at 3849 million in the 2005 nancial year was 1% higher than in the 2004 nancial year following a reduction of 5% to 3802 million in the 2004 nancial year.
EBITDA margins before exceptional items were maintained at 43% across all three nancial years.
Leaver costs were 45 million in the 2005 nancial year 2004  46 million 2003  131 million.
32 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review Depreciation costs were broadly at at 1909 million in the 2005 nancial year and 1919 million in the 2004 nancial year.
Operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items at 1940 million increased by 3% in the 2005 nancial year.
This was after a reduction of 9% to 1883 million in the 2004 nancial year.
The operating prot margin before exceptional items remained broadly at at 21.6% and 21.2% in the 2005 and 2004 nancial years respectively.
Capital expenditure on plant and equipment at 1973 million increased by 9% in the 2005 nancial year and follows an increase of 10% in the 2004 nancial year.
This reects increased expenditure to support the rapid growth in broadband and investment to support the transformation of the groups network.
BT Global Servicestel m m m Group turnover 6381 5782 5417 Group operating prot loss
Capital expenditure 628 479 445 Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items BT Global Services supplies managed services and solutions to multisite organisations worldwide  our core target market is 10000 multisite organisations including major companies with signicant global requirements together with large organisations in target local markets.
We provide them with global reach and a complete range of networked IT services.
Our extensive global communications network and strong strategic partnerships enable us to serve customers in the key commercial centres of Europe North America and the Asia Pacic region.
Our global communications services portfolio includes desktop and network equipment and software transport and connectivity managed LAN local area network WAN wide area network and IPVPN internet protocol virtual private network services managed mobility applications hosting storage and security services and business transformation and change management services.
In the 2005 nancial year BT Global Services turnover was 6381 million including 111 million from the Albacom and Infonet businesses acquired in the nal quarter of the year.
This represents an underlying increase of 8% compared to the 2004 nancial year.
BT Global Solutions turnover grew by 17% in the 2005 nancial year to 3202 million following growth of 14% in the 2004 nancial year reecting the conversion of the strong order book.
BT Consulting and Systems Integration performed strongly with turnover of 824 million in the 2005 nancial year representing an increase of 14% over the prior year 2004  16%.
The growth includes the impact of the NHS contracts won in 2004.
In the 2005 and 2004 nancial years contract wins from managed ICT solutions amounted to more than 7 billion.
BT Global Products turnover grew by 4% to 1897 million in the 2005 nancial year 2004  9% and continues to reect the growth of MPLS Multi Protocol Label Switching.
In the 2005 nancial year BT Global Carrier turnover increased by 2% to 981 million reversing the decline of 1% seen in the 2004 nancial year.
The increase in 2005 reects the increases in termination revenues in Europe partly offset by the anticipated decline in ATandT revenues.
The increase in turnover together with lower network and selling general and administration costs helped generate improvements in EBITDA before exceptional items in the 2005 nancial year of 14% to 580 million following an improvement of 113% in the 2004 nancial year.
The 2005 2004 and 2003 nancial years include leaver costs of 33 million 33 million and 65 million respectively.
Headcount increased by 16% to 24600 in the 2005 nancial year which includes the expected increase in resources associated with strengthening the overseas network centric solutions delivery capabilities and an increase in headcount to service the increased ICT contract base.
Headcount increased by 23% to 21200 in the 2004 nancial year.
The 2005 nancial year saw Global Services deliver its rst ever full year operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items at 7 million an improvement of 112 million over the previous year.
The acquisitions contributed an operating loss of 10 million since acquisition in the nal quarter of the 2005 nancial year.
Capital expenditure for the 2005 nancial year was 628 million an increase of 31% from 479 million in the 2004 nancial year mainly due to expenditure on the NHS contracts won in 2004.
Other operating income Other operating income for the group decreased by 6 million to 171 million in the 2005 nancial year and by 38 million to 177 million in the 2004 nancial year.
Operating costs Total operating costs increased by 1% in the 2005 nancial year to 16005 million although they were at year on year excluding the impact of acquisitions after reducing by 3% in the 2004 nancial year.
Our cost efciency programmes achieved savings of around 400 million in the 2005 nancial year which enabled us to invest in growing our new wave activities.
The increase in total costs in the 2005 nancial year reects the cost of supporting new ICT contracts including strengthening our networked IT services delivery capabilities outside the UK higher marketing costs and higher subscriber acquisition costs.
As a percentage of group turnover operating costs excluding goodwill amortisation and exceptional items were 86% in the 2005 nancial year 2004  85% 2003  86%.
In all three nancial years net exceptional costs were incurred.
These amounted to 59 million 7 million and 198 million in the 2005 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
These exceptional costs are considered separately in the discussion which follows.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 33 Operating coststel m m Staff costs 4451 4415 4250 Own work capitalised 722 677 583 Depreciation 2834 2921 3011 Goodwill and other intangibles amortisation 22 15 24 Payments to telecommunications operators 3725 3963 3940 Other operating costs 5636 5182 5526 Total operating costs before exceptional costs 15946 15819 16168 Net exceptional costs 59 7 198 Total operating costs 16005 15826 16366 Restated  see note 1 Staff costs increased by 1% to 4451 million in the 2005 nancial year and by 4% to 4415 million in the 2004 nancial year.
In the 2005 nancial year the number of staff employed increased by 2200 to 102100 at 31 March 2005 after decreasing by 4800 in the 2004 nancial year.
The increase in the 2005 nancial year was mainly due to the additional staff required to service ICT contracts and the acquisitions of Albacom and Infonet.
The increase in headcount and pay rates was offset by lower early leaver costs.
In the 2004 nancial year increased pay rates and national insurance and a 141 million increase in the pension charge offset the impact of the lower headcount and leaver costs.
The allocation for the employee prot share scheme included within staff costs was 11 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The allocation for the 2004 and 2003 nancial years was 20 million and 36 million respectively.
Early leaver costs of 166 million were incurred in the 2005 nancial year compared with 202 million and 276 million in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
This reects BTs continued focus on improving operational efciencies.
Leaver costs include the cost of enhanced pension benets provided to leavers which amounted to nil 1 million and 60 million in the 2005 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
The depreciation charge decreased by 3% in the 2005 nancial year to 2834 million after decreasing by 3% in the 2004 nancial year.
Goodwill amortisation in respect of subsidiaries and businesses acquired and amortisation of other intangibles totalled 22 million in the 2005 nancial year compared with 15 million in the 2004 nancial year and 24 million in the 2003 nancial year.
Payments to other telecommunications operators decreased by 6% in the 2005 nancial year to 3725 million after increasing by 1% in the 2004 nancial year.
The decrease in the 2005 nancial year mainly reects the impact of mobile termination rate reductions offset by higher volumes.
Other operating costs before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items increased by 9% in the 2005 nancial year to 5636 million after reducing by 6% in the 2004 nancial year.
This reects not only the cost of supporting new ICT contracts but also investment in new wave activities including strengthening our networked IT services delivery capabilities outside the UK higher marketing costs and higher subscriber acquisition costs.
The decrease in the 2004 nancial year was largely due to efciency cost savings offset by the adverse impact of currency movements.
Other operating costs include the maintenance and support of the networks accommodation and marketing costs the cost of sales of customer premises equipment and non pay related leaver costs.
The exceptional items within operating costs for the 2005 2004 and 2003 nancial years are shown in the table below.
Exceptional operating coststel m m m Property rationalisation costs 59  198 Rectication costs  30 BT Wholesale bad debt release  23 Total exceptional operating costs 59 7 198 In the 2005 nancial year 59 million of exceptional property rationalisation charges were recognised in relation to the groups provincial ofce portfolio.
This rationalisation programme is expected to continue through next year giving rise to further rationalisation costs.
In the 2004 nancial year net exceptional operating costs included the rectication costs relating to a major incident offset by the 23 million release of the surplus exceptional bad debt provisions made in the 2002 nancial year.
In the 2003 nancial year a property rationalisation charge of 198 million was recognised in relation to the groups London ofce estate.
Group operating prot loss In the 2005 nancial year group operating prot before goodwill amortisation and the exceptional items described above of 2864 million was 1% lower than in the 2004 nancial year which in turn was 3% higher than in the 2003 nancial year.
This reects the increased operating costs described above in the 2005 nancial year.
Total group operating prot for the 2005 nancial year was 2789 million compared to a prot of 2870 million in the 2004 nancial year and a prot of 2576 million in the 2003 nancial year.
Associates and joint ventures The results of associates and joint ventures are shown below Share of turnover 408 395 1455 Share of operating loss prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items  8 181 The groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover was 408 million during the 2005 nancial year.
In the 2004 nancial year the groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover was 395 million a decrease of 1060 million over the previous year due to the disposal of the groups interest in Cegetel in the 2003 nancial year.
34 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review The principal contributors to turnover in the 2005 nancial year were LG Telecom in Korea 251 million 2004  196 million and Albacom in Italy 97 million 2004  147 million.
The principal contributors to turnover in the 2003 nancial year were Cegetel in France 956 million up to the date of disposal and LG Telecom 198 million.
In February 2005 Albacom became a wholly owned subsidiary of the group when the remaining 74% interest was acquired.
The groups share of its ventures operating prots before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was nil in the 2005 nancial year.
This compares to a loss of 8 million and a prot of 181 million in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
The principal contributor to the groups share of operating prots before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items in the 2003 nancial year was Cegetel 198 million.
Exceptional items within the operating losses prots from joint ventures and associates are as follows Impairment of assets in joint ventures 25 Goodwill impairment  26 Release of exit costs   150 Total exceptional operating costs credits 25 26 150 In the 2005 nancial year BT incurred an exceptional impairment charge of 25 million being BTs share of a write down of Albacoms assets prior to Albacom becoming a subsidiary.
In the 2004 nancial year BT charged its share of an exceptional goodwill impairment made by Albacom amounting to 26 million.
In the 2003 nancial year BT completed the exit from its investment in Blu on more favourable terms than anticipated and surplus exit cost provisions of 150 million were released.
Goodwill amortisation was nil in both the 2005 and 2004 nancial year compared to 2 million in the 2003 nancial year.
Total operating prot loss Total operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items for the 2005 nancial year of 2864 million was 1% lower than in the 2004 nancial year which in turn was 3% lower than the previous nancial year.
The movement in total operating prot was due to the factors explained above.
Total operating prot for the 2005 nancial year was 2764 million including BTs share of the operating results of its associates and joint ventures.
This compared to 2836 million for the 2004 nancial year and 2905 million for the 2003 nancial year.
The reduction in total operating prot reects the reduction in associates and joint ventures prots offset by cost efciency savings the strong performance of BT Global Services and lower leaver costs.
Prot on sale of group undertakings and xed asset investments During the 2005 nancial year the net proceeds for disposals totalled 560 million and the prot before tax from disposal of noncore investments totalled 358 million.
In January 2005 BT sold its 4% interest in Intelsat for net proceeds of 64 million which resulted in a prot on disposal of 46 million.
In December 2004 BT sold its 15.8% interest in Eutelsat SA for net proceeds of 356 million resulting in a prot on disposal of 236 million.
In November 2004 BT completed the sale of its 11.9% shareholding in StarHub Pte Ltd for net proceeds of 77 million resulting in a prot on disposal of 38 million.
In the 2004 nancial year the consideration for disposals totalled 133 million and the prot before tax from disposals totalled 36 million.
This was principally in relation to the disposal of the groups 7.8% interest in Inmarsat which was sold for 67 million realising a prot on disposal of 32 million.
In the 2003 nancial year a number of noncore investments were sold.
The consideration for the disposals totalled 3028 million and the prot before taxation from disposals totalled 1696 million.
This was principally in relation to the disposal of our 26% interest in Cegetel a French telecommunications operator on 22 January 2003.
The total proceeds were 2603 million received in cash and the prot was 1509 million before the recognition of an exceptional interest charge of 293 million on closing out xed interest rate swaps following receipt of the sale proceeds.
Interest charge In the 2005 nancial year the total net interest charge including BTs share of its ventures charges at 801 million was 140 million lower than in the preceding year which in turn was 498 million lower than in the 2003 nancial year.
Of the total net charge 787 million arises in the group for the 2005 nancial year compared with 924 million and 1420 million in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
The reduction in the net interest charge in the 2005 nancial year reects the continued reduction in the level of net debt.
In addition there were no exceptional interest charges or credits in the 2005 nancial year compared to a net exceptional charge of 55 million in the 2004 nancial year.
The net exceptional charge in the 2004 nancial year represents the premium on buying back E1.1 billion of 7.125% bonds due in 2011 and US195 million of the groups US dollar bonds partially offset by a credit from the one off interest recognised on full repayment of loan notes received as part of the original consideration from the disposal of Yell.
The reduction in the net interest charge in the 2004 nancial year reects the reduction in the level of net debt and lower net exceptional charges in the 2004 nancial year.
The net interest charge in the 2003 nancial year includes the 293 million exceptional cost of terminating xed interest rate swaps as a consequence of the receipt of the Cegetel sale proceeds.
Interest cover in the 2005 nancial year represented 3.6 times total operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items and compares with interest cover of 3.3 in the 2004 nancial year and 2.6 in the 2003 nancial year.
The improvement in cover is due to the reduction in the interest charge mainly arising from the reduction in net debt.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 35 Prot loss before taxation The groups prot before taxation for the 2005 nancial year was 2343 million compared with a prot of 1945 million in the 2004 nancial year and a prot of 3173 million in the 2003 nancial year.
The prot in the 2003 nancial year included the exceptional prots from the sale of investments and businesses totalling 1696 million.
The groups prot before taxation before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items for the 2005 nancial year was 2085 million compared with 2013 million in the 2004 nancial year and 1840 million in the 2003 nancial year.
The improvement in the underlying prot was due to cost efciency savings the strong performance of BT Global Services lower leaver costs and the lower interest charges explained above.
Taxation
The tax charge for the 2005 nancial year was 523 million and comprises 539 million on the prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items offset by tax relief of 16 million on certain exceptional charges.
The tax charge on the prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items is at an effective rate of 25.9%.
This reduction in the effective rate from 28.2% in the 2004 nancial year reects the continued improvements in the tax efciency of the group.
The tax charge for the 2004 nancial year was 539 million and comprises 568 million on the prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items offset by tax relief of 29 million on certain exceptional charges.
The tax charge for the 2003 nancial year was 459 million and comprises 598 million on the prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items offset by tax relief of 139 million on certain exceptional charges.
Earnings loss per share The basic earnings per share of 21.4 pence per share for the 2005 nancial year compares with 16.4 pence for the 2004 nancial year and 31.4 pence for the 2003 nancial year.
The following table illustrates the impact of exceptional items and goodwill amortisation on the basic earnings per share for the past three nancial years pence pence pence Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 18.1 16.9 14.4 Exceptional items and goodwill amortisation 3.3 0.5 17.0 Total basic earnings per share 21.4 16.4 31.4 Restated  see note 1 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 18.1 pence for the 2005 nancial year compare with an equivalent of 16.9 pence and 14.4 pence for the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
Diluted earnings per share were not materially different in all three years.
Dividends
The board recommends a nal dividend of 6.50 pence per share to shareholders amounting to 551 million.
This will be paid subject to shareholder approval on 5 September 2005 to shareholders on the register on 5 August 2005.
This takes the dividend for the full year to 10.4 pence per share compared to 8.5 pence in the 2004 nancial year an increase of 22%.
This years dividend pay out ratio is 57% of earnings before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items compared to 50% in the 2004 nancial year.
We continue with our progressive dividend policy.
The dividend for the 2006 nancial year will be at least 60% of underlying earnings subject to the groups overall nancial position we expect our pay out ratio to rise to around twothirds of underlying earnings by the 2008 nancial year.
The interim and nal dividend in the 2004 nancial year was 3.2 pence per share and 5.3 pence per share respectively.
This gave a full dividend for the year of 8.5 pence per share amounting to 732 million.
The interim and nal dividend in the 2003 nancial year was 2.25 pence per share and 4.25 pence per share respectively.
This gave a full dividend for the year of 6.5 pence per share amounting to 560 million.
Financing
Net cash inow from operating activities of 5898 million in the 2005 nancial year compares with 5389 million in the 2004 nancial year and 6023 million in the 2003 nancial year.
Special and deciency contributions to the main pension fund described below of 6 million in the 2005 nancial year compared to 742 million in the 2004 36 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial reviewtel Summarised cash ow statement m m m Net cash inow from operating activities 5898 5389 6023 Dividends from associates and joint ventures 2 36 Net cash outow for returns on investments and servicing of nance 878 527 1506 Taxation paid 332 317 434 Net cash outow for capital expenditure and nancial investment 2408 2477 2381 Net cash outow inow for acquisitions and disposals 418 60 2842 Equity dividends paid 784 645 367 Cash inow before management of liquid resources and nancing 1080 1366 4183 Management of liquid resources 587 1123 1729 Net cash outow from nancing 1485 2445 2473 Increase decrease in cash in the year 182 44 19 Decrease in net debt in the year resulting from cash ows 887 1222 4225 nancial year and 329 million in the 2003 nancial year consequently reducing the net cash inow by these amounts.
The pension payments in the 2004 nancial year include early payment of 380 million deciency contributions to the BT Pension Scheme which represents most of the deciency contributions for the 2005 and 2006 nancial years.
The net cash outow for returns on investments and servicing of nance amounted to 878 million 527 million and 1506 million in the 2005 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
The increased outow of 351 million in the 2005 nancial year reects the receipt of 420 million of funds on restructuring part of the groups swap portfolio in the 2004 nancial year.
This effect was offset by lower interest payments due to certain bonds maturing during the 2005 nancial year.
The reduction in the 2004 nancial year outow of 979 million includes the effect of the restructuring of the groups swap portfolio.
In addition the 2003 nancial year included the payment of a 293 million premium on closing out 2.6 billion of xed interest rate swaps following receipt of the Cegetel sale proceeds.
Tax paid in the 2005 nancial year totalled 332 million compared with 317 million in the 2004 nancial year and 434 million paid in the 2003 nancial year.
The lower tax paid in the 2005 and 2004 nancial year reects the lower current tax charge and the level of payments made on account.
The net cash outow of 2408 million for capital expenditure and nancial investment in the 2005 nancial year included 3056 million of capital expenditure on property plant and equipment offset by 650 million received on the sale of xed assets.
In the 2004 nancial year the net cash outow of 2477 million for capital expenditure and nancial investment included 2684 million of capital expenditure on property plant and equipment offset by 208 million received on the sale of xed assets.
Capital expenditure is higher than the 2004 nancial year as a result of expenditure to support the rapid growth in broadband and the transformation of the groups network.
In the 2003 nancial year the net cash outow of 2381 million for capital expenditure and nancial investment included 2580 million of capital expenditure on plant and equipment offset by 200 million received on the sale of xed assets.
The net cash outow from acquisitions less disposals in the 2005 nancial year totalled 418 million.
The principal cash outow for acquisitions was mainly due to the purchase of Infonet Services Corporation and Albacom
The net cash outow from acquisitions less disposals in the 2004 nancial year totalled 60 million.
The principal cash outow for acquisitions was due to the purchase of a controlling interest in BT Expedite Limited formerly NSB Retail plc and Transcomm plc.
In the 2003 nancial year the net cash inow from disposals less acquisitions totalled 2842 million.
Cash proceeds from disposals amounted to 2919 million and principally comprised 2603 million from the sale of the investment in Cegetel.
Equity dividends paid in the 2005 nancial year totalled 784 million whilst those paid in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years totalled 645 million and 367 million respectively.
The resulting cash inow for the 2005 nancial year before management of liquid resources and nancing of 1080 million together with inows from current asset investments were mainly applied to long term borrowing repayments of 1297 million.
The cash inow for the 2004 nancial year of 1366 million was mainly applied in repaying longterm borrowings with total borrowings of 3627 million being repaid.
In addition the group issued new loans of 1326 million.
The new loans included a US172 million 0.75% exchangeable bond due in 2008 exchangeable into ordinary shares of LG Telecom BTs Korean based associate and a sale and leaseback of circuit switches which had no effect on net debt but increased gross debt and cash by around 1 billion.
The cash inow for the 2003 nancial year of 4183 million was applied in repaying shortterm borrowings and investing in short term investments with total borrowings of 2535 million being repaid.
The cash inow for the 2005 nancial year resulted in net debt reducing by a further 639 million to 7786 million having reduced by 1148 million to 8425 million in the 2004 nancial year.
During the 2005 nancial year the group further restructured some of its swaps portfolio to mitigate credit risk to and with certain counterparties.
As a result the group terminated 2.9 billion of crosscurrency and sterling interest rate swaps with some swaps being replaced with new swaps which had the same economic hedging effect.
This resulted in the group paying 107 million in reducing gross debt and receiving a net 14 million of interest receipts.
The group also restructured some of its swap portfolio during the 2004 nancial year to mitigate credit risk to certain counterparties.
As a result the group terminated 7 billion of crosscurrency interest rate swaps and replaced these with new swaps which had the same economic hedging effect.
This resulted in the group paying 445 million in reducing gross debt and receiving 420 million of interest receipts.
The interest receipts and payments on restructuring for the 2005 and 2004 nancial years have been included within deferred income and other debtors respectively on the balance sheet and will be amortised to the prot and loss account over the term of the underlying hedged debt.
During the 2005 nancial year the share buyback programme continued with the group repurchasing 101 million shares for consideration of 195 million.
During the 2004 nancial year the group repurchased 81 million shares for consideration of 144 million.
Treasury policy The group has a centralised treasury operation whose primary role is to manage liquidity funding investment and the groups nancial risk including risk from volatility in currency and interest rates and counterparty credit risk.
The treasury operation is not a prot centre and the objective is to manage risk at optimum cost.
The Board sets the treasury departments policy and its activities are subject to a set of controls commensurate with the magnitude of the borrowings and investments under its management.
Counterparty credit risk is closely monitored and managed within controls set by the Board.
Derivative instruments including forward foreign exchange contracts are entered into for hedging purposes only.
We have set out further details on this topic and on our capital resources and foreign currency exposure in note 33 to the nancial statements in compliance with FRS 13.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 37 Offbalance sheet arrangements As disclosed in the nancial statements there are no off balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on the groups nancial condition changes in nancial condition revenues or expenses results of operations liquidity capital expenditure or capital resources with the exception of the following Operating leases note 27 Capital commitments and guarantees note 27 Derivative contracts note 33 Capital resources During the period under review the group has reduced its level of borrowings so that its net debt was 7.8 billion at 31 March 2005 compared with 8.4 billion at 31 March 2004 and 9.6 billion at 31 March 2003.
This is at a level with which we are comfortable and we are no longer targeting net debt of around 7 billion in the 2007 nancial year.
The directors have a reasonable expectation that the group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and therefore they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the nancial statements.
There has been no signicant change in the nancial or trading position of the group since 31 March 2005.
The following table sets out the groups contractual obligations and commitments as they fall due for payment as at 31 March 2005.
Payments due by period Contractual obligations and commitments
Less than 1 year years years
Loans and other borrowings 11596 4197 1071 352 5976 Finance lease obligations Operating lease obligations 1045tel8587 Capital commitments Total 23781 5405 2494 1160 14722 At 31 March 2005 the group had cash and shortterm investments of 4803 million.
At that date 4498 million of debt fell due for repayment in the 2006 nancial year.
The group had unused shortterm bank facilities amounting to approximately 145 million at 31 March 2005.
These resources will allow the group to settle its obligations as they fall due.
At 31 March 2004 the group had cash and shortterm investments of 5272 million and unused shortterm bank facilities amounting to approximately 145 million.
Foreign currency and interest rate exposure Most of the groups current turnover is invoiced in pounds sterling and most of its operations and costs arise within the UK.
The groups foreign currency borrowings which totalled 8.8 billion at 31 March 2005 are used to nance its operations.
These borrowings have been predominantly swapped into sterling.
Cross currency swaps and forward foreign exchange contracts have been entered into to reduce the foreign currency exposure on the groups operations and the groups net assets.
The group also enters into forward foreign exchange contracts to hedge investment interest expense and purchase and sale commitments.
The commitments hedged are principally US dollar and euro denominated.
As a result of these policies the groups exposure to foreign currency arises mainly on the residual currency exposure on its nonUK investments in its subsidiaries and ventures and on any imbalances between the value of outgoing and incoming international calls.
A 10% strengthening in sterling against major currencies would cause the groups net assets at 31 March 2005 to fall by less than 150 million with insignicant effect on the groups prot.
This compares with a fall of less than 120 million and 100 million in the years ended 31 March 2004 and 2003 respectively.
Foreign exchange contracts are entered into as a hedge of sales and purchases accordingly a change in the fair value of the hedge is offset by a corresponding change in the value of the underlying sale or purchase.
The majority of the groups longterm borrowings have been and are subject to xed interest rates.
The group has entered into interest rate swap agreements with commercial banks and other institutions to vary the amounts and period for which interest rates are xed.
At
31 March 2005 the group had outstanding interest rate swap agreements with notional principal amounts totalling 5297 million compared to 5210 million at 31 March 2004.
The longterm debt instruments which BT issued in December 2000 and February 2001 both contained covenants providing that if the BT group credit rating were downgraded below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of Standard and Poors SandP additional interest would accrue from the next interest coupon period at the rate of 0.25 percentage points for each ratings category adjustment by each ratings agency.
In May 2001 Moodys downgraded BTs credit rating to Baa1 which increased BTs annual interest charge by approximately 32 million.
BTs credit rating from SandP is A minus.
Based upon the total amount of debt of 9 billion outstanding on these instruments at 31 March 2005 BTs annual interest charge would increase by approximately 26 million if BTs credit rating were to be downgraded by one credit rating category by both agencies below a longterm debt rating of Baa1 A minus.
If BTs credit rating with Moodys was to be upgraded by one credit rating category the annual interest charge would be reduced by approximately 13 million.
Based upon the composition of net debt at 31 March 2005 a one percentage point increase in interest rates would increase the groups annual net interest expense by less than 10 million.
This compares with an increase of less than 15 million and less than 10 million in the years ended 31 March 2004 and 2003 respectively.
Capital expenditure Capital expenditure on plant equipment and property excluding the movement on capital accruals totalled 3011 million in the 2005 nancial year compared with 2673 million and 2445 million in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
Capital expenditure is expected to be just over 3 billion in the 2006 nancial year as the group invests in its 21st century network 21CN programme and takes account of the additional expenditure associated with the acquired businesses.
The acquired businesses incurred capital expenditure of 12 million from their date of acquisition in the 2005 nancial year.
38 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review Of the capital expenditure 114 million was in Europe outside the UK in the 2005 nancial year compared to 86 million in the 2004 nancial year.
Contracts placed for ongoing capital expenditure totalled 735 million at 31 March 2005.
21CN is being developed using stringent capital return criteria and a rigorous approach to any investment in the narrowband network.
21CN aims to deliver long term structural cost reduction as we progressively migrate onto a simpler lower cost network architecture.
BT expects that future capital expenditure will be funded from net cash inows from operating activities and if required by external nancing.
Acquisitions
The total amount invested in acquisitions in the 2005 nancial year including further funding of existing ventures was 453 million being mainly the acquisitions of Infonet and Albacom.
In February 2005 the group completed the acquisition of the 74% interest in Albacom not already held giving BT full ownership for total consideration of 131 million.
This gave rise to goodwill of 9 million.
In February 2005 the group also completed the acquisition of Infonet for total consideration of 520 million being 315 million net of cash balances.
This gave rise to goodwill of 264 million.
In the period since acquisition they have contributed 111 million to turnover and an operating loss of 10 million.
In April 2005 we completed the acquisition of Radianz the leading nancial services extranet provider from Reuters for consideration of 107 million including the cash on the balance sheet subject to working capital adjustments at completion date.
The total amount invested in the 2004 nancial year including further funding of existing ventures was 61 million lower than the 77 million invested in the 2003 nancial year.
Balance sheet Net assets at 31 March 2005 amounted to 3851 million compared to 3066 million at 31 March 2004 with the increase due to the retained prots of 938 million offset by the 195 million buyback of shares and currency movements.
BT Group plc the parent company had reserves of 9096 million at 31 March 2005 and 9585 million at 31 March 2004.
BTs xed assets totalled 16654 million at 31 March 2005 of which 15916 million were tangible assets principally forming the UK xed network.
At 31 March 2004 xed assets were 16015 million and tangible assets were 15487 million.
Return on capital employed The return before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items on the average capital employed total assets excluding goodwill less current liabilities excluding corporate taxes and dividends payable and provisions other than those for deferred taxation was 16.0% for the 2005 nancial year.
In the 2004 nancial year the group made a return before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 15.3%.
Pensions
The most recently completed triennial actuarial valuation of the BT Pension Scheme BTPS BTs main pension fund performed by the BTPS independent actuary for the trustees of the scheme was carried out as at 31 December 2002.
This valuation showed the fund to be in decit to an amount of 2.1 billion.
Assets of the fund of 22.8 billion at that date covered 92% of the funds liabilities.
The previous valuation was carried out as at 31 December 1999.
The result of this valuation was that the fund was in decit by 1.0 billion.
Assets of the fund of 29.7 billion at that date covered 97% of the funds liabilities.
The deterioration in the funding position was principally the result of lower equity returns over the three years and improved life expectancy of BTPS members and was in spite of the additional deciency funding payments totalling 600 million that were paid over the previous three years.
The valuation under the prescribed Minimum Funding Requirement approach showed the assets to cover 101% of the liabilities at 31 December 2002.
The next triennial valuation will be performed as at 31 December 2005.
The groups ordinary contribution rate increased to 12.2% of employees pensionable pay with effect from April 2003.
The contribution rate was 11.6% for the 2003 nancial year.
In addition the company agreed to make annual deciency contributions to the BTPS of 232 million with effect from the 2004 nancial year.
In the 2005 nancial year no deciency payments were made.
This was because in the 2004 nancial year total deciency contributions of 612 million were made including early payment of 380 million scheduled for payment in the 2005 and 2006 nancial years.
This compares to the 200 million annual deciency payments made in the 2003 nancial year.
The group is also required to pay special contributions to cover costs arising from enhanced pension benets provided to leavers.
The special contributions paid in the 2005 2004 and 2003 nancial years amounted to 6 million 130 million and 129 million respectively in respect of early leavers.
The payment expected to be made in the 2006 nancial year is nil in relation to leavers in the calendar year ended 31 December 2004.
The group continues to account for pension costs in accordance with UK Statement of Standard Accounting Practice No.
24 SSAP 24.
The groups total annual pension charges for the 2005 2004 and 2003 nancial years were 465 million 404 million and 322 million respectively.
This includes 430 million 376 million and 306 million respectively in relation to the BTPS.
The increase in the pension charge in the 2005 nancial year reects the introduction of Smart Pensions a salary sacrice scheme as a result of which there is a switch between wages and salaries and pension charges.
The
2005 and 2004 nancial years include a 154 million amortisation charge for the pension decit partly offset by a reduction in the number of active members and the interest credit related to the balance sheet prepayment.
The prot and loss charge for providing incremental pension benets for leavers amounted to nil 1 million and 60 million in the 2005 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively.
The pension charge for the 2005 and 2004 nancial years is based upon the SSAP 24 valuation as at 31 March 2003.
This valuation is based on the December 2002 funding valuation rolled forward to 31 March 2003 and uses a slightly higher investment return assumption than was used for the trustees funding valuation a lower ination rate and lower salary increase assumptions.
The resulting SSAP 24 decit amounts to 1.4 billion.
The
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 39 regular pension cost is charged at 11.3% of pensionable salaries compared to the 11.6% rate applied in the 2003 nancial year.
The full FRS 17 disclosures are provided in the notes to the nancial statements.
At 31 March 2005 the FRS 17 decit was 3.3 billion net of tax being a 0.3 billion reduction from 3.6 billion at 31 March 2004.
The number of retired members and other current beneciaries in the pension fund has been increasing in recent years and at 31 December 2004 was approximately 122% higher than the number of active members.
Consequently BTs future pension costs and contributions will depend on the investment returns of the pension fund and could uctuate in the medium term.
The BTPS was closed to new entrants on 31 March 2001 and we launched a new dened contribution pension scheme for people joining BT after that date which is to provide benets based on the employees and the employing companys contributions.
This change is in line with the practice increasingly adopted by major UK groups and is designed to be more exible for employees and enable the group to determine its pension costs more precisely than is the case for dened benet schemes.
The nancial impact of this change was not signicant in the nancial years under review and is not expected to be signicant in the next few years but it should reduce pension costs in the longer term.
Geographical information In the 2005 nancial year approximately 91% of the groups turnover was generated by operations in the UK compared with 93% in the 2004 and 94% in the 2003 nancial years.
BTs operating prots have been derived from its UK operations with losses being incurred outside the UK in each of the last three nancial years.
Regulatory nancial information BT is required under the continuation notice issued by Oftel on 25 July 2003 which extends the applicability of certain conditions previously included in its main licence to cover the 2004 nancial year to publish disaggregated nancial information for various activities of the group which have been used as the basis of charges paid by other telecommunication operators in the UK for the use of BTs network.
New SMP conditions see Regulation competition and prices  Conditions applying to BT only apply for the 2005 nancial year onwards.
The activities presented separately in the regulatory nancial statements do not necessarily correspond with any businesses separately managed funded or operated within the group.
The results set out in regulatory nancial statements for the 2004 and 2003 nancial years showed that the groups operating prot is derived predominantly from xednetwork calls.
Regulation competition and prices See pages 15 to 22 in the Business review section.
Competition and the UK economy See page 17 in the Business review section.
Environment
See pages 44 to 45 in the Our commitment to society section.
Critical accounting policies The groups principal accounting policies are set out on pages 72 to 74 of the Consolidated nancial statements and conform with UK Generally Accepted Accounting Principles UK GAAP.
In accordance with the requirements of Financial Reporting Standard No.18 these policies and applicable estimation techniques have been reviewed by the directors who have conrmed them to be the most appropriate for the preparation of the 2005 nancial statements.
Additionally during the 2005 nancial year the group adopted UITF Abstract 38 Accounting for ESOP trusts and the related amendments to UITF Abstract 17 revised 2003 Employee Share
See note 1 on page 81 for details.
We in common with virtually all other companies need to use estimates in the preparation of our nancial statements.
The most sensitive estimates affecting our nancial statements are in the areas of assessing the level of interconnect income with and payments to other telecommunications operators providing for doubtful debts establishing xed asset lives for depreciation purposes assessing the stage of completion and likely outcome under long term contracts making appropriate longterm assumptions in calculating pension liabilities and costs making appropriate mediumterm assumptions on asset impairment reviews and calculating current tax liabilities on our prots.
We are required to interconnect our networks with other telecommunications operators.
In certain instances we rely on other operators to measure the trafc ows interconnecting with our networks.
We use estimates in these cases to determine the amount of income receivable from or payments we need to make to these other operators.
The prices at which these services are charged are often regulated and are subject to retrospective adjustment.
We use estimates in assessing the likely effect of these adjustments.
We provide services to over 20 million individuals and businesses mainly on credit terms.
We know that certain debts due to us will not be paid through the default of a small number of our customers.
We use estimates based on our historical experience in determining the level of debts that we believe will not be collected.
These estimates include such factors as the current state of the UK economy and particular industry issues.
The plant and equipment used in our networks is long lived with cables and switching equipment operating for over ten years and underground ducts being used for decades.
The annual depreciation charge is sensitive to the estimated service lives we allocate to each type of asset.
We regularly review these asset lives and change them when necessary to reect current thinking on their remaining lives in light of technological change prospective economic utilisation and physical condition of the assets concerned.
As part of the property rationalisation programme we have identied a number of properties that are surplus to requirements.
Although efforts are being made to sublet this space it is recognised by management that this may not be possible immediately in the current economic environment.
Estimates have been made of the cost of vacant possession and any shortfall arising from the sub lease rental income being lower than the lease costs being borne by BT.
We enter into long term customer contracts which can extend over a number of nancial years.
During the 40 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review contractual period turnover costs and prots may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate protability of each contract.
If at any time these estimates indicate the contract will be unprotable the entire estimated loss for the contract is recognised immediately.
The company performs ongoing protability analyses of its contracts in order to determine whether the latest estimates require updating.
Key factors reviewed include future staff and third party costs and potential productivity efciencies.
We have a commitment mainly through the BT Pension Scheme to pay pension benets to approximately 357000 people over more than 60 years.
The cost of these benets and the present value of our pension liabilities depend on such factors as the life expectancy of the members the salary progression of our current employees the return that the pension fund assets will generate in the time before they are used to fund the pension payments and the discount rate at which the future pension payments are discounted.
We use estimates for all these factors in determining the pension costs and liabilities incorporated in our nancial statements.
The actual tax we pay on our prots is determined according to complex tax laws and regulations.
Where the effect of these laws and regulations is unclear we use estimates in determining the liability for the tax to be paid on our past prots which we recognise in our nancial statements.
Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS In compliance with European Union regulations BT will be adopting IFRS as the basis of accounting for the 2006 nancial year.
This will lead to a number of changes in future reported nancial information.
The group started its IFRS transition project in 2003.
The project team is overseen by the Group Finance Director and regular updates have been provided to the Audit Committee.
The project has involved a detailed assessment of the impact of IFRS on BTs accounting policies and reported results system changes to capture additional data training of staff and communications.
As part of the transition to IFRS in March 2005 we presented on our investor relations website our view of the pro forma nancial impact of adopting IFRS for the 2004 nancial year.
BT continues to report under UK Generally Accepted Accounting Principles UK GAAP for the 2005 nancial year but will be presenting nancial information in accordance with IFRS for each quarter and the year ending 31 March 2006.
The following provides additional information on the unaudited pro forma impact of IFRS in advance of the publication of the rst IFRS results and the material changes to BTs accounting policies used to prepare the nancial results for 2005 nancial year.
Whilst some of the changes required by IFRS will impact BTs reported prots and net assets this has no impact on the cash ows generated by the business or the cash resources available for investment or distribution to shareholders.
Furthermore the adoption of IFRS does not affect BTs strategy or underlying business performance.
It is important to note that the IFRS position as stated is BTs current view based on the nancial reporting standards currently in issue and changes may arise as new accounting pronouncements are developed and issued.
Due to a number of new and revised Standards included within the body of Standards that comprise IFRS there is not yet a signicant body of established practice on which to draw in forming opinions regarding interpretation and application.
Accordingly practice is continuing to evolve.
At this stage therefore the full nancial effect of reporting under IFRS as it will be applied and reported in the groups rst IFRS nancial statements may be subject to change.
We estimate that the pro forma impact of adopting IFRS on the reported UK GAAP results for the 2005 nancial year would have been negligible on the underlying earnings being the prot before goodwill amortisation exceptional items and tax and the earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
However due to the inherent volatilities introduced by IFRS no such statement can be made in respect of future years.
These estimates exclude the mark to market effects of IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement which we are not required to apply until 1 April 2005.
Pensions
Under UK GAAP the group measures pension commitments and other related postretirement benets in accordance with SSAP 24 Accounting for Pension Costs with additional disclosures provided in accordance with FRS 17 Retirement Benets.
Under IFRS the group will measure pension commitments and other related postretirement benets in accordance with IAS 19 Employee Benets which takes a similar approach to FRS 17.
On adoption of IAS 19 the decitsurplus of dened benet pension schemes will be recognised on balance sheet.
The amended version of IAS 19 which is subject to EU approval allows companies to choose to recognise actuarial gains and losses immediately in reserves or alternatively to be held on the balance sheet and released to the income statement over a period of time.
BT has elected to early adopt the amended version of IAS 19 and reect the impact of actuarial gains and losses immediately in reserves.
The income statement charge is split between an operating charge and a net nance charge.
The net nance charge relates to the unwinding of the discount applied to the liabilities of the scheme offset by the expected return on the assets of the scheme based on conditions prevailing at the start of the year.
Under SSAP 24 the asset on the balance sheet represents the timing differences between the pension charge to the prot and loss account and the payments made to the pension scheme.
Under IFRS the liability asset on the balance sheet represents the decitsurplus in the pension scheme.
The scheme assets are valued at market value and the liabilities are discounted using a high quality corporate bond rate.
Under SSAP 24 a pension charge for the 2005 nancial year of 465 million including a charge for the amortisation of the SSAP 24 decit in the BT Pension Scheme and an interest credit relating to the balance sheet prepayment was recognised.
Under IFRS the estimated total charge of 342 million is split between an operating charge of 540 million and a net nance interest income of 198 million.
Accordingly there is an additional 75 million charge to operating prot and a net nance income of 198 million under IFRS.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 41 A pension liability of 4781 million 3347 million net of tax would be recognised at 31 March 2005 offset by the reversal of provisions and other creditors of 44 million and the pension prepayment on the UK GAAP balance sheet of 1118 million.
The tax effect of this reversal is 329 million.
The net effect is a reduction in shareholders funds of 4092 million at 31 March 2005.
Sharebased payment Under UK GAAP an expense is recognised for the award of share options and shares based on their intrinsic value the difference between the exercise price and the market value at date of the award.
The majority of BTs sharebased payments are made under all employee Save As You Earn plans which are exempt under UK GAAP and the intrinsic value of many of the senior management schemes is nil.
Under IFRS 2 Sharebased payment an expense is recognised in the income statement for all sharebased payments both awards of options and awards of shares.
This expense is based on the fair value at the date of grant of the award using option pricing models and is charged over the related vesting period.
The accounting rules of IFRS 2 will result in an estimated operating charge for the 2005 nancial year of 39 million which is offset by the reversal of the UK GAAP charge of 11 million.
The majority of this IFRS charge relates to the groups all employee Save As You Earn schemes.
There is a related tax credit of 9 million offset by the reversal of the UK GAAP tax credit of 3 million.
The credit for the share based payments is recognised directly in reserves as the awards are equity settled.
Goodwill and other intangible assets UK GAAP requires goodwill to be amortised over its expected useful economic life.
Under IFRS 3 Business Combinations goodwill is no longer amortised but held at carrying value on the balance sheet and tested annually for impairment.
BT has elected to adopt the IFRS 1 exemption which allows existing UK GAAP goodwill at the transition date not to be restated but to be tested for impairment.
IAS 38 Intangible assets requires other intangible assets arising on acquisitions after the transition date to be separately identied and amortised over their useful economic life often a shorter period than for goodwill.
As a result intangible assets such as customer relationships and trademarks need to be separately valued and recognised on business combinations and then amortised over their useful economic lives.
The goodwill amortisation charged in 2005 nancial year of 16 million under UK GAAP will be reversed.
During the year BT has undertaken a number of acquisitions detailed in note 15 to the accounts.
Events after the balance sheet date Under UK GAAP the dividend charge is recognised in the prot and loss account in the period to which it relates.
Under IAS 10 Events after the Balance Sheet Date the dividend charge is not recognised in the income statement but is recognised directly in reserves.
In addition the dividend is required to be recognised in the period in which it is declared.
The nal dividend creditor of 551 million for the 2005 nancial year will be reversed as it was not declared at 31 March 2005.
Foreign exchange Under UK GAAP exchange differences arising from the translation of intercompany loans which provide nance or provide a hedge against foreign undertakings are taken to reserves on consolidation.
These exchange differences are reported in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
Under IAS 21 The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates foreign exchange gains and losses arising on certain intercompany loans are excluded from the amount taken to reserve on consolidation.
Foreign exchange gains and losses on these balances are recognised in the prot and loss account under IFRS.
In the 2005 nancial year a consolidated foreign exchange gain of 4 million which was taken directly to the prot and loss reserve under UK GAAP is reversed into operating prot.
Lease accounting There is a requirement under IAS 17 Leases to view leases of land separately from leases of buildings.
Furthermore there is a requirement to recognise operating lease charges as an expense on a straight line basis.
As a result the building elements of a small number of properties have been reclassied from operating leases under UK GAAP to nance leases under IFRS and lease rentals under BTs 2001 sale and leaseback transaction are recognised on a straight line basis.
The prot before tax for the 2005 nancial year will be reduced by approximately 3 million as a result of the recognition of depreciation and nance lease interest charges and the removal of the UK GAAP operating lease charges for the properties reclassied as nance leases.
The charge for the 2005 nancial year will also reduce by approximately 101 million due to operating lease charges being recognised on a straight line basis.
Other adjustments There are a number of other minor adjustments and reclassication under IFRS including i Computer software that is not an integral part of hardware is treated as an intangible asset.
Under UK GAAP the groups policy was to categorise all capitalised software as tangible xed assets.
This will result in a balance sheet reclassication. balance sheet.
Under UK GAAP the net deferred tax liability was shown within provisions.
This will result in 1660 million being reclassied to deferred tax assets leaving 1941 million as deferred tax liabilities. resulting in a reclassication. ows remain unchanged.
Financial instruments BT has taken the IFRS 1 exemption not to restate comparatives for the adoption of IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
These standards set out the accounting rules surrounding the recognition measurement disclosure and 42 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review presentation of nancial instruments.
These standards will be adopted by BT with effect from 1 April 2005.
The fair value of derivative nancial instruments existing at 1 April 2005 will be included on the balance sheet at fair value.
Future market interest rate and currency movements will give rise to adjustments to these fair values.
Where hedge accounting cannot be applied under the prescriptive rules of IAS 39 changes in market values of nancial instruments will impact the prot and loss account.
We expect group reserves at 1 April 2005 to be approximately 500 million lower under IFRS than under UK GAAP as a result of adopting IAS 39.
The group will present a reconciliation between the closing 31 March 2005 UK GAAP equity and opening 1 April 2005 IFRS equity when the rst IFRS results are announced for the rst quarter to 30 June 2005.
US GAAP The groups net income and earnings per share for the three nancial years ended 31 March 2005 and shareholders equity at 31 March 2005 and 2004 under US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles US GAAP are shown in the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles Section.
Differences between UK GAAP and US GAAP include results of the differing accounting treatment of leasing transactions pension costs redundancy costs intangible assets goodwill deferred taxation capitalisation of interest nancial instruments share based payment and dividends.
Cash ow information under the US GAAP presentation is also shown further in this document.
In December 2004 the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.
123R SFAS 123R ShareBased Payment which revises SFAS 123 and supersedes APB 25.
SFAS 123R requires that the cost of all sharebased payment transactions be recognised in the nancial statements.
SFAS 123R also establishes fair value as the measurement method in accounting for sharebased payments to employees.
BT adopted SFAS 123R on 1 April 2005 using the modied prospective transition method.
BT estimates the application of the expensing provisions of SFAS 123R will result in a pretax expense of approximately 45 million in the 2006 nancial year subject to additional grants and awards.
In December 2004 the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.
153 SFAS 153 Exchanges of Nonmonetary Assets  an amendment of APB Opinion No.
SFAS 153 addresses the measurement of exchanges of nonmonetary assets.
It eliminates the exception from fair value measurement for nonmonetary exchanges of similar productive assets in paragraph 21b of APB Opinion No.
29 Accounting for Nonmonetary Transactions and replaces it with an exception for exchanges that do not have commercial substance.
A nonmonetary exchange has commercial substance if the future cash ows of the entity are expected to change signicantly as a result of the exchange.
As required by SFAS 153 we will adopt this new accounting standard effective July 1 2005.
The adoption of SFAS 153 is not expected to have a material impact on our nancial position results of operations or cash ows.
In November 2004 the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.
151 SFAS 151 Inventory Costs  an amendment of ARB No.
43 Chapter 4 which claries that abnormal amounts of idle facility expense freight handling costs and wasted material spoilage should be recognised as a current period expense.
In addition SFAS 151 requires that allocation of xed production overhead to the costs of conversion be based on the normal capacity of the production facilities.
SFAS 151 is effective for scal years beginning after June 15 2005.
BT does not believe that the implementation of this standard will have a material impact on its nancial position results of operations or cash ows.
In September 2004 the EITF reached a consensus on EITF Issue No.
0214 Whether an Investor Should Apply the Equity Method of Accounting to Investments Other Than Common Stock in which the Task Force reached the consensus that an investor that has the ability to exercise signicant inuence over the operating and nancial policies of the investee should apply the equity method of accounting when it has an investment in common stock andor an investment that is insubstance common stock.
The consensus of this EITF is to be applied in reporting periods beginning after September 15 2004.
We do not believe the adoption of this standard will have a material impact on our nancial position results of operations or cash ows.
In October 2004 the EITF reached a consensus on Issue No.
041 Accounting for Preexisting Relationships between the Parties to a Business Combination EITF 041.
EITF 041 addresses the accounting treatment of preexisting relationships between the parties of a business combination.
The consensus of EITF 041 should be applied to business combinations consummated and goodwill impairment tests performed in reporting periods beginning after the FASB ratied the consensus at its October 13 2004 meeting.
The group will adopt the provisions of EITF 041 as of April 1 2005.
If it is determined that assets of an acquired entity are related to a preexisting contractual relationship thus requiring accounting separate from the business combination BT will evaluate whether the acquiring entity of the group should recognise contractual relationships as assets separate from goodwill in that business combination.
In March 2004 the EITF reached a consensus on EITF Issue No.
031 The Meaning of OtherThanTemporary Impairment and Its Application to Certain Investments EITF 031.
The guidance prescribed a threestep model for determining whether an investment is otherthan temporarily impaired and requires disclosure for unrealized losses on investments.
In September 2004 the FASB issued FASB Staff Position EITF 0311 Effective Date of Paragraphs 1020 of EITF Issue No.
031 FSP EITF 0311.
FSP EITF 0311 delays the effective date for the measurement and recognition guidance contained in paragraphs 1020 of EITF 031.
The disclosure requirements of EITF 031 remain effective for scal years ending after June 15 2004.
No effective date for the measurement and recognition guidance has been established in FSP EITF 0311.
During the period of delay FSP EITF 0311 states that companies should continue to apply current guidance to determine if an impairment is otherthantemporary.
The adoption of EITF 031 excluding paragraphs 1020 did not impact the groups consolidated nancial position results of operations or cash ows.
The group will assess the impact of paragraphs 1020 of EITF 031 once the guidance has been nalised.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 43 Corporate social responsibility CSR Managing social ethical and environmental issues in a way that grows shareholder value and helps BT and our customers to be more sustainable is a key challenge for us.
The Dow Jones Sustainability Indexes rank companies for their success in managing social ethical and environmental factors for competitive advantage.
During the 2005 nancial year BT was ranked as the top telecommunications company in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index for the fourth year in a row.
We also hold the Queens Award for Enterprise in recognition of our contribution to sustainable development.
This section of the report together with the broad statement on social environmental and ethical matters included in the section on Corporate governance provides information in response to the Association of British Insurers disclosure guidelines on social responsibility.
More detailed disclosures on BTs implementation of social ethical and environmental policies and procedures are available online in our independentlyveried social and environmental report which has been prepared in accordance with the 2002 Global Reporting Initiative GRI sustainability reporting guidelines.
CSR governance The Board reviews our CSR strategy and performance annually and is kept informed of our main CSR risks and opportunities as well as new developments that may impact on its duties.
A Board committee  the Community Support Committee  oversees community charitable and arts expenditure and the strategy for maximising our contribution to society.
The committee chaired by Sir Christopher Bland consists of representatives from BT businesses two nonexecutive directors and two external independent members who have a reputation for excellence in this eld.
An executive committee the Corporate Social Responsibility Steering Group CSRSG oversees the implementation of our CSR strategy and programme.
This includes risk assessment target and objective setting ISO 14001 certication  the international standard for environmental management systems  and public accountability.
The CSRSG consists of CSR champions nominated by the lines of business and seven support functions human resources corporate governance health and safety group property communications internal audit and procurement.
The CSRSG is chaired by BTs CSR champion Alison Ritchie Chief Broadband Ofcer and a member of the Operating Committee.
It is supported by advice from an independent panel of CSR experts.
Embedding CSR into BTs commercial operations is an important part of our CSR strategy and a key part of our work in the 2005 nancial year has been extending our CSR activity into our global operations.
We have carried out a number of health checks in our commercial operations to identify specic social economic and environmental impacts positive and negative and particular CSR risks and opportunities.
A report is then compiled which includes recommended actions.
We have important relationships with a wide range of stakeholders including employees customers and suppliers.
We engage with these stakeholders in a number of ways including consumer liaison panels an annual employee survey and a supplier relationship management programme.
Our CSR team coordinates and monitors CSR performance identies potential issues and opportunities that might affect the business and supports BTs commercial activities.
As part of our CSR performance measurement we have 12 nonnancial KPIs key performance indicators which provide a comprehensive overview of BTs social and environmental performance.
Our performance against these is published in our annual Social and Environmental report.
Social environmental and ethical risks During the 2005 nancial year we further increased our understanding of our CSR risks.
Privacy has been identied as an additional risk and we have developed a set of privacy principles for the business and commissioned research on the topic of privacy in the digital networked economy.
In the context of CSR our most signicant risks are and supply chain working conditions and health and safety and climate change and diversity and offshoring or the geography of jobs and breach of the code of business ethics and and privacy.
Each of these risks has a risk owner and mitigation strategy in place more detail on these can be found in our online social and environmental report.
CSR business opportunities There is a direct link between our CSR activity corporate reputation and customer satisfaction.
A detailed analysis in 2001 of customer opinion data based on tens of thousands of interviews showed that a 1% improvement in the publics perception of our CSR activities resulted in a 0.1% increase in our retail customer satisfaction gures.
This underlines how important it is not only to protect our reputation through appropriate risk management activities but also to enhance it through our community activities.
Longterm sustainability trends are creating market opportunities for us such as the use of teleconferencing and exible working to reduce the need to travel and provide more exible lifestyles.
Increasingly BT has to address social and environmental matters when bidding for business.
In the 2005 nancial year bids to the value of 2.2 billion required us to demonstrate expertise in managing these issues.
Environment
During the 2005 nancial year we retained ISO 14001 accreditation for our UK operations and BT Spain and extended it to BT Ireland.
BT is one of the largest consumers of industrial and commercial electricity in the UK and the growth of broadband has as expected increased our electricity use.
In the 2005 nancial year our usage increased by 3.1%.
However we also signed the worlds largest green energy contract which means that almost all of BTs UK electricity needs will be met from environmentallyfriendly Our commitment to society 44 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Operating and nancial review sources including wind generation solar wave and hydroelectric schemes.
In CO emissions savings this equates to 325000 tonnes each year equivalent to that produced by approximately 100000 cars.
CO emissionstel 2002 Total UK only million tonnes 0.76 0.92 0.96 1.03 % below 1996 53% 42% 40% 36% Tonnes per 1m turnover During the 2005 nancial year we received an income of 3 million from our recycling activities offset against the 7 million we spent managing our waste contracts recycling our waste and sending waste to landll.
Wastetel 2002 Total waste tonnes 110622 107303 117688 114999 Total waste recycled tonnes 37421 27626 27809 24099 % Recycled 34% 26% 24% 21% During the 2005 nancial year we reduced our commercial eet  still one of the largest in the UK  by 2% and our fuel consumption by 3.5%.
Transporttel 2002 Number of vehicles UK only 31969 32663 33979 37509 Fuel consumption million litres 51.97 53.85 56.12 62.76 Digital inclusion Digital inclusion is a key public policy issue and we are working with the UK Government and the voluntary sector to nd effective ways to use communications technology to tackle social exclusion.
On 12 October 2004 BT was involved as a founder member in the launch of the Alliance for Digital Inclusion.
Our involvement in the EverybodyOnline programme established in partnership with charity campaign group Citizens Online continues to be a key part of our digital inclusion campaign.
The campaign aims to increase skills and access to communications technology in deprived communities and to increase the understanding of the causes and effects of the digital divide and how they can be addressed at a national level.
Community
We commit a minimum of 0.5% of our UK pretax prots directly to activities which support society.
This has ranged from 10 million in 1987 peaking at 16 million in 2001 and we provided 9.1 million in the 2005 nancial year.
BT operations also provided a further 11.7 million in funding and support in kind over the past nancial year.
In the 2005 nancial year BT made charitable donations of 2 million.
The focus of our community programmes is on big issues where better communication can make a real difference to society.
For example more than 10500 schools and over two million young people have taken part in the BT Education Programme  a dramabased campaign helping children to improve their communication skills.
This activity is supported by our volunteering programme which has several thousand registered volunteers working with schools.
ChildLine a UK charity answers 2300 calls every day but many hundreds more go unanswered.
We are working with ChildLine on a campaign to ensure that every childs call for help is answered.
In addition BT people gave 2 million directly to charities during the 2005 nancial year through Give as you Earn to which BT added a direct contribution of 1 million.
Tsunami response BT played a role in the response to the Asian tsunami of 26 December 2004.
We set up a live call centre at the BT Tower to handle the unprecedented number of calls the Disasters Emergency Committee DEC was experiencing and also ran the online donation facility.
Individual
Sixteen BT engineers travelled to the affected area to help reestablish the telecommunications infrastructure.
We made an immediate 500000 donation.
Disability services Our Age and Disability Action team promotes equal access to a wide range of products and services.
We work directly with older and disabled people and their representatives to raise awareness of BTs inclusive approach and are continuing to develop our processes to ensure that new products and services are accessible to disabled people.
For people with hearing or speech impairments for example our textphone offers easy access to BT TextDirect  the service that enables users to dial direct to other text or voice users.
Customers with visual or mobility impairments benet from products with large clear keypads and cordless or handsfree options.
During the 2005 nancial year we also launched Relate 3000 an inclusively designed phone and our new BT Text service which includes a speaking SMS facility.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 45 Board of directors Sir Christopher Bland Chairman def Sir Christopher Bland was appointed to the Board as Chairman on 1 May 2001.
He chairs the Nominating and Community Support committees.
He was chairman of the BBC Board of Governors from 1 April 1996 until 30 September 2001.
From 1972 to 1979 Sir Christopher was deputy chairman of the Independent Broadcasting Authority and chairman of its Complaints Review Board.
In 1982 he became a non executive director of LWT Holdings and was chairman from 1983 to 1994 when LWT was acquired by Granada
From December 1994 to May 2000 he was chairman of NFC.
From 1977 to 1985 he was chairman of Sir Joseph Causton and Sons.
Sir Christopher who was chairman of the Hammersmith and Queen Charlottes Hospitals Special Health Authority from 1982 to 1994 and of Hammersmith Hospitals NHS Trust from 1994 to February 1997 was knighted for his work in the NHS in 1993.
He was chairman of the Private Finance Panel from 1995 to 1996 and a member of the Prime Ministers Advisory Panel on the Citizens Charter.
He is Senior Adviser at Warburg Pincus and chairman of the Royal Shakespeare Company.
Aged 66.
Executive directors Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002 and became Chief Executive on 1 February 2002.
He chairs the Operating Committee.
Ben Verwaayen was formerly vice chairman of the management board of Lucent Technologies in the USA from October 1999.
He joined Lucent in September 1997 as executive vice president international and became chief operating ofcer the following month.
Prior to joining Lucent Ben Verwaayen worked for KPN in the Netherlands for nine years as president and managing director of its telecoms subsidiary PTT Telecom.
From
1975 to 1988 he worked for ITT in Europe.
He is a non executive director of UPS.
A Dutch national he is aged 53.
Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director af Hanif Lalani was appointed to the Board on 7 February 2005 as Group Finance Director.
He was formerly Chief Financial Ofcer for BT Wholesale.
Since joining BT in 1983 he has held a number of positions including Chief Executive of BT Northern Ireland and Managing Director BT Regions.
Hanif Lalani was also Chairman of OCEAN Communications BTs subsidiary in the Republic of
He was awarded the OBE in January 2003 for services to business in Northern Ireland.
He is a Chartered Management Accountant.
Aged 43.
Ian Livingston Chief Executive BT Retail Ian Livingston was appointed as Chief Executive of BT Retail on 7 February 2005.
He was formerly Group Finance Director from April 2002.
Prior to joining BT he was group nance director of Dixons Group from 1997.
He joined Dixons in 1991 after working for 3i Group and Bank of America International.
His experience at Dixons spanned a number of operational and nancial roles both in the UK and overseas.
He was also a director of Freeserve from its inception.
He is a Chartered Accountant and also a nonexecutive director of Hilton
Aged 40.
Andy Green Chief Executive BT Global Services Andy Green was appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
He was appointed as Chief Executive of BT Global Services in October 2001.
Since joining BT in 1986 he has held a number of positions including Chief Executive of BT Openworld and Group Director of Strategy and
Andy Green was a member of the former Executive Committee from February 1995.
Aged 49.
Dr Paul Reynolds Chief Executive BT Wholesale Paul Reynolds was appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
In April 2000 he was appointed as Chief Executive of BT Wholesale.
He joined BT from the companys predecessor corporation which he joined in 1983 and has held a number of roles including Director of the Ofce of the Chairman Director of Multimedia and from 1999 Managing Director of Networks and Information Services.
He is a nonexecutive director of E Access a Japanese corporation.
Aged 48.
NonExecutive directors Clayton Brendish be Clayton Brendish was appointed to the Board on 1 September 2002.
He is nonexecutive director and external chairman of the Meteorological Ofce Board nonexecutive chairman of Close Beacon Investment Fund and Echo Research Limited and a nonexecutive director of Elexon and Herald Investment Trust.
He is also a trustee of Economist Newspapers and the Foundation for Liver Research.
Prior to his retirement in May 2001 Clayton Brendish was executive deputy chairman of CMG having joined the board when it acquired Admiral.
Clayton
Brendish was cofounder and executive chairman of Admiral incorporated in 1979.
He also acted as an advisor to the Government on the efciency of the Civil
Aged 58 Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman bcd Sir Anthony Greener was appointed to the Board on 1 October 2000.
He was appointed Joint Deputy Chairman and chairman of the Audit Committee on 1 January 2001.
He is the senior independent director.
He became Deputy Chairman and chairman of the Remuneration Committee on 18 July 2001.
Sir Anthony is chairman of the Qualications and Curriculum Authority.
He was formerly chairman of
Prior to the merger of Guinness and Grand Metropolitan he was chairman and chief executive of Guinness having been chief executive of Guinness since 1992.
Aged 64.
Louis R Hughes bc Louis Hughes joined the Board on 1 January 2000.
He is nonexecutive chairman of Maxager Technology Inc.
USA.
He was formerly president and chief operating ofcer of Lockheed Martin Corporation and previously executive vice president of General Motors.
Louis Hughes is a nonexecutive director of AB Electrolux Sweden and Sulzer AG and ABB Limited both Switzerland.
From 1993 to 2000 he was a member of the supervisory board of Deutsche Bank.
Louis Hughes was granted unpaid leave of absence by the Board from 1 September 2004 to 30 June 2005 to lead the civil reconstruction effort for the US Government in
A US national he is aged 56.
Board of directors and Operating Committee 46 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 The Rt Hon Baroness Jay of Paddington PC ce Baroness Margaret Jay was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
She was formerly Lord Privy Seal Leader of the House of Lords and Minister for Women.
Previously she was Minister of State at the Department of
Baroness Jay has held nonexecutive positions with Scottish Power Carlton Television and LBC.
She has been a member of the Central Research and Development Committee for the NHS was a founding director of the National AIDS Trust a governor of South Bank University and a member of the Meteorological Ofce Council.
She is currently chairman of the Overseas Development Institute a nonexecutive director of Independent News and Media and a member of its International Advisory Board and a member of the Committee on Standards in Public
Aged 65.
John Nelson bdf John Nelson was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
A Chartered Accountant he retired as chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston Europe CSFB on 31 January 2002.
He was a member of the executive board and chairman of the European executive committee of CSFB.
Prior to joining CSFB in January 1999 John Nelson spent 13 years with Lazard Brothers.
He was appointed vice chairman of Lazard Brothers in 1990.
He was also a chairman of Lazard S. director of Lazard Freres New York.
He was a nonexecutive director of Woolwich until it was taken over by Barclays Bank in 2000.
He is deputy chairman of Kingsher and a nonexecutive director of Hammerson of which he will become chairman in September 2005.
Aged 57.
Carl G Symon bc Carl Symon was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
He retired from IBM in May 2001 after a 32year career during which he held senior executive positions in the USA Canada Latin America Asia and Europe including chairman and chief executive ofcer of IBM UK.
Carl Symon is chairman of a number of private companies and a nonexecutive director of RollsRoyce and Rexam.
A US national he is aged 59.
Maarten van den Bergh bcdf Maarten van den Bergh was appointed to the Board on 1 September 2000.
He chairs the Pension Scheme Performance Review Group.
Group and a nonexecutive director of Royal Dutch Petroleum Company British Airways and a member of the Supervisory Board of AkzoNobel.
Prior to his retirement in July 2000 Maarten van den Bergh was president of the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company and vice chairman of its committee of managing directors from July 1998 having been appointed a managing director of the Royal Dutch Shell Group of companies in July 1992.
A Dutch national he is aged 63.
Operating Committee Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director Ian Livingston Chief Executive BT Retail Andy Green Chief Executive BT Global Services Dr Paul Reynolds Chief Executive BT Wholesale See page 46 for biographical details.
Alison Ritchie ae Alison Ritchie joined BT from the companys predecessor corporation which she joined in 1981.
She was appointed a member of the former Executive Committee in December 2000.
Alison Ritchie was appointed Chief Broadband Ofcer in November 2002.
She directs and champions the transformation of BT from a narrowband to a broadband company and the delivery of high quality broadband services to residential business and wholesale customers.
Alison Ritchie was formerly Chief Executive BT Openworld.
Before joining BT Openworld she was BTs Restructuring Project Director coordinating the project teams working on the nancial organisational and managerial restructuring of BT.
She is a member of the board of the British Quality Foundation and a non executive director of Roffey Park Institute.
Aged 44.
Company Secretary Larry Stone Larry Stone formerly Corporate Governance Director from 1 June 2000 was appointed Company Secretary on 27 March 2002.
He previously held external relations and regulatory roles with BT in Tokyo and Brussels and with BT Cellnet now O2.
He is a trustee of the BT Pension Scheme and was a director of ProShare.
Aged 47.
Key to membership of principal Board committees
Audit
Remuneration
Nominating
Community Support Pension Scheme Performance Review Group All the nonexecutive directors are considered independent of the management of the company.
Board of directors and Operating Committee BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 47 The directors submit their report and the audited nancial statements of the company BT Group plc and the group which includes its subsidiary undertakings for the 2005 nancial year.
Introduction
BT Group plc is the listed holding company for the BT group of companies.
The Operating and nancial review on pages 6 to 45 the discussion on Corporate governance on pages 50 to 55 the Report on directors remuneration on pages 56 to 68 and Risk Factors on page 126 form part of this report.
The audited nancial statements are presented on pages 71 to 122.
Principal activity The groups principal activity is the supply of communications services and equipment.
In the 2005 nancial year approximately 91% of group turnover arose from operations in the UK.
Directors
The names and biographical details of the directors of the company are given on pages 46 and 47.
All served throughout the nancial year with the exception of Hanif Lalani who was appointed on 7 February 2005.
Pierre
Danon served as a director until 28 February 2005.
In accordance with the articles of association Hanif Lalani having been appointed as a director by the Board retires at the forthcoming annual general meeting AGM and will be proposed for election.
Ben Verwaayen Paul Reynolds Carl Symon and Baroness Jay retire by rotation and will be proposed for reelection.
Details of these directors contracts of appointment are included in the Report on directors remuneration on pages 56 to 68 and the discussion on Corporate governance on pages 50 to 55.
Substantial shareholdings At 18 May 2005 the company had received notications from Legal and General Investment Management Limited Barclays PLC and Brandes Investment Partners LLC under Part VI of the Companies Act 1985 in respect of holdings of 289727496 shares 341139080 shares and 347201310 shares respectively representing holdings of 3.4% 4.01% and 4.08% of the companys issued ordinary share capital.
Interest of management in certain transactions During and at the end of the 2005 nancial year none of the companys directors was materially interested in any material transaction in relation to the groups business and none is materially interested in any presently proposed material transactions.
Policy on the payment of suppliers BTs policy is to use its purchasing power fairly and to pay promptly and as agreed.
BT has a variety of payment terms with its suppliers.
The terms for payments for purchases under major contracts are settled when agreeing the other terms negotiated with the individual suppliers.
It is BTs current policy to make payments for other purchases within 30 working days of the invoice date provided that the relevant invoice is presented to the company in a timely fashion and is complete.
BTs payment terms are printed on the companys standard purchase order forms or where appropriate specied in individual contracts agreed with the supplier.
The ratio expressed in days between the amounts invoiced to the company by its suppliers in the 2005 nancial year and the amounts owed to its trade creditors at the end of the year was 36 calendar days.
Political donations The companys continuing policy is that no company in the group shall make contributions in cash or kind to any political party.
Arrangements are in place to implement this policy.
However the denition of political donations used in the Companies Act 1985 is very much broader than the sense in which these words are ordinarily used.
It covers activities such as making MPs and others in the political world aware of key industry issues and matters affecting the company which make an important contribution to their understanding of BT.
These activities are carried out on an evenhanded basis related broadly to the major UK political parties electoral strength.
The authority we are requesting at the AGM is not designed to change the above policy.
It will however ensure that BT acts within the provisions of the Companies Act 1985 requiring companies to obtain shareholder authority before they can make donations to EU political organisations which includes UK political parties as dened in the Act.
During the 2005 nancial year the companys whollyowned subsidiary British Telecommunications plc made the following payments to cover the cost of hosting brieng meetings about the companys activities with MPs and MEPs Labour Party 10972 Conservative Party 5930 Liberal Democrats Party 2907 Scottish National Party 2000 Plaid Cymru 500.
Auditors
Resolutions to reappoint PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as auditors of the company and to authorise the directors to settle their remuneration will be proposed at the AGM.
Authority to purchase shares The authority given at last years AGM of the company held on 14 July 2004 for the company to purchase in the market 859 million of its shares representing 10% of the issued share capital expires on 13 October 2005.
Shareholders will be asked to give a similar authority at the AGM.
During the 2005 nancial year 101 million shares of 5 pence each were purchased under this authority 1.2% of the share capital for a total consideration of 195 million at an average price of 1.92 per share.
The shares were purchased in an onmarket programme of buying back the companys shares initiated in November 2003 as part of the companys shareholder distribution strategy.
36 million shares were cancelled and 134 million shares have been retained as treasury shares.
At 18 May 2005 11 million treasury shares had been transferred to meet the companys obligations under its employee share plans.
Report of the directors 48 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 AGM resolutions The resolutions to be proposed at the AGM to be held on 13 July 2005 together with explanatory notes appear in the separate Notice of Annual General Meeting sent to all shareholders.
By order of the Board Larry Stone
18 May 2005 Registered ofce 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ Registered in England and Wales No.
Report of the directors BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 49 It is BTs policy to achieve for all our operations best practice in our standards of business integrity.
This includes a commitment to maintaining the highest standards of corporate governance and ethics throughout the group.
The directors consider that BT has throughout the year complied with the provisions set out in section 1 of the 2003 Combined Code on Corporate Governance.
The Board Composition and role The Board which operates as a single team is currently made up of the parttime Chairman the Chief Executive four other executive directors and seven nonexecutive directors.
All of the nonexecutive directors meet the criteria for independence set out in the Combined Code and are therefore considered by the Board to be independent.
It is BTs policy that the Board will comprise a majority of independent nonexecutive directors.
The directors biographies are set out on pages 46 and 47.
The Boards principal focus is the overall strategic direction development and control of the group.
In support of this the Board approves the groups values business practice policies strategic plans annual budget capital expenditure and investments budgets larger capital expenditure proposals and the groups overall system of internal controls governance and compliance authorities.
It also has oversight and control of the groups operating and nancial performance.
These responsibilities are set out in a formal statement of the Boards role.
The Board has agreed the groups corporate governance framework including empowering the companys key management committee the Operating Committeeto make decisions on operational and other matters.
The roles and powers of this committee are set out later in this report under Principal Board committees.
Their powers and the authorities delegated to individual members of the Operating Committee are available to everyone in the group on the groups intranet site.
Historically the Board has met every month except in
Additionally it meets on an ad hoc basis to consider matters which are time critical.
The Board met 14 times during the 2005 nancial year.
For the 2006 nancial year and going forward the standard Board cycle will be nine not 11 meetings each year.
The roles of the Chairman and the Chief Executive are separate.
They are set out in written job descriptions approved by the Nominating Committee.
In addition to chairing the Board the Chairman is responsible for consulting the nonexecutive directors particularly the Deputy Chairman on corporate governance issues matters considered by the Nominating Committee which the Chairman chairs and the individual performances of the nonexecutive directors.
The Chairman and the non executive directors hold regular dinners at which they discuss matters without the executive directors being present.
With the Chief Executive and the Secretary the Chairman ensures the Board is kept properly informed is consulted on all issues reserved to it and that its decisions are made in a timely and considered way that enables the directors to full their duciary duties.
The Chairman ensures that the views of the shareholders are known to the Board and considered appropriately.
He represents the company in specied strategic and Government relationships as agreed with the Chief Executive and generally acts as the bridge between the Board and the Companys executive team particularly on the Groups broad strategic direction.
The Chief Executive has nal executive responsibility to the Board for the success of the group.
The Chairmans other current signicant commitments are shown in his biography on page 46.
During the 2005 nancial year the only change has been his appointment as Chairman of the Royal Shakespeare
The Secretary manages the provision of timely accurate and considered information to the Board for its meetings and in consultation with the Chairman and Chief Executive at other appropriate times.
He recommends to the Chairman and the Chief Executive for Board consideration where appropriate the companys corporate governance policies and practices and is responsible for their communication and implementation.
The appointment and removal of the Secretary is a matter for the whole Board.
He advises the Board on appropriate procedures for the management of its meetings and duties and the meetings of the companys principal committees as well as the implementation of corporate governance and compliance within the group.
BTs nonexecutive directors The Nominating Committee has agreed and periodically reviews the combination of experience skills and other attributes which the nonexecutive directors as a whole are to bring to the Board.
This prole is used by the Committee when the appointment of a nonexecutive director is being considered to assess the suitability of candidates who are put forward by the directors and outside consultants.
Shortlisted candidates meet the Committee which then recommends to the Board a candidate for appointment.
The nonexecutive directors provide a strong independent element on the Board.
Between them they bring experience and independent judgement gained at the most senior levels of international business operations and strategy marketing technology communications and political and international affairs.
Sir Anthony Greener the Deputy Chairman is the senior independent director.
He chairs the Audit and Remuneration committees.
In his capacity as the chairman of the Remuneration Committeehe meets with BTs major institutional shareholders.
The Deputy Chairman also continues to be available to discuss matters with institutional shareholders where it would be inappropriate for those discussions to take place with either the Chairman or the Chief Executive.
He will also attend at his discretion and in consultation with the Chairman and the Chief Executive other meetings with shareholders during the year.
The other nonexecutive directors may attend at their request meetings with the companys major shareholders and others.
Nonexecutive directors are appointed initially for three years subject to three months termination notice from either BT or the director.
At the end of the rst three years the appointment may be continued by mutual agreement.
Each nonexecutive director is provided upon appointment with a letter setting out the terms of his or her appointment including membership of Board committees the fees to be paid and the time commitment expected from the director.
The letter also covers such matters as the condentiality of information and the companys share dealing code.
Corporate governance 50 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Election and reelection All directors are required by the companys articles of association to be elected by shareholders at the rst AGM after their appointment if appointed by the Board. at intervals of not more than three years.
The director may seek reelection.
Service agreements The Chairman and executive directors have service agreements which are approved by the Remuneration
Information about the periods of these contracts is in the Report on directors remuneration.
Independent advice The Board has a procedure for directors in furtherance of their duties to take independent professional advice if necessary at the companys expense.
In addition all directors have access to the advice and services of the
Training and information On appointment the directors take part in an induction programme when they receive information about BT the role of the Board and the matters reserved for its decision the terms of reference and membership of the principal Board committees and the powers delegated to those committees the companys corporate governance policies and procedures including the powers reserved to the groups most senior executives and the latest nancial information about the group.
This is supplemented by visits to key BT locations and meetings with members of the Operating Committee and other key senior executives.
Throughout their period in ofce the directors are continually updated on BTs business the competitive and regulatory environments in which it operates technology and corporate social responsibility matters and other changes affecting BT and the communications industry as a whole by written briengs and meetings with senior BT executives.
Directors are also advised on appointment of their legal and other duties and obligations as a director of a listed company both in writing and in facetoface meetings with the Secretary.
They are reminded of these duties each year and they are also updated on changes to the legal accounting and governance requirements upon the company and themselves as directors.
During the 2005 nancial year for example they have attended a presentation on the effects of the introduction of international nancial reporting standards on the Groups results and have received further briengs on the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 which affects BT because its securities are registered with the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC changes to UK company law and various corporate governance proposals from the European Commission.
Guidelines are in place concerning the content presentation and delivery of papers for each Board meeting so that the directors have enough information to be properly briefed sufciently far ahead of each Board meeting and at other appropriate times.
Board evaluation During summer 2004 the Board carried out through a questionnaire and discussion with directors a formal evaluation of Board and Board committee performance.
The individual performance of directors was also evaluated at onetoone sessions with the Chairman.
As part of this process the Deputy Chairman Sir Anthony Greener met all directors individually to review the Chairmans performance.
The results of that exercise were considered by the Board in July 2004 and a number of actions agreed.
These evaluations will be carried out annually.
Directors and ofcers liability insurance and indemnity For some years the company has purchased insurance to cover its directors and ofcers against their costs in defending themselves in civil legal proceedings taken against them in that capacity and in respect of damages resulting from the unsuccessful defence of any proceedings.
At the date upon which this report was approved and throughout the 2005 nancial year the companys whollyowned subsidiary British Telecommunications plc has provided an indemnity in respect of all the companys directors.
Neither the insurance nor the indemnity provide cover where the director has acted fraudulently or dishonestly.
Principal Board committees To meet best corporate governance practice Audit Remuneration and Nominating Committees have long been an established part of BTs system of governance.
Each committee has written terms of reference which are available on the companys website.
The minutes of Audit and Nominating Committee meetings are sent at their request to directors who are not a member of a committee.
In the case of the Remuneration Committee minutes are circulated on request to other nonexecutive directors as well as to members of the committee.
Audit Committee The Audit Committee is chaired by Sir Anthony Greener the Deputy Chairman and senior independent director.
The other members are Maarten van den Bergh Clay Brendish Lou Hughes John Nelson and Carl Symon.
They are all independent nonexecutive directors.
They were members of the committee throughout the 2005 nancial year.
The Board considers that the Committees members have broad commercial experience and extensive business leadership having held various roles in accountancy nancial management and supervision treasury and corporate nance and that there is a broad and suitable mix of business nancial and IT experience on the
The Board has reviewed membership of the Committee and is satised that several of the Committees members have the recent and relevant nancial experience required for the provisions of the Combined Code.
The Committee recommends the appointment and reappointment of the companys external auditors and considers their resignation or dismissal recommending to the Board appropriate action to appoint new auditors.
It ensures that key partners are rotated at appropriate intervals.
It discusses with the auditors the scope of their audits before they commence reviews the results and considers the formal reports of the auditors and reports the results of those reviews to the Board.
It reviews the auditors performance including the scope of the audit and recommends to the Board appropriate remuneration.
Corporate governance BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 51 As a result of regulatory or similar requirements it may be necessary to employ the companys external auditors for certain nonaudit work.
In order to safeguard the independence and objectivity of the external auditors the Board has determined policies as to what nonaudit services can be provided by the companys external auditors and the approval processes related to them.
Under those policies work of a consultancy nature will not be offered to the external auditors unless there are clear efciencies and value added benets to the company.
The overall policies and the processes to implement them were reviewed and appropriately modied in the light of the provisions of the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 relating to nonaudit services that external auditors may not perform.
The Audit Committee monitors the extent of nonaudit work being performed by the companys auditors and approves such work before it is undertaken.
It also monitors the level of nonaudit fees paid to the external auditors.
The Audit Committee reviews the companys published nancial results the Annual Report and Form 20F and other published information for statutory and regulatory compliance.
It reports its views to the Board to assist it in its approval of the results announcements and the Annual Report and Form 20F.
The Committee also reviews the disclosure made by the Chief Executive and Group Finance Director during the certication process for the annual report about the design or operation of internal controls or material weaknesses in the controls including any fraud involving management or other employees who have a signicant role in the companys nancial controls.
The Board as required by UK law takes responsibility for all disclosures in the annual report.
The Audit Committee monitors and reviews the standards of risk management and internal control the effectiveness of internal control nancial reporting accounting policies and procedures and the companys statements on internal controls before they are agreed by the Board for each years annual report.
It also reviews the companys internal audit function and its relationship with the external auditors including internal audits plans and performance.
It reviews the arrangements for dealing in condence with complaints from employees about accounting or nancial management impropriety fraud poor business practices and other matters.
At each of its meetings it reviews with the group chief internal auditor and appropriate executives the implementation and effectiveness of key operational and functional change and remedial programmes.
The Committee also sets aside time at every meeting to seek the views of the companys internal and external auditors in the absence of executives.
In addition to carrying out those regular tasks which are within the Committees terms of reference and which are described above it has also carried out its annual consideration of the groups risk register as submitted to it by the Operating Committee and reviewed the companys system of internal control its accounting systems IT security and fraud and related matters.
It also considered the effect on the companys results of the introduction of international nancial reporting standards which have applied to the companys results from the nancial year beginning on 1 April 2005.
The Committee has also reviewed at each of its meetings during the 2005 nancial year the steps being taken within the group with regard to the application of the SarbanesOxley Act dealing with the internal control over nancial reporting.
It also specically evaluated its performance and processes and has reviewed the experience skills and succession planning within the Groups nance function.
The Group Finance Director the Secretary the groups chief internal auditor and the companys external auditors attend the Committees meetings.
The Committee met four times during the 2005 nancial year.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee comprises solely independent nonexecutive directors and is chaired by Sir Anthony
It met ve times during the 2005 nancial year.
Further details about the Committee are included in the Report on directors remuneration.
Nominating Committee The Nominating Committee consists of the Chairman the Deputy Chairman John Nelson and Maarten van den
Its members have not changed during the 2005 nancial year.
The Secretary and where appropriate at the invitation of the Chairman the Chief Executive attends the Committees meetings.
It ensures an appropriate balance of experience and abilities on the Board using this evaluation to review the size and composition of the Board and to recommend any proposed changes to the Board.
It keeps under review the need for appointments to the Board prepares a description of the specic experience and skills needed for an appointment considers candidates who are put forward by the directors and external consultants and recommends to the Board the appointments of all directors after having met shortlisted candidates.
It also reviews the time required from the Deputy Chairman and other nonexecutive directors to carry out their duties and advises the Board on succession planning for the positions of the Chairman Deputy Chairman Chief Executive and all other Board appointments.
The Committee met four times during the 2005 nancial year.
It reviewed the current structure prole and balance of the Board approved the Chairmans and Chief Executives job descriptions and the Board and Board committee evaluation questionnaire and process.
The Committee also reviewed and recommended to the Board the continued appointments as nonexecutive directors of Baroness Jay John Nelson who did not take part in the review of his own reappointment and Carl Symon.
52 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Corporate governance Meetings attendance The following table shows the attendance of directors at meetings of the Board and Audit Remuneration and Nominating committees during the 2005 nancial year.
Board
Audit
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nominating
Committee
Attendance is shown only for a committee member Number of meetings Director Sir Christopher Bland 14 4 Maarten van den Bergh Clay Brendish 14 3 Pierre Danon Andy Green 14 Sir Anthony Greener Lou Hughes Margaret Jay 12 4 Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston 13 John Nelson 13 3 3 Paul Reynolds 13 Carl Symon 14 4 5 Ben Verwaayen 14 Resigned as a director on 28 February 2005 Granted unpaid leave of absence by the Board from 1 September 2004 to 30 June 2005 to lead the civil reconstruction effort for the US Government in Afghanistan Appointed a director from 7 February 2005 Operating Committee The Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen chairs the Operating Committee which meets weekly.
The other members are the Group Finance Director the Chief Executives of BT Retail BT Wholesale and BT Global Services and the Chief Broadband Ofcer.
The Secretary attends all meetings.
The Group Strategy and the Group HR Directors normally attend each meeting.
The Committee has collective responsibility for running the groups business endto end.
To do that it develops the groups strategy and budget for Board approval recommends to the Board the groups capital expenditure and investments budgets monitors the nancial operational and customer quality of service performance of the whole group reviews the groups risks register allocates resources across the group within plans agreed by the Board plans and delivers major crossbusiness programmes and reviews the senior talent base and succession plans of the group.
Within the groups corporate governance framework approved by the Board the Operating Committee is empowered to approve up to limits after which Board approval is required capital expenditure disposals of xed assets the making of investments by the group and divestments.
It is authorised to delegate these approvals up to its own limits to senior executives.
Internal control and risk management The Board is responsible for the groups systems of internal control and risk management and for reviewing the effectiveness of those systems.
Such systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives any system can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Board also takes account of signicant social environmental and ethical matters that relate to BTs businesses and reviews annually BTs corporate social responsibility.
The companys workplace practices specic environmental social and ethical risks and opportunities and details of underlying governance processes are dealt with in Our people and Our commitment to society.
BT has processes for identifying evaluating and managing the signicant risks faced by the group.
These processes have been in place for the whole of the 2005 nancial year and have continued up to the date on which this document was approved.
The processes are in accordance with the Turnbull guidance for directors published in the UK in September 1999.
Risk assessment and evaluation takes place as an integral part of the groups annual strategic planning cycle.
The group has a detailed risk management process culminating in a Board review which identies the key risks facing the group and each business unit.
This information is reviewed by senior management as part of the strategic review.
The groups current key risks are summarised in Risk factors of this document.
The key features of the risk management process comprise the following procedures and senior executives led by the Secretary review the groups key risks and have created a group risk register describing the risks owners and mitigation strategies.
This is reviewed by the Operating Committee before being reviewed and approved by the Board. risks and ensure that the key risks are addressed.
Finance Director on the operation of internal controls in their area of responsibility. year. control.
Internal Audit reports to the management and the Audit Committee on the status of specic areas identied for improvement.
Internal audit also promotes effective risk management in the lines of business operations. reports its conclusions to the Board.
The Audit Committee has carried out these actions for the 2005 nancial year.
New subsidiaries acquired during the year have not been included in the above risk management process.
They will be included for the 2006 nancial year.
Material joint ventures and associates which BT does not control outside the UK have not been dealt with as part of the group for the purposes of this internal control assessment.
The Board has approved the formal statement of matters which are reserved to it for consideration approval or oversight.
It has also approved the groups corporate governance framework which sets out the high level principles by which the group is managed and the responsibilities and powers of the Operating Committee Corporate governance BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 53 and the groups senior executives.
As part of this framework the development and implementation of certain powers relating to groupwide policies and practices are reserved to identied senior executives.
Relations with shareholders Senior executives led by the Chief Executive and the Group Finance Director and including as appropriate the other executive directors hold meetings with the companys principal institutional shareholders to discuss the companys strategy nancial performance and specic major investment activities.
The Deputy Chairman also attends at his discretion and in consultation with the Chairman and the Chief Executive meetings with shareholders during the year.
The company also maintains contact when appropriate through the chairman of the Remuneration Committee and other senior executives to discuss overall remuneration policies and plans.
Contact with institutional shareholders and with nancial analysts brokers and the media is controlled by written guidelines to ensure the protection of share price sensitive information that has not already been made generally available to the companys shareholders.
The directors are provided with either full or summarised reports and other written briengs from the companys major shareholders and analysts and are regularly informed by the Secretary about the holdings of its principal shareholders.
The Secretary also surveys the companys retail shareholders about the quality of the companys shareholder communications and share registration services.
We are continuing our policy that shareholders vote on the annual report at the AGM.
Shareholders will also again be asked to vote on the Report on directors remuneration.
It is part of our policy to involve shareholders fully in the affairs of the company and to give them the opportunity at the AGM to ask questions about the companys activities and prospects.
We also give the shareholders the opportunity to vote on every substantially different issue by proposing a separate resolution for each issue.
The proxy votes for and against each resolution as well as abstentions will be counted before the AGM and the results will be made available at the meeting after the shareholders have voted on each resolution on a show of hands and at the end of the meeting.
It is our policy for all directors to attend the AGM if at all possible.
Whilst because of ill health or other pressing reasons this may not always be possible in normal circumstances this means that the chairman of the Audit Nominating and Remuneration committees is at the AGM and is available to answer relevant questions.
The Annual Review and if requested the Annual Report and Form 20F together with the Notice of the AGM are sent to shareholders in the most costeffective fashion given the large number of shareholders.
We aim to give as much notice as possible and at least 21 clear days as required by the companys articles of association.
In practice these documents are being sent to shareholders more than 20 working days before the AGM.
Established procedures ensure the timely release of share price sensitive information and the publication of the companys nancial results and regulatory nancial statements.
All external announcements are also reviewed for accuracy and compliance requirements by a committee of senior functional executives the Disclosure Committee which is chaired by the Secretary.
Statement of business practice To reinforce our commitment to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity and ethics BT has a written statement of business practice The Way We Work.
The statement covers all our operations and reects the expectations in the area of corporate governance and business practice standards.
A copy of the statement has been sent to every employee.
Copies are also sent to the employees of newly acquired subsidiaries.
These highlevel principles are supported by a continuing and comprehensive communications programme and online training.
A condential helpline and email facility are also available to employees who have questions about the application of these principles.
The helpline number is published externally.
We also continue to require our agents and contractors to apply these principles when representing BT.
Pension funds BTs two main pension funds  the BT Pension Scheme and the BT Retirement Plan  are not controlled by the Board but by separate trustees who are company and union nominees under independent chairmen.
The trustees look after the assets of the funds which are held separately from those of the company.
The pension funds assets can only be used in accordance with their respective rules and for no other purpose.
Financial statements A statement by the directors of their responsibilities for preparing the nancial statements is included in the Statement of directors responsibility.
The directors statement on going concern is on page 38 of the Financial review.
US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 BT has securities registered with the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC.
As a result BT is obliged to comply with those provisions of the SarbanesOxley Act applicable to foreign issuers.
BT will comply with the legal and regulatory requirements introduced pursuant to this legislation in so far as they are applicable to the group.
Given the narrow and prescriptive denition under the relevant SEC rules it is the opinion of the Board that the Audit Committee does not include a member who is an audit committee nancial expert.
However the Board considers that the Committees members have broad commercial experience and extensive business leadership having held various roles in accountancy nancial management and supervision treasury and corporate nance and that there is a broad and suitable mix of business nancial and IT experience on the Committee.
The Board and its committees are keeping the appointment of a nancial expert as dened by US law under review.
The Chief Executive and Group Finance Director after evaluating the effectiveness of BTs disclosure controls and procedures as of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report and Form 20F have concluded that as of such date BTs disclosure controls and procedures were effective to ensure that material information relating to BT was made known to them by others within the group.
The Chief Executive and Group Finance Director have also 54 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Corporate governance provided the certications required by the SarbanesOxley
There were no changes in BTs internal control over nancial reporting that occurred during the year ended 31 March 2005 that have materially affected or are reasonably likely to materially affect BTs internal control over nancial reporting.
The code of ethics for the Chief Executive Group Finance Director and Director Group Financial Control and Treasury adopted for the purposes of the SarbanesOxley Act is posted on the companys website at siteThegroupCompanyprole
The New York Stock Exchange The company as a foreign issuer with American Depositary Shares listed on the New York Stock Exchange NYSE is obliged to disclose any signicant ways in which its corporate governance practices differ from the corporate governance listing standards of the NYSE.
The company has reviewed the NYSEs new listing standards and believes that its corporate governance practices are consistent with them with the following exception where the company does not meet the strict requirements set out in the standards.
The standards state that companies must have a nominatingcorporate governance committee composed entirely of independent directors and with written terms of reference which in addition to identifying individuals qualied to become board members develops and recommends to the Board a set of corporate governance principles applicable to the company.
BT has a Nominating Committee. approval.
The Board approves the groups overall system of internal controls governance and compliance authorities.
The Board and the Nominating Committee are made up of a majority of independent nonexecutive directors.
The SarbanesOxley Act the SEC and NYSE rules will require the company from 31 July 2005 to comply with certain provisions relating to the Audit Committee.
These include the independence of Audit Committee members and procedures for the treatment of complaints regarding accounting or auditing matters.
The company is already fully compliant with these requirements.
Corporate governance BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 55 The review is divided into the following sections 56 Remuneration policy Not audited i Constitution and process ii Packages iii Annual package  nancial year 200506 iv Other matters Executive share ownership
Other benets Service agreements Outside appointments Nonexecutive directors letters of appointment Nonexecutive directors remuneration Directors service agreements and contracts of appointment Directors interests Performance graph 62 Remuneration review Audited Directors emoluments Former directors
Pensions
Share options Share awards under longterm incentive schemes Vesting of outstanding share awards and options Deferred Bonus Plan Share awards under allemployee share ownership plans Operating Committee Remuneration policy This part of the Report on directors remuneration is not subject to audit.
The directors consider that BT has thoughout the year complied with the provisions set out in Section 1 of the 2003 Combined Code on Corporate Governance.
Shareholders will be invited to approve this report at the companys 2005 AGM.
The Board is ultimately responsible for both the structure and amount of executive remuneration but it has delegated prime responsibility for executive remuneration to the Remuneration Committee.
The Committee is made up wholly of independent nonexecutive directors.
The terms of reference of the Committee are available on the companys website at site The Committees role is to set the remuneration policy and individual remuneration packages for the Chairman and the senior management team comprising the executive directors members of the Operating Committee OC and other senior executives reporting to the Chief Executive.
This includes approving changes to the companys longterm incentive plans recommending to the Board those plans which require shareholder approval and overseeing their operation.
In this role the Committee also monitors the structure of reward for executives reporting to the senior management team and determines the basis on which awards are granted under the companys executive share plans.
The Committee met ve times during the nancial year 200405.
Sir Anthony Greener has chaired the Committee since 18 July 2001.
Other members of the Committee who served during the nancial years 200304 and 200405 were and Maarten van den Bergh and Lou Hughes and Margaret Jay and Carl Symon.
The Chairman and Chief Executive are invited to attend meetings.
They are not present when matters affecting their own remuneration arrangements are considered.
No director or executive is involved in any decision relating to his or her remuneration.
Non executive directors who are not members of the Committee are entitled to receive papers and minutes of the Committee.
The Committee has access to professional advisers both from within the company and externally.
Towers Perrin HR consultants Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ian Livingston in his capacity as Group Finance Director Alex Wilson Group HR Director and Larry Stone Company Secretary provided advice that materially assisted the Committee in relation to directors remuneration in the nancial year 200405.
Towers Perrin who are appointed by the company provide BT with a range of data and advisory services covering all aspects of executive pay bonus arrangements shares and benets.
The Committee has agreed that Towers Perrin may advise both the Committee and BT and should be invited to attend meetings when major remuneration policy issues are being discussed.
BTs executive remuneration policy is to reward employees competitively taking into account individual line of business and company performance market comparisons and the competitive pressures in the information and communications technology industry as BT focuses on growth through transformation.
Base
Report on directors remuneration 56 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 salaries are positioned around the midmarket with total direct compensation basic salary annual bonus  cash and deferred shares  and the expected value of any long term incentives to be at the upper quartile only for sustained and excellent performance.
There are no plans to change this policy.
A signicant and increasing proportion of the total executive remuneration package is linked to line of business andor corporate performance.
Remuneration arrangements and performance targets are kept under regular review to achieve this.
The remuneration package is made up of some or all of the following Basic salary Salaries are reviewed annually but increases are made only where the Committee believes that adjustments are appropriate to reect contribution increased responsibilities andor market pressures.
No base pay changes were proposed or made save that the Committee agreed an increase in base salary effective on 1 January 2005 for Andy Green and Ian Livingston to align their packages with their revised responsibilities in a highly competitive market.
Performancerelated remuneration Annual bonus The annual bonus plan is designed to reward the achievement of results against set objectives.
For the nancial year 200405 ontarget and maximum requiring truly exceptional performance bonus levels for executive directors and OC members as a percentage of salary were 75% and 150% respectively and for the Chief Executive they were 127.5% and 195% with onethird of any bonus payable in the form of deferred shares.
Under his contract the Chairman is not entitled to a bonus.
Targets in respect of corporate performance set at the beginning of the nancial year 200405 for each objective to which specic weights were attached were based on earnings per share free cash ow and customer satisfaction.
Delivery against these operational targets will be a key determinant of success and supports BTs strategy for transformation and growth.
For the three line of business Chief Executives 75% of the potential bonus was linked to BTs corporate performance and 25% to the performance of their respective line of business.
For all other relevant executives bonuses were based solely on corporate performance.
The Committee retains the exibility to enhance or reduce bonus awards in exceptional circumstances.
Achievement against corporate targets in the nancial year 200405 Earnings per share weighting 40% of target Free cash ow weighting 40% of target
20% of target Total % of target Note  threshold reflects 50% of target target is 100% and stretch is 150% The deferred share element of the annual bonus is paid under the Deferred Bonus Plan DBP.
The shares are held in trust and transferred to the executive after three years if still employed by the company.
There are no additional performance measures for the vesting of deferred share awards.
The Committee considers that deferring a part of the annual bonus in this way also acts as a retention measure and contributes to aligning management with longterm shareholder interest.
These deferred awards for Ben Verwaayen Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds at the end of the nancial year 200405 are contained in the table on page 67.
The initial values of the awards are in note f on page 62.
Longterm incentives The BT Equity Incentive Portfolio the Portfolio is designed to ensure that equity participation is an important part of overall remuneration.
It comprises three elements share options incentive shares and retention shares.
A combination of share options and incentive shares was used for equity participation in the nancial year 200405.
Retention shares are used only as a recruitment or retention tool.
Under his service agreement the Chairman is not entitled to receive annual grants of longterm incentive awards or options.
Normally awards vest and options become exercisable only if a predetermined performance target has been achieved.
The performance measure for outstanding awards and options is TSR total shareholder return compared with a relevant basket of companies.
TSR links the reward given to directors with the performance of BT against the shares of other major companies.
For grants in the nancial years 200102 200203 and 200304 the comparator group was the FTSE 100 at 1 April in each year and for grants in the nancial year 200405 TSR was measured against a comparator group of companies from the European Telecom Sector.
At 1 April 2004 the group contained the following companies BT Group Cable and Wireless Cosmote Mobile Telecommunications Deutsche Telekom France Telecom Hellenic Telecommunications O2 formerly mmO Portugal Telecom
Swisscom
TDC
Tele2
Telecom Italia Telecom Italia Mobile
Telekom Austria
TeliaSonera
Vodafone Group The base price at the beginning of the performance period is calculated by averaging the share price of BT and other companies in the comparator group over the six months to 31 March prior to the award.
However for the awards granted in the nancial year 200203 the period was from 19 November 2001 the date of the O2 demerger to 31 March 2002.
The end price is the average of the share price over the six months to the end of the performance period adjusted for all capital actions and dividend payments that occur during the performance period.
Share options The price at which shares may be acquired under the Global Share Option Plan GSOP is the market price at the date of grant.
Other than for new recruits the size of Report on directors remuneration BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 57 option grant is based on corporate and individual performance.
Options are exercisable after three years subject to a performance target being met.
The
Committee would not normally expect the initial value of annual grants of options based on the market price of a BT share to exceed three times base salary.
In the nancial year 200405 the maximum option grant for executive directors and OC members was reduced to 1.5 times base salary see Incentive shares below.
For options granted subject to a TSR measure BTs TSR at the end of the threeyear period must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to be exercisable.
At median 30% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
The proportion of options that are exercisable reduces on a straightline basis between those points.
For options granted in the nancial year 200203 if the performance measure is not met in full at the rst measurement it may be retested against a xed base in years four and ve and for options granted in the nancial year 200304 may be retested in year ve.
If TSR has not reached the median at the end of the fth year previously unexercisable options will lapse.
For options granted in the nancial year 200203 TSR had reached 74th position at the rst measurement relative to the FTSE 100 and performance will be retested in the nancial year 200506.
For options granted in the nancial year 200405 there will be no retesting and the policy of the Committee going forward is for there to be no retesting.
The oneoff grant of additional options in the nancial year 200203 to the senior executives most responsible for delivering BTs strategic plan lapsed on 31 March 2005 as the required 35% compound annual growth in BTs earnings per share over three years equivalent to 22 pence per share at the end of the 2005 nancial year was not achieved.
The grant was not subject to a retesting condition.
The option granted to Sir Christopher Bland on 22 June 2001 as part of his recruitment package is not subject to a performance measure as it matched a personal investment in BT shares of 1 million.
The details of the options held by Sir Christopher Bland Ben Verwaayen Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds at the end of the nancial year 200405 are contained in the table on page 65.
Incentive shares In the nancial year 200405 the Committee decided to grant a combination of performancelinked share options and incentive shares instead of a grant of share options.
Incentive shares with a maximum value of twothirds base salary were granted in the nancial year 200405.
Awards of incentive shares vest after a performance period of three years if the participant is still employed by BT and a performance measure has been met.
For awards of incentive shares in the nancial year 200405 TSR at the end of the three year period must be in the upper quartile relative to the comparator group for all of the shares to vest.
At median 25% of the shares under award will vest.
Below that point none of the shares under award will vest.
The proportion of shares that vests reduces on a straightline basis between those points.
There will be no retesting and no matching shares are being offered to any executive on vesting of the incentive shares.
The details of incentive share awards held by Ben Verwaayen Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds at the end of the nancial year 200405 are contained in the table on page 66.
Retention shares Retention shares are granted under the Retention Share Plan RSP to individuals with critical skills as a recruitment or retention tool.
As a result shares currently under award are not generally linked to a corporate performance target.
The length of the retention period before awards vest is exible.
The shares are transferred at the end of the specied period if the individual is still employed by BT.
Retention shares are used only in exceptional circumstances and in the nancial year 200405 six awards were made for recruitment purposes none of which was to an executive director or OC member.
The
Committee has approved the grant of an award of retention shares to Ian Livingston with an initial market value of 1m to help secure his appointment and long term retention as Chief Executive BT Retail.
It is expected that these will be granted at the end of May 2005 and will vest in two tranches.
The awards under the RSP held by Sir Christopher Bland Ben Verwaayen and Ian Livingston at the end of the nancial year 200405 or which vested during the year are contained in the table on page 66.
Other share plans The executive directors and the Chairman may participate in BTs HM Revenue and Customs approved allemployee share plans the Employee Sharesave Scheme and Employee Share Investment Plan which replaced the BT Employee Share Ownership Scheme on the same basis as other employees.
There are further details of these plans in note 31 to the accounts.
The Remuneration Committee does not expect there to be any general increase in base pay for executive directors in the nancial year 200506.
Longterm reward The Committee believes that in the increasingly competitive markets for communications and ICT in which BT operates BTs present longterm incentive arrangements have not been acting as a sufciently effective retention tool.
This has been reected in the loss to the business of a number of key senior executives in the past year.
The Committee believes that key to the successful execution of BTs transformation strategy will be year on year delivery of operational targets.
Accordingly the Committee has decided to modify the emphasis on some of the components making up the remuneration package for executive directors and OC members.
This involves and no further annual grants of options balanced by and an increase in the maximum award of incentive shares from twothirds to 100% of base salary and and an increase in annual bonus potential payable in deferred shares.
TSR will continue to be measured against a comparator group of companies from the European Telecom Sector.
The Committee determined with advice from Towers Perrin that the overall value of longterm incentive 58 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Report on directors remuneration awards will not change materially as a result of these proposals.
The change in emphasis will increase the proportion of variable reward linked to annual performance targets.
Incentive share awards remain a signicant part of the package and together with deferred shares these modications further align management with long term shareholder interests.
The changes have the effect of increasing ontarget bonus from 75% to 87.5% of base salary of which the cash element continues to be 50% of salary.
Arrangements for BT Group Chief Executive and the Chief Executive BT Global Services The salary of the Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen has remained unchanged since joining the company in January 2002.
With the announced retirement of the Chairman at the AGM 2007 management continuity through this period is an important issue.
The Committee has decided therefore in order to make his total package both increasingly retentive and competitive with leaders of the 30 largest companies in the FTSE 100 to increase further the deferred share element of his annual bonus but not the cash element.
Both elements are determined by performance against corporate targets.
For the nancial year 200506 and subsequent nancial years twothirds of his bonus will be payable in deferred shares which will vest after three years.
This has the effect of increasing his ontarget annual bonus to 255% of salary of which 85% would be payable in cash as currently and 170% of salary payable in deferred shares.
His total bonus cash and deferred shares  will be subject to an overall cap of 300% of base salary in any one year.
As a retention measure and given competitive market conditions the Committee has also decided to introduce an additional special bonus arrangement for Andy Green Chief Executive BT Global Services linked to performance targets for that line of business given the critical importance of its continuing growth and margin improvement to BTs transformation.
This bonus arrangement payable in retention shares which will vest three years after grant will be applied to performance in each of the nancial years 200506 200607 and 200708.
Awards will be linked to a sliding scale of BT Global Services performance weighted equally around revenue growth EBIT and cash generation.
The target award will be equivalent to 100% of salary with a maximum of 150% of salary.
Annual bonus plan The annual bonus plan will continue to focus on annual objectives and to reward the achievement of results against those objectives.
Performance will again be against earnings per share free cash ow and customer satisfaction measures.
In the nancial year 200506 targets will be linked to corporate performance only.
Previously 25% of potential bonus for line of business Chief Executives was linked to the performance of their respective line of business.
Group performance targets for the nancial year 200506 are believed to be more challenging than the outturn of the nancial year 200405 which outturned below target as BT continues its programme of transformation and investment.
Proportion of xed and variable remuneration For the nancial year 200506 for the achievement of target performancerelated remuneration comprising annual and longterm incentives will be approximately 74% of total remuneration excluding pension for the Chief Executive 70% for Chief Executive Global Services and 56% for the remaining three executive directors.
Total remuneration comprises base salary annual bonus cash and deferred shares  and the expected value of awards under BTs longterm incentive plans.
Executive share ownership A mandatory shareholding programme has been introduced for the nancial year 200506 onwards.
This is to encourage executive directors and OC members to build up a shareholding in the company over time by retaining shares received either as a result of participating in a BT employee share plan other than the shares sold to pay a National Insurance or income tax liability or from onmarket purchases.
The Chief Executive is required to build up a shareholding of 2 x salary and the remaining executive directors and OC members 1.5 x salary.
Given that a large part of an executives remuneration is already variable the requirement excludes the need to make a further personal investment to build up the shareholding should awards not vest.
Current shareholdings are set out on page 61.
Pensions
Those executive directors and most other senior executives who joined the company prior to 1 April 2001 have their pension benets based on service and salary known as dened benet arrangements.
Those with longer BT service are entitled to pensions at normal retirement age of twothirds of nal salary including any cash lump sum entitlement.
Those with shorter BT service are entitled to a pension of onethirtieth of salary for each year of service.
In both cases for most executives a spouses pension of twothirds of the executives pension is provided in the event of death after retirement.
Should the executive die in service a lump sum equal to four times annual salary is payable together with a spouses pension of twothirds of the executives anticipated pension at normal retirement age.
BT closed its dened benet arrangements to new employees with effect from 1 April 2001.
From this date retirement provision is generally made on a dened contribution basis.
The company agrees to pay a xed percentage of the executives salary each year towards the provision of retirement benets typically this is around 30% of salary.
Additionally a lump sum equal to four times annual salary is payable on death in service.
The Committee has reviewed the impact of the Lifetime Allowance under tax legislation as the taxation of approved pension schemes will change from 6 April 2006.
As a result BT will offer to those members affected the option to opt out of the pension scheme and in its place to receive a cash allowance annually.
This will be broadly cash neutral for the company.
The Committee will keep this policy under review as best practice develops.
Pension provision for all executives is based on salary alone  bonuses other elements of pay and longterm incentives are excluded.
Report on directors remuneration BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 59 Other benets Other benets for the Chairman and the senior management team include some or all of the following company car fuel or driver personal telecommunications facilities and home security medical and dental cover for the director and immediate family special life cover professional subscriptions and personal tax planning and nancial counselling.
The company has a permanent health insurance policy to provide cover for the Chairman and executive directors and members of the OC who may become permanently incapacitated.
Service agreements It is the policy for the Chairman and executive directors to have service agreements providing for one years notice.
It may be necessary on recruitment to offer longer initial periods to new directors from outside BT or circumstances may make it appropriate to offer a longer xed term.
All the service agreements contain provisions dealing with the removal of a director through poor performance including in the event of early termination of the contract by BT.
Sir Christopher Blands contract expires at the conclusion of the AGM in 2007.
On termination of his contract by BT before that date he is entitled to payment of salary and the value of benets for the period of 12 months from date of termination or until the conclusion of the companys AGM in 2007 if that period is shorter.
Ben Verwaayens contract entitles him on termination of his contract by BT to payment of 700000.
The contracts of Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds entitle them on termination of their contract by BT to payment of salary and the value of benets until the earlier of 12 months from notice of termination or the director obtaining fulltime employment.
If the contract of a director other than that of the Chairman and Hanif Lalani is terminated by BT within one year of BT entering into a scheme of arrangement or becoming a subsidiary of another company he will be entitled to receive the higher of that current years ontarget bonus or the previous years bonus the market value of shares awarded under an employee share ownership plan or deferred bonus plan that have not vested together with a years salary and the value of any benets.
The Committee has reviewed contracts taking into account the joint statement of best practice on executive contracts and severance by the Association of British Insurers and the National Association of Pension Funds and other relevant guidelines and believes that contract terms are generally in line with best practice.
The clause described above dealing with termination following BT entering into a scheme of arrangement or becoming a subsidiary of another company will be excluded from contracts for new appointments as was the case for Hanif Lalani.
Outside appointments The Committee believes that there are signicant benets to both the company and the individual from executive directors accepting nonexecutive directorships of companies outside BT.
The Committee will consider up to two external appointments of which only one may be to the Board of a major company for which a director may retain the fees.
Ben Verwaayen was appointed as a nonexecutive director of United Parcel Service Inc.
17 March 2005 and is entitled to receive an annual fee of
On joining the Board he received 336 shares of restricted UPS common stock amounting to US25000 and will receive an US85000 restricted stock grant annually.
Ian Livingston receives an annual fee of 38000 as a nonexecutive director of Hilton Group plc.
Paul Reynolds was appointed a nonexecutive director of EAccess in Japan on 29 June 2004 and receives an annual fee of 3 million approximately 15000.
He was granted an option over 250 shares at 139000 approximately 695 per share on 1 July 2004.
Pierre
Danon who resigned on 28 February 2005 as a director of BT was a nonexecutive director of EMAP plc and received an annual fee of 35000.
Nonexecutive directors letters of appointment Nonexecutive directors have letters of appointment.
They are appointed for an initial period of three years.
During that period either party can give the other at least three months notice.
At the end of the period the appointment may be continued by mutual agreement.
Further details of appointment arrangements for nonexecutive directors are set out on page 50 in the section dealing with corporate governance issues.
The letters of appointment of nonexecutive directors are terminable on notice by the company without compensation.
Nonexecutive directors remuneration Seven of the directors on the Board are nonexecutive directors who in accordance with BTs articles of association cannot individually vote on their own remuneration.
Nonexecutive remuneration is reviewed by the Chairman and the Chief Executive and discussed and agreed by the Board.
Nonexecutive directors may attend the Board discussion but may not participate in it.
The fees paid to nonexecutive directors were increased with effect from 1 January 2004 to reect their increasing responsibilities and time commitments.
Nonexecutive directors fees were last changed ve years previously on 1 January 1999.
The basic fee for nonexecutive directors is 40000 per year.
An additional fee for membership of Board committees is 5000 per year other than for the Pension Scheme Performance Review Group for which no fee is paid.
Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman and senior nonexecutive director who also chairs both the Remuneration Committee and the Audit Committee receives total fees of 115000 per year.
To align further the interests of the nonexecutive directors with those of shareholders the companys policy is to encourage these directors to purchase on a voluntary basis 5000 of BT shares each year.
The directors are asked to hold these shares until they retire from the Board.
This policy is not mandatory.
No element of nonexecutive remuneration is performancerelated.
Nonexecutive directors do not participate in BTs bonus or employee share plans and are not members of any of the company pension schemes.
60 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Report on directors remuneration Directors service agreements and contracts of appointment The dates on which directors initial service agreementsletters of appointment commenced and the current expiry dates are as follows Chairman and executive directors Commencement date Expiry date of current service agreement or letter of appointment Sir Christopher Bland 1 May 2001 Sir Christopher Bland entered into a new service agreement on 29 August 2003 which terminates at the conclusion of the 2007 AGM terminable on 12 months notice by either the company or the director before that date.
B Verwaayen 14 January 2002 A Green H Lalani I Livingston Dr P Reynolds P Danon resigned 28 February 2005 19 November 2001 7 February 2005 8 April 2002 19 November 2001 19 November 2001 The contract is terminable by the company on 12 months notice and by the director on six months notice.
Nonexecutive directors Sir Anthony Greener M van den Bergh LR Hughes Baroness Jay J Nelson CG Symon 1 October 2000 1 September 2000 1 January 2000 14 January 2002 14 January 2002 14 January 2002 Letters of appointment were for an initial period of three years.
Appointments were extended for a further three years and are terminable by the company or the director on three months notice.
C Brendish 1 September 2002 Letter of appointment is for an initial period of three years and is terminable by the company or the director on three months notice.
The appointment is renewable by mutual agreement.
There are no other service agreements or material contracts existing or proposed between the company and the directors.
There are no arrangements or understandings between any director or executive ofcer and any other person pursuant to which any director or executive ofcer was selected to serve.
There are no family relationships between the directors.
Directors interests The interests of directors holding ofce at the end of year and their families in the companys shares at 31 March 2005 and 1 April 2004 or date of appointment if later are shown below
Benecial holdings 2005 2004 Sir Christopher Bland B Verwaayen 902001 387876 A Green H Lalani cd ab I Livingston Dr P Reynolds ab Sir Anthony Greener 60007 34607 M van den Bergh 7540 4800 C Brendish 23920 23920 LR Hughes 6800 6800 Baroness Jay 5572 5572 J Nelson 50000 50000 CG Symon 10069 10069 Total 2246649 1546517 During the period from 1 April 2005 to 15 May 2005 Paul Reynolds and Hanif Lalani each purchased 125 shares under the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan.
Includes free shares awarded under the Employee Share Investment Plan andor Employee Share Ownership Scheme.
At 31 March 2005 Sir Christopher Bland and each of the executive directors as potential beneficiaries had a nonbeneficial interest in 27733138 shares 2004  30463435 held in trust by Ilford Trustees Jersey Limited for allocation to employees under the employee share schemes.
They each also had a nonbeneficial interest in 139029 shares 2004  141864 held in trust by Halifax Corporate Trustees Limited for participants in the Employee Share Investment Plan.
At date of appointment  7 February 2005.
Report on directors remuneration BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 61 Performance graph This graph illustrates as required by the Companies Act 1985 the performance of BT Group plc measured by TSR adjusted for the rights issue and the demerger of BTs mobile business in the nancial year 200102 relative to a broad equity market index over the past ve years.
The FTSE 100 is considered to be the most appropriate index against which to measure performance for these purposes as BT has been a constituent of the FTSE 100 throughout the veyear period and the index is widely used.
TSR is the measure of the returns that a company has provided for its shareholders reecting share price movements and assuming reinvestment of dividends.
31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March BTs total shareholder return TSR performance over the five financial years to 31 March BT FTSE 100 1 April 2000  100.
Source Datastream Remuneration Review This part of the Report on directors remuneration is subject to audit.
Directors emoluments Directors emoluments for the nancial year 200405 were as follows
Pension allowance net of pension contributions Total salary and fees
Expenses allowance
Total
Total
Sir Christopher Bland B Verwaayen cdf 70tel196 41 1512 1968 A Green df H Lalani def I Livingston bdf 46telDr P Reynolds bdf 400  Sir Anthony Greener 115  115    115 96 M van den Bergh 55  55    55 44 C Brendish 50  50    50 39 LR Hughes 21  21    21 40 Baroness Jay 50  50    50 39 J Nelson 50  50    50 39 CG Symon 50  50    50 40 P Danon bdfh 413  381 247 3628 1449 251 168 5496 6028 Balance or part of the pension allowance for the financial year 200405  see Pensions below.
Ian Livingston Paul Reynolds and Pierre Danon each received a monthly cash allowance in lieu of a company car equivalent to 18500 per annum.
Ben Verwaayen was entitled to a housing allowance of 250000 per annum until 13 January 2005.
In the financial year 200405 196000 was paid in respect of that year 2004  250000.
These amounts are included in the table above under Expenses allowance.
Other benefits includes some or all of the following company car fuel or driver personal telecommunications facilities and home security medicaland dental cover for the director and immediate family special life cover professional subscriptions and personal tax planning and financial counselling.
In addition Paul Reynolds and Pierre Danon had interest free loans  see Loans below.
Hanif Lalani joined the Board on 7 February 2005.
Deferred annual bonuses payable in shares in three years time were awarded to Ben Verwaayen 224000 2004  429500 Andy Green 102000 2004  168000 Hanif Lalani 68000 2004  nil Ian Livingston 99000 2004  162500 Paul Reynolds 106500 2004  147500 and Pierre Danon nil 2004  129500.
When added to the amounts paid or payable for the 200405 financial year in the table above the total emoluments of Ben Verwaayen were 1736000 2004  2397500 Andy Green 786000 2004  959000 Hanif Lalani 275000 2004  nil Ian Livingston 915000 2004 1075500 Paul Reynolds 759500 2004  884500 and Pierre Danon 701000 2004  879500.
Retirement benefits are accruing to three directors 2004  three under defined contribution arrangements and to three directors 2004  three and one former director under a defined benefit scheme.
Pierre Danon resigned from the Board on 28 February 2005.
62 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Report on directors remuneration The annual salaries of the Chairman Ben Verwaayen Pierre Danon and Paul Reynolds remained unchanged during the nancial years 200304 and 200405.
On
1 January 2005 the annual salaries of Andy Green and Ian Livingston increased from 425000 to 500000 and 450000 to 525000 respectively.
Hanif Lalani joined the Board on 7 February 2005 on an annual salary of 400000.
Following this years salary review the Committee decided that there should be no general increase from 1 June 2005 in basic salaries.
A special retention arrangement was established for Hanif Lalani on 1 July 2004 when he was CFO BT Wholesale under which he will receive a lump sum cash payment of 150000 on 30 June 2006 provided he is still an employee of the company on that date.
The award will be forfeited without compensation if Mr Lalani resigns or his employment is terminated by the company with cause before that date.
Pierre Danons pro rata bonus in respect of the nancial year 200405 until he resigned from the Board on 28 February 2005 was based on the achievement of corporate and line of business objectives and on the Committees view on his outstanding contribution to BT.
All his executive share awards and options lapsed on his resignation.
The annual bonus of Hanif Lalani relates to the whole year and is based solely on line of business objectives.
Ian Livingstons annual bonus was based solely on the achievement of corporate objectives.
Annual cash bonus awards in respect of the nancial year 200405 which are not pensionable to executive directors ranged from 38% to 64% of current salary 2004 58% to 123%.
Former directors Yve Newbold retired on 31 August 2004 as a member of the Community Support Committee for which she received fees in the nancial year 200405 of 2708.
She also received fees of 2000 as a member of BTs Social Policy Leadership Panel which she left on 16 November 2004.
Dr Iain Anderson retired in June 2004 as chairman BT Scotland for which he received fees in the nancial year 200405 of 3000.
Sir Peter Boneld received under preexisting arrangements a pension of 340000 payable in the nancial year 200405 2004  331000.
Loans
Prior to the date of their appointment to the Board on 19 November 2001 Pierre Danon and Paul Reynolds each had interestfree loans from the company to assist with relocation of 375000 and 300000 respectively.
At
31 March 2005 Pierre Danon owed 209374 2003 243750 which is repayable by 1 June 2005 and Paul Reynolds owed 230000 2003  260000.
During the nancial year 200405 the maximum amount outstanding was 503750.
There are no outstanding loans granted by any member of the BT group to any other of the directors or guarantees provided by any member of the BT group for their benet.
Pensions
Sir Christopher Bland is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company matches his contributions up to 10% of the earnings cap to a personal pension plan.
Company contributions of 10200 were payable in respect of the nancial year 200405.
The earnings cap is a restriction on the amount of pay which can be used to calculate contributions and benets due to a tax approved pension scheme.
Ben Verwaayen is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company has agreed to pay an annual amount equal to 30% of his salary towards pension provision increased from 20% and effective on 1 January 2005.
The company paid 30600 into his personal pension plan plus a cash payment of 126900 representing the balance of the pension allowance for the nancial year 200405.
BT also provides him with a lump sum death in service benet of four times his salary.
Ian Livingston is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company has agreed to pay an annual amount equal to 30% of his salary towards pension provision.
The company paid 20400 into his personal pension plan plus a cash payment of 120225 representing the balance of the pension allowance for the nancial year 200405.
BT also provides him with a lump sum death in service benet of four times his salary.
Andy Green is a member of the BT Pension Scheme.
From 31 December 1997 the company has been purchasing an additional 203 days of pensionable service each year to bring his pensionable service at age 60 up to 40 years.
A twothirds widows pension would be payable on his death.
Hanif Lalani is a member of the BT Pension Scheme.
From 7 February 2005 the company has been purchasing an additional 23 days of pensionable service each year to bring his pensionable service at age 60 up to 40 years.
Paul Reynolds is a member of the BT Pension Scheme.
From 1 July 1996 the company has been purchasing an additional 109 days of pensionable service each year to bring his pensionable service at age 60 up to 40 years. death.
Pierre Danon resigned as a director on 28 February 2005.
His pension accrued at the rate of onethirtieth of his nal salary for each year of service.
In addition a two thirds widows pension would have been payable on his death.
He was a member of the BT Pension Scheme but as he was subject to the earnings cap the company agreed to increase his benets to the target level by means of a nonapproved unfunded arrangement.
Report on directors remuneration BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 63 The table below shows the increase in the accrued benets including those referred to above to which each director has become entitled during the year and the transfer value of the increase in accrued benets Accrued pension Transfer value of accrued benets Change in transfer value cd less directors contributions
Transfer value of increase in accrued benets less directors contributionsteltel 2005 P Danon A Green 131 117 1848 1H Lalani P Reynolds 123 116 1578 1ad As required by the Companies Act 1985 Schedule 7A.
These amounts represent the deferred pension to which the directors would have been entitled had they left the company on 31 March 2004 and 2005 respectively.
Transfer value of the deferred pension in column a as at 31 March 2005 calculated on the basis of actuarial advice in accordance with Actuarial Guidance Note GN11.
The transfer value represents a liability of the company rather than any remuneration due to the individual and cannot be meaningfully aggregated with annual remuneration as it is not money the individual is entitled to receive.
The equivalent transfer value but calculated as at 31 March 2004 on the assumption that the director left service at that date.
The increase in pension built up during the year net of inflation.
The transfer value of the pension in column e less directors contributions.
Directors contributions in the financial year 200405 were as follows Pierre Danon 14025 2004  14580 Andy Green 26625 2004  25500 Hanif Lalani 16300 2004  13350 and Paul Reynolds 24000 2004  24000.
Pierre Danon resigned as a director on 28 February 2005.
Hanif Lalani joined the Board on 7 February 2005.
64 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Report on directors remuneration Share options held during the year ended 31 March 2005 Number of shares under option 1 April 2004 or date of appointment Granted Lapsed 31 March 2005 Option price per share Usual date from which exercisable Usual expiry date Sir Christopher Bland 314244 314244 318p 01052004 01052011 B Verwaayen 1121121 1121121 250p 11022005 11022012 935830 187p 29072005 29072012 561500  187p 29072005 29072012 1052632 199.5p 24062006 24062013 546875 192p 24062007 24062014 3671083 546875 561500 3656458 A Green 2905 2905  255p 14082005 13022006 568190 187p 29072005 29072012 340910  187p 29072005 29072012 639098 199.5p 24062006 24062013 332032 192p 24062007 24062014 5712 165p 14082007 13022008 1551103 337744 343815 1545032 H Lalani 5346 173p 14082006 13022007 177810 187p 29072005 29072012 210527 199.5p 24062006 24062013 105264 199.5p 24062004 24062013 156250 192p 24062007 24062014 655197   655197 I Livingston 7290 7290 227p 14082007 13022008 601610 187p 29072005 29072012 360970  187p 29072005 29072012 676692 199.5p 24062006 24062013 351563 192p 24062007 24062014 1646562 351563 360970 1637155 Dr P Reynolds 4555 4555 218p 14022007 13082007 534760 187p 29072005 29072012 320860  187p 29072005 29072012 601504 199.5p 24062006 24062013 312500 192p 24062007 24062014 1461679 312500 320860 1453319 Former director P Danon 601610 601610  187p 29072005 29072012 360970  187p 29072005 29072012 676692  199.5p 24062006 24062013 351563  192p 24062007 24062014 1639272 351563 1990835 Total 10939140 1900245 3577980 9261405 All of the above options were granted for nil consideration.
No options were exercised during the year.
Options granted under the GSOP on 22 June 2001.
The option is not subject to a performance measure.
It was a term of Sir Christopher Blands initial service contract that i he purchased BT shares to the value of at least 1 million and ii as soon as practicable after the purchase of the shares invested shares the company would grant a share option over shares to the value of at least 1 million.
Sir Christopher Bland was the legal and beneficial owner of the invested shares on 1 May 2004 so the option became exercisable on that date.
Options granted under the GSOP on 11 February 2002.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to become exercisable.
At median 40% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
Options granted under the GSOP on 29 July 2002.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to become exercisable.
At median 30% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
Options granted under the GSOP on 29 July 2002.
The vesting of the options was subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure was earnings per share.
The performance measure was not met and as a result the options have lapsed.
Options granted under the GSOP on 24 June 2003.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100  see note c above.
Options granted under the GSOP on 24 June 2004.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with a group of companies from the European Telecom Sector.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to become exercisable.
At median 30% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
Options granted on 24 June 2002 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Options granted on 25 June 2004 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Options granted on 27 June 2003 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Options granted under the GSOP Special Incentive Award on 24 June 2003 prior to Mr Lalanis appointment as a director.
These options are not subject to a performance measure as the grant was linked to performance.
Options granted on 21 December 2001 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Date of appointment  7 February 2005.
Report on directors remuneration BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 65 The market price of the shares at 31 March 2005 was 205.5p 2004  177p and the range during the nancial year 200405 was 169.25p  216.25p.
As at 31 March 2005 one third of Hanif Lalanis GSOP 2003 option granted under the Special Incentive Award was exercisable giving an unrealised gain of 2105.
There were no further unrealised gains on the above share options at 31 March 2005 2004  nil based on the share price of the shares at that date.
All of Mr Danons options lapsed on his last day of service 28 February 2005.
Share awards under longterm incentive schemes held during the year ended 31 March 2005 Details of the companys ordinary shares provisionally awarded to directors as participants under the ISP and RSP are as follows 1 April 2004 or date of appointment Awarded
Lapsed
Total number of award shares 31 March
Price on grant Market Price at vesting
Sir Christopher Bland RSP 2003 286100  13653   299753 2007 182p B Verwaayen ISP 2004  241284 11514   252798 310307 193.42p RSP 2001 832869  39746 872615    257.814p 207.75p 1813 A Green ISP 2004  146494 6990   153484 310307 193.42p H Lalani ISP 2004 70912  1312   72224 310307 193.42p I Livingston ISP 2004  155111 7401   162512 310307 193.42p RSP 2002 350664  8366 175332  183698 050405 273.5p 181.75p 319 RSP 2002 117691  5616   123307 200505 202.0p Dr P Reynolds ISP 2004  137877 6579   144456 310307 193.42p Former director Pierre Danon ISP 2004  155111 7401  162512   193.42p The size of awards granted during the financial year 200405 was calculated using the average middle market price of a BT share for the three days prior to the grant.
Awards under the ISP were made on 24 June 2004.
The awards will vest subject to a performance condition being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with a group of companies from the European Telecom Sector.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the awards to vest.
At median 25% of the awards will vest.
Below that point none of the awards will vest.
The RSP awards granted on 11 Februray 2002 vested on 11 February 2005.
The second tranche of the RSP award granted on 30 May 2002 vested on 21 May 2004.
Date of appointment 7 February 2005.
The award granted under the ISP on 24 June 2004 and the subsequent dividends reinvested lapsed on 28 February 2005 when Pierre Danon resigned as a director.
Vesting of RSP awards is not subject to a performance condition being met.
Vesting of outstanding share awards and options Details of options granted under the GSOP in the nancial years 200203 and 200304 which would vest based on BT Groups TSR compared with the other companies in the FTSE 100 for the relevant performance period up to 31 March 2005 and details of options granted under the GSOP in the nancial year 200405 and awards of shares under the ISP in the nancial year 200405 which would vest based on BT Groups TSR compared with a group of companies from the European Telecom Sector for the relevant performance period up to 31 March 2005 are as follows 31 March 2005 31 March 2004
Percentage of shares vesting TSR position Percentage of shares vesting ISP 2004 310307 11 GSOP 2002 290705 74  77 GSOP 2003 240606 84  93 GSOP 2004 240607 11 None of these outstanding options or awards of shares under the ISP which are subject to the TSR performance conditions would vest.
Options granted to executive directors under the GSOP during the nancial year 200203 as an additional incentive whose exercise was subject to a 35% compound annual growth in earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items being achieved over three years equivalent to 22p per share at the end of the nancial year 200405 are not included in the above table but are included in the table on page 65.
Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items for the nancial year 200405 are 18.1p per share 2004  16.9p.
The compound annual growth in earnings per share over the three years did not meet the target and as a result all of the options have lapsed.
66 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Report on directors remuneration Deferred Bonus Plan awards held during the year ended 31 March 2005 The following deferred bonuses have been awarded to the directors under the DBP.
These shares will normally be transferred to participants at the end of the threeyear deferred period if those participants are still employed by BT Group.
1 April 2004 or at date of appointment Awarded
Dividends reinvested Lapsed
31 March
Price at grant Market Price at vesting
BVerwaayen 80183   3826  84009 010805 202.0p 443238   21152  464390 010806 199.5p 222030  10595  232625 010807 193.42p AGreen 46723  46723     267.912p 187.7897p 88 52751   2517  55268 010805 202.0p 79983   3816  83799 010806 199.5p 86939  4148  91087 010807 193.42p H Lalani 12750   235  12985 010805 202.0p 25917   479  26396 010806 199.5p 26843   496  27339 010807 193.42p ILivingston 88088   4203  92291 010806 199.5p 83961  4006  87967 010807 193.42p Dr P Reynolds 33934  33934     267.912p 187.7897p 64 47476   2264  49740 010805 202.0p 75277   3591  78868 010806 199.5p 76342  3643  79985 010807 193.42p Former directors P Danon 23054  23054     267.912p 187.7897p 43 79129   3776 82905  010805 202.0p 88088   4203 92291  010806 199.5p 66970  3195 70165  010807 193.42p Sir Peter Boneld 157718  157718    010804 267.912p 187.7897p 296 The size of the awards granted during the nancial year 200405 was calculated using the average middle market price of a BT share for the three days prior to the grant.
Awards granted on 24 June 2004.
Awards granted on 22 June 2001 vested on 2 August 2004.
Date of appointment  7 February 2005.
All outstanding awards made under the DBP to P Danon lapsed on 28 February 2005 when he resigned as a director.
Under the terms of his service agreement awards granted to Sir Peter Bonfield were preserved on his leaving until the normal vesting date.
Report on directors remuneration BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 67 Share awards under allemployee share ownership plans held during the year ended 31 March 2005 1 April 2004 or at date of appointment Awarded Vested Total number of award shares 31 March 2005
Sir Christopher Bland ESIP 2003 186   186 050808 ESIP 2004  116 116 040809
ESOS 2001 66  66 ESIP 2002 130   130 140807 ESIP 2003 186   186 050808 ESIP 2004  116 116 0408
ESIP 2002 130   130 140807 ESIP 2003 186   186 050808 ESIP 2004 116 116 040809
ESIP 2004  116 116 040809 P Reynolds ESOS 2001 66  66 ESIP 2002 130   130 140807 ESIP 2003 186   186 050808 ESIP 2004  116 116 0408 Former director P Danon ESIP 2002 130   130 140807 ESIP 2003 186   186 050808 ESIP 2004  116 116 040809 Awards granted under the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan on 4 August 2004.
On that date the market price of a BT Group share was Awards granted under the BT Employee Share Ownership Scheme on 30 July 2001 vested on 30 July 2004.
On 2 August 2004 the first dealing day after that date the market price of a BT Group share was 190p.
The market price on the date of award was 482p.
Date of appointment 7 February 2005.
Operating Committee The aggregate remuneration of members of the Operating Committee OC other than directors for services in all capacities during the nancial year 200405 was as follows Salaries and benets 296 296 Annual bonuses 104 198 Provision for longterm incentive awards 346 268 Company pension fund contributions 34 34 Total 780 796 Of the six members of the OC ve are members of the
No options were granted under the BT Group Employee Sharesave Scheme to OC members other than to directors during the nancial year 200405 2004  Nil.
The members of the OC benecially own less than 1% of the companys outstanding ordinary shares.
By order of the Board Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman and Chairman of Remuneration Committee 18 May 2005 68 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Report on directors remuneration The directors are required by law to prepare nancial statements for each nancial year which give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and the group as at the end of the nancial year and of the prot or loss and cash ows of the group for that period.
The directors consider that in preparing the nancial statements for the year ended 31 March 2005 on pages 71 to 122 the company has used appropriate accounting policies consistently applied and supported by reasonable and prudent judgements and estimates.
The directors also consider that all applicable accounting standards have been followed and conrm that the nancial statements have been prepared on the going concern basis.
The directors are responsible for ensuring that the company keeps accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the company and which enable them to ensure that the nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 1985.
The directors are also responsible for taking such steps that are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
The auditors responsibilities are stated in their report to the shareholders.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 69 Statement of directors responsibility for preparing the nancial statements United Kingdom Opinion Independent auditors report to the shareholders of BT Group plc We have audited the nancial statements which comprise the group prot and loss account group and company balance sheets group cash ow statement group statement of total recognised gains and losses and the related notes which have been prepared under the historical cost convention and the accounting policies set out in the Accounting Policies.
We have also audited the disclosures required by Part 3 of Schedule 7A to the Companies Act 1985 contained in the directors remuneration report the audited part.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditors The directors responsibilities for preparing the annual report and the nancial statements in accordance with applicable United Kingdom law and accounting standards are set out in the statement of directors responsibilities.
The directors are also responsible for preparing the directors remuneration report.
Our responsibility is to audit the nancial statements and the audited part of the directors remuneration report in accordance with relevant legal and regulatory requirements and United Kingdom Auditing Standards issued by the Auditing Practices
This report including the opinion has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Section 235 of the Companies Act 1985 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving this opinion accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
We report to you our opinion as to whether the nancial statements give a true and fair view and whether the nancial statements and the audited part of the directors remuneration report have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
We also report to you if in our opinion the directors report is not consistent with the nancial statements if the company has not kept proper accounting records if we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or if information specied by law regarding directors remuneration and transactions is not disclosed.
We read the other information contained in the Annual Report and Form 20F and consider the implications for our report if we become aware of any apparent misstatements or material inconsistencies with the nancial statements.
The other information comprises only the Financial headlines Chairmans message Chief Executives statement Operating and nancial review Report of the directors Corporate governance the unaudited part of the directors remuneration report and Risk factors.
We review whether the corporate governance statement reects the companys compliance with the nine provisions of the 2003 FRC Combined Code specied for our review by the Listing Rules of the Financial Services Authority and we report if it does not.
We are not required to consider whether the boards statements on internal control cover all risks and controls or to form an opinion on the effectiveness of the companys or groups corporate governance procedures or its risk and control procedures.
Basis of audit opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards issued by the Auditing Practices Board.
An audit includes examination on a test basis of evidence relevant to the amounts and disclosures in the nancial statements and the audited part of the directors remuneration report.
It also includes an assessment of the signicant estimates and judgements made by the directors in the preparation of the nancial statements and of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the companys circumstances consistently applied and adequately disclosed.
We planned and performed our audit so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered necessary in order to provide us with sufcient evidence to give reasonable assurance that the nancial statements and the audited part of the directors remuneration report are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or other irregularity or error.
In forming our opinion we also evaluated the overall adequacy of the presentation of information in the nancial statements.
Opinion
In our opinion the nancial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and the group at 31 March 2005 and of the prot and cash ows of the group for the year then ended the nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and those parts of the directors remuneration report required by Part 3 of Schedule 7A to the Companies Act 1985 have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors
18 May 2005 United States Opinion Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm to the board of directors and shareholders of BT Group plc In our opinion the accompanying group prot and loss account group balance sheet group cash ow statement group statement of total recognised gains and losses and the related notes present fairly in all material respects the nancial position of BT Group plc and its subsidiaries at 31 March 2005 and 2004 and the results of their operations and their cash ows for each of the three years in the period ended 31 March 2005 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United Kingdom.
These nancial statements are the responsibility of the groups management our responsibility is to express an opinion on these nancial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits of these statements in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the nancial statements are free of material misstatement.
An audit includes examining on a test basis evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the nancial statements assessing the accounting principles used and signicant estimates made by management and evaluating the overall nancial statement presentation.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Accounting principles generally accepted in the United Kingdom vary in certain important respects from accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Information relating to the nature and effect of such differences is presented in the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles section.
As discussed in Note 1 to the nancial statements the company changed its method for accounting for the employee benet trust in 2005.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors
18 May 2005 70 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Report of the independent auditors The consolidated nancial statements are divided into the following sections 72 Accounting policies 75 Group prot and loss account 78 Group statement of total recognised gains and losses 79 Group cash ow statement 80 Group balance sheet 81 Notes to the nancial statements 81 Changes in accounting policy and presentation 81 Segmental analysis 84 Turnover 84 Operating costs 85 Groups share of operating prot of associates and joint ventures 85 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 85 Interest receivable 86 Interest payable 86 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 87 Minority interests 87 Dividends 87 Earnings loss per share 88 Reconciliation of operating prot loss to operating cash ows 88 Management of liquid resources 88 Acquisitions and disposals 91 Net debt 91 Intangible assets 92 Tangible xed assets 93 Fixed asset investments 94 Debtors 94 Current asset investments 94 Loans and other borrowings 95 Other creditors 95 Provisions for liabilities and charges 96 Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds 96 Related party transactions 96 Financial commitments and contingent liabilities 97 Pension costs 102 Directors emoluments 102 People employed 102 Employee share plans 105 Auditors 106 Financial instruments and risk management 110 Company balance sheet 111 Post balance sheet events BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 71 Consolidated nancial statements i Basis of preparation of the nancial statements The nancial statements are prepared under the historical cost convention and in accordance with applicable accounting standards and the provisions of the Companies Act 1985.
The group nancial statements consolidate those of the company and all of its subsidiary undertakings.
Where the nancial statements of subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures do not conform with the groups accounting policies appropriate adjustments are made on consolidation in order to present the group nancial statements on a consistent basis.
The principal subsidiary undertakings nancial years are all coterminous with those of the company.
The results of undertakings acquired during the year are consolidated from the date of effective acquisition.
The preparation of nancial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the nancial statements and the reported amounts of income and expenditure during the reporting period.
Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Estimates are used principally when accounting for interconnect income provision for doubtful debts payments to telecommunication operators longterm contracts depreciation goodwill amortisation and impairment employee pension schemes provisions for liabilities and charges and taxes.
Group turnover net of discounts which excludes value added tax and other sales taxes comprises the value of services provided and equipment sales by group undertakings excluding those between them.
Total turnover is group turnover together with the groups share of its associates and joint ventures turnover.
Turnover from calls is recognised in the group prot and loss account at the time the call is made over the groups networks.
Turnover from rentals is recognised evenly over the period to which the charges relate.
Turnover from equipment sales is recognised at the point of sale.
Prepaid call card sales are deferred until the customer uses the stored value in the card to pay for the relevant calls.
Turnover arising from the provision of other services including maintenance contracts is recognised evenly over the periods in which the service is provided to the customer.
Turnover from installation and connection activities is recognised in the period in which it is earned.
Turnover from long term contracts is recognised throughout the duration of the contract to the extent that the outcome of the contract can be assessed with reasonable certainty and in accordance with the stage of completion of contractual obligations.
Turnover from classied directories mainly comprising advertising revenue is recognised in the group prot and loss account upon completion of delivery.
Expenditure on research and development is written off as incurred.
Assets held under nance leases are capitalised and depreciated over their useful lives.
The capital element of future obligations under nance leases are recognised as liabilities.
The interest element of rental obligations are charged over the period of the nance lease and represent a constant proportion of the balance of capital repayments outstanding.
Operating lease rentals are charged against the prot and loss account on a straightline basis over the lease period except where the contractual payment terms are considered to be a more systematic and appropriate basis.
Interest payable including that related to nancing the construction of tangible xed assets is written off as incurred.
Discounts or premiums and expenses on the issue of debt securities are amortised over the term of the related security and included within interest payable.
Premiums payable on early redemptions of debt securities in lieu of future interest costs are written off when paid.
On consolidation assets and liabilities of foreign undertakings are translated into sterling at year end exchange rates.
The results of foreign undertakings are translated into sterling at average rates of exchange for the year.
Exchange differences arising from the retranslation at year end exchange rates of the net investment in foreign undertakings less exchange differences on borrowings which nance or provide a hedge against those undertakings are taken to reserves and are reported in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
All other exchange gains or losses are dealt with through the prot and loss account.
Goodwill arising from the purchase of subsidiary undertakings and interests in associates and joint ventures represents the excess of the fair value of the purchase consideration over the fair value of the identiable net assets acquired.
Prior to becoming a subsidiary undertaking Albacom SpA was accounted for as a joint venture.
In accordance with FRS 2 Accounting for subsidiary undertakings and in order to give a true and fair view purchased goodwill has been calculated as the sum of goodwill arising on each purchase of shares in Albacom and represents a departure from the statutory method.
See note 15 for further information.
For acquisitions completed on or after 1 April 1998 the goodwill arising is capitalised as an intangible asset or if arising in respect of an associate or joint venture recorded as part of the related investment.
Goodwill is amortised on a straight line basis from the time of acquisition over its useful economic life.
The economic life is normally presumed to be a maximum of 20 years.
For acquisitions on or before 31 March 1998 the goodwill is written off on acquisition against group reserves.
If an undertaking is subsequently divested the appropriate unamortised goodwill or goodwill written off to reserves is dealt with through the prot and loss account in the period of disposal as part of the gain or loss on divestment.
72 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Accounting policies b Other intangibles Licence fees paid to governments which permit telecommunication activities to be operated for dened periods are amortised from the latter of the start of the licence period or launch of service to the end of the licence period on a straightline basis.
Tangible xed assets are stated at historical cost less depreciation.
Cost in the case of network services includes contractors charges and payments on account materials direct labour and directly attributable overheads.
Depreciation is provided on tangible xed assets on a straight line basis from the time they are available for use so as to write off their costs over their estimated useful lives taking into account any expected residual values.
No depreciation is provided on freehold land.
The lives assigned to other signicant tangible xed assets are Freehold buildings  40 years Leasehold land and buildings  Unexpired portion of lease or 40 years whichever is the shorter Transmission equipment duct  25 years cable  3 to 25 years radio and repeater equipment  2 to 25 years Exchange equipment  2 to 13 years Computers and ofce equipment  3 to 6 years Payphones other network equipment motor vehicles and cableships  2 to 20 years Software  2 to 5 years ix Fixed asset investments Investments in subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures are stated in the balance sheet of the company at cost less amounts written off.
Investments in associates and joint ventures are stated in the group balance sheet at the groups share of their net assets together with any attributable unamortised goodwill on acquisitions arising on or after 1 April 1998.
The groups share of prots less losses of associates and joint ventures is included in the group prot and loss account.
Investments in other participating interests and other investments are stated at cost less amounts written off.
Intangible and tangible xed assets are tested for impairment when an event that might affect asset values has occurred.
Goodwill is also reviewed for impairment at the end of the rst nancial year after acquisition.
An impairment loss is recognised to the extent that the carrying amount cannot be recovered either by selling the asset or by the discounted future cash ows from operating the assets.
Stocks mainly comprise items of equipment held for sale or rental consumable items and work in progress on long term contracts.
Equipment held and consumable items are stated at the lower of cost and estimated net realisable value after provisions for obsolescence.
Work in progress on longterm contracts is stated at cost after deducting payments on account less provisions for any foreseeable losses.
Debtors are stated in the balance sheet at estimated net realisable value.
Net realisable value is the invoiced amount less provisions for bad and doubtful debtors.
Provisions are made specically against debtors where there is evidence of a dispute or an inability to pay.
An additional provision is made based on an analysis of balances by age previous losses experienced and general economic conditions.
Redundancy or leaver costs arising from periodic reviews of staff levels are charged against prot in the year in which the group is demonstrably committed to the employees leaving the group.
If the estimated cost of providing incremental pension benets in respect of employees leaving the group exceeds any total accounting surplus based on the latest actuarial valuation of the groups pension scheme and the amount of the provision for pension liabilities on the balance sheet then the excess estimated cost is charged against prot in the year in which the employees agree to leave the group within redundancy or leaver costs.
The group operates a funded dened benet pension scheme which is independent of the groups nances for the substantial majority of its employees.
Actuarial valuations of the main scheme are carried out by an independent actuary as determined by the trustees at intervals of not more than three years to determine the rates of contribution payable.
The pension cost is determined on the advice of the companys actuary having regard to the results of these valuations.
In any intervening years the actuaries review the continuing appropriateness of the contribution rates.
The cost of providing pensions is charged against prots over employees working lives with the group using the projected unit method.
Variations from this regular cost are allocated on a straightline basis over the average remaining service lives of current employees to the extent that these variations do not relate to the estimated cost of providing incremental pension benets in the circumstances described in xiii above.
Interest is accounted for on the provision or prepayment in the balance sheet which results from differences between amounts recognised as pension costs and amounts funded.
The regular pension cost variations from the regular pension cost described above and interest are all charged within staff costs.
The group also operates dened contribution pension schemes and the prot and loss account is charged with the contributions payable.
Accounting policies BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 73 xv Taxation Full provision is made for deferred taxation on all timing differences which have arisen but have not reversed at the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is regarded as more likely than not that there will be taxable prots from which the underlying timing differences can be deducted.
No deferred tax is provided in respect of any future remittance of earnings of foreign subsidiaries or associates where no commitment has been made to remit such earnings.
The deferred tax balances are not discounted.
Debt instruments are stated at the amount of net proceeds adjusted to amortise any discount over the term of the debt and further adjusted for the effect of currency swaps acting as hedges.
The group uses derivative nancial instruments to reduce exposure to foreign exchange risks and interest rate movements.
The group does not hold or issue derivative nancial instruments for nancial trading purposes.
Criteria to qualify for hedge accounting The group considers its derivative nancial instruments to be hedges when certain criteria are met.
For foreign currency derivatives the instrument must be related to actual foreign currency assets or liabilities or a probable commitment and whose characteristics have been identied.
It must involve the same currency or similar currencies as the hedged item and must also reduce the risk of foreign currency exchange movements on the groups operations.
For interest rate derivatives the instrument must be related to assets or liabilities or a probable commitment such as a future bond issue and must also change the interest rate or the nature of the interest rate by converting a xed rate to a variable rate or vice versa.
Accounting for derivative nancial instruments Principal amounts underlying currency swaps are revalued at exchange rates ruling at the date of the group balance sheet and to the extent that they are not related to debt instruments are included in debtors or creditors.
Interest differentials under interest rate swap agreements used to vary the amounts and periods for which interest rates on borrowings are xed are recognised by adjustment of interest payable.
The forward exchange contracts used to change the currency mix of net debt are revalued to balance sheet rates with net unrealised gains and losses being shown as part of debtors creditors or as part of net debt.
The difference between spot and forward rate for these contracts is recognised as part of net interest payable over the term of the contract.
The forward exchange contracts hedging transaction exposures are revalued at the prevailing forward rate on the balance sheet date with net unrealised gains and losses being shown as debtors and creditors.
Instruments that form hedges against future xedrate bond issues are marked to market.
Gains or losses are deferred until the bond is issued when they are recognised evenly over the term of the bond.
74 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Accounting policies Notes Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items
Total
Total turnover 2 19031  19031 Groups share of joint ventures turnover 3 355  355 Groups share of associates turnover 3 53  53 Group turnover 2 18623  18623 Other operating income 171  171 Operating costs 4 15930 75 16005 Group operating prot loss 2864 75 2789 Groups share of operating loss of joint ventures 5 6 25 31 Groups share of operating prot of associates 5 6 6 Total operating prot loss 2864 100 2764 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 6  358 358 Prot on sale of property xed assets 22  22 Interest receivable 7 265  265 Interest payable 8 1066  1066 Prot on ordinary activities before taxation 2085 258 2343 Tax on prot on ordinary activities 9 539 16 523 Prot on ordinary activities after taxation 1546 274 1820 Minority interests 10 1 1 Prot for the nancial year 1547 274 1821 Dividends 11 883 Retained prot for the nancial year 25 938 Basic earnings per share 12 18.1p 21.4p Diluted earnings per share 12 18.0p 21.2p BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 75 Group prot and loss account for the year ended 31 March 2005 Notes Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items
Total
Total turnover 2 18914  18914 Groups share of joint ventures turnover 3 352  352 Groups share of associates turnover 3 43  43 Group turnover 2 18519  18519 Other operating income 177  177 Operating costs 4 15807 19 15826 Group operating prot loss 2889 19 2870 Groups share of operating loss of joint ventures 5 12 26 38 Groups share of operating prot of associates 5 4 4 Total operating prot loss 2881 45 2836 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 6 434 38 Loss on sale of group undertakings 6  2 2 Prot on sale of property xed assets 14  14 Interest receivable Interest payable 8 1150 89 1239 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation 2013 68 1945 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 9 568 29 539 Prot loss on ordinary activities after taxation 1445 39 1406 Minority interests 10 8 8 Prot loss for the nancial year 1453 39 1414 Dividends 11 732 Retained prot for the nancial year 25 682 Basic earnings per share 12 16.9p 16.4p Diluted earnings per share 12 16.8p 16.3p Restated following adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see note 1 76 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Group prot and loss account for the year ended 31 March 2004 Notes Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items
Total
Total turnover 2 20182  20182 Groups share of joint ventures turnover 3 425  425 Groups share of associates turnover 3 1030  1030 Group turnover 2 18727  18727 Other operating income 215  215 Operating costs 4 16148 218 16366 Group operating prot loss 2794 218 2576 Groups share of operating prot loss of joint ventures 5 31 150 119 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates 5 212 2 210 Total operating prot loss 2975 70 2905 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 6  1705 1705 Loss on sale of group undertakings 6  9 9 Prot on sale of property xed assets 11  11 Interest receivable 7 195  195 Interest payable 8 1341 293 1634 Prot on ordinary activities before taxation 1840 1333 3173 Tax on prot on ordinary activities 9 598 139 459 Prot on ordinary activities after taxation 1242 1472 2714 Minority interests 10 5 7 12 Prot for the nancial year 1237 1465 2702 Dividends 11 560 Retained prot for the nancial year 25 2142 Basic earnings per share 12 14.4p 31.4p Diluted earnings per share 12 14.3p 31.2p Restated following adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see note 1 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 77 Group prot and loss account for the year ended 31 March 2003 2005
Restated
Prot loss for the nancial year Group 1861 1465 2499 Joint ventures 46 54 103 Associates 6 3 100 Total prot for the nancial year 1821 1414 2702 Currency movements arising on consolidation of nonUK Subsidiaries 24 40 18 Joint ventures 3 1 5 Associates 1 1 2 Tax on foreign exchange gains taken to reserves 7 47 16 Total recognised gains and losses for the nancial year 1840 1325 2707 Prior year adjustment note 1 21 Total recognised gains and losses since last annual report 1861 78 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Group statement of total recognised gains and losses for the year ended 31 March 2005 Notes Net cash inow from operating activities 13 5898 5389 6023 Dividends from associates and joint ventures 2 36 Returns on investments and servicing of nance Interest received 374 673 231 Interest paid including nance costs 1252 1200 1737 Net cash outow for returns on investments and servicing of nance 878 527 1506
UK corporation tax paid 319 305 425 NonUK tax paid 13 12 9 Taxation paid 332 317 434 Capital expenditure and nancial investment Purchase of tangible xed assets 3056 2684 2580 Sale of tangible xed assets 111 76 94 Purchase of xed asset investments 2 1 1 Disposal of xed asset investments 539 132 106 Net cash outow for capital expenditure and nancial investment 2408 2477 2381 Free cash ow before acquisitions disposals and dividends 2282 2071 1708 Acquisitions and disposals Purchase of subsidiary undertakings net of 208m cash acquired 2004  1m 2003  13m 426 32 56 Investments in joint ventures 27 29 133 Disposal of subsidiary undertakings  3 Sale of investments in joint ventures and associates 35 1 2916 Net cash outow inow for acquisitions and disposals 418 60 2842 Equity dividends paid 784 645 367 Cash inow before management of liquid resources and nancing 1080 1366 4183 Management of liquid resources 14 587 1123 1729
Issue of ordinary share capital  42 Amounts received in respect of employee share plans 2 Repurchase of ordinary share capital 195 144 New loans 5 1326 20 Repayment of loans 1297 3627 2471 Net decrease in shortterm borrowings   64 Net cash outow from nancing 1485 2445 2473 Increase decrease in cash in the year 182 44 19 Decrease in net debt in the year resulting from cash ows 16 887 1222 4225 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 79 Group cash ow statement for the year ended 31 March 2005 Notes
Fixed assets Intangible assets 17 623 204 Tangible assets 18 15916 15487 Investments in joint ventures 19 Share of gross assets and goodwill 305 496 Share of gross liabilities 225 399 Total investments in joint ventures 80 97 Investments in associates 19 28 24 Other investments 19 7 203 Total investments 19 115 324 Total xed assets 16654 16015 Current assets Stocks 106 89
Falling due within one year 4269 4017 Falling due after more than one year 1118 1172 Total debtors 20 5387 5189 Investments 21 4597 5163 Cash at bank and in hand 206 109 Total current assets 10296 10550 Creditors amounts falling due within one year Loans and other borrowings 22 4498 1271 Other creditors 23 7963 7252 Total creditors amounts falling due within one year 12461 8523 Net current liabilities assets 2165 2027 Total assets less current liabilities 14489 18042 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year Loans and other borrowings 22 8091 12426 Provisions for liabilities and charges Deferred taxation 24 2174 2191 Total provisions for liabilities and charges 2497 2504 Minority interests 50 46 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 25 34 432 432 Share premium account 25 3 2 Capital redemption reserve 25 2 2 Other reserves 25 998 998 Prot and loss account 25 2416 1632 Total equity shareholders funds 25 3851 3066 14489 18042 Restated following adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see note 1 The nancial statements on pages 71 to 122 were approved by the board of directors on 18 May 2005 and were signed on its behalf by Sir Christopher Bland
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director 80 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Group balance sheet as at 31 March 2005 1.
Changes in accounting policy and presentation During the 2005 nancial year the group adopted UITF Abstract 38 Accounting for ESOP trusts and the related amendments to UITF Abstract 17 revised 2003 Employee Share Schemes.
UITF 38 changes the presentation of an entitys own shares held in an ESOP trust from previously being held as assets to being deducted in arriving at shareholders funds.
UITF 17 revised 2003 requires the amounts recognised in the prot and loss account in respect of share awards previously based on the book value of shares held in the ESOP trusts to being based on the fair value of shares at the date the award is made.
An additional charge of 3 million and a credit of 16 million for the 2004 and 2003 nancial years respectively has been made to the group prot and loss account.
The effect on the groups balance sheet at 1 April 2002 has been to reduce xed assets by 177 million to reduce other creditors by 25 million and to reduce shareholders funds by 152 million.
The prior year adjustment in the statement of total recognised gains and losses is 21 million.
Had we not adopted this change the charge to the prot and loss account would have been 18 million higher in the 2005 nancial year.
A small number of changes in the presentation of the notes to the nancial statements have been made and comparative gures have been restated accordingly as explained in the notes where material.
Segmental analysis The group provides telecommunication services principally in the UK and essentially operates as a unitary business.
Its
The turnover of each line of business is derived as follows and BT Retail derives its turnover from the supply of exchange lines and from the calls made over these lines the provision of ICT products and services the leasing of private circuits and other private services the sale and rental of customer premises equipment to the groups UK customers and other lines of business and from its narrowband and broadband internet access products. other BT lines of business and from carrying transit trafc between telecommunications operators. systems integration work and from the xed network operations of the groups European subsidiaries.
The business also derives revenues from providing web hosting facilities to end customers and through BT lines of business.
Segmented information on the lines of business is given below for the years ended 31 March 2005 31 March 2004 and 31 March 2003 as required by the UK accounting standard SSAP 25 and the US accounting standard SFAS No.
SFAS 131.
There is extensive trading between the lines of business and protability is dependent on the transfer price levels.
These intragroup trading arrangements and operating assets are subject to periodic review and have changed in some instances.
Comparative gures have been restated for these and other changes and in certain instances have been determined using apportionments and allocations.
Turnover
Depreciation
Operating
External Internal
Year ended 31 March 2005 m m m m m m BT Retail 12115 447 12562 134 1 1116 BT Wholesale 3812 5167 8979 1909  1940 BT Global Services 2671 3710 6381 584 31 35 Intragroup  9324 9324 Group totals 18623  18623 2856 25 2764
Depreciation
Operating
External Internal
Year ended 31 March 2004 m m m m m m BT Retail 12602 338 12940 163 1 1232 BT Wholesale 3473 5410 8883 1919  1884 BT Global Services 2410 3372 5782 624 37 153 Other  127 Intragroup  9121 9121 Group totals 18519  18519 2936 34 2836 Restated  see note 1 Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 81 2.
Segmental analysis continued
Depreciation
Operating
External Internal
Year ended 31 March 2003 m m m m m m BT Retail 12979 238 13217 202 3 1212 BT Wholesale 3525 5726 9251 1923 1 2069 BT Global Services 2183 3234 5417 632 180 214 Other  162 Intragroup  9199 9199 Group totals 18727  18727 3035 329 2905 Restated  see note 1 Transactions between divisions are at prices set in accordance with those agreed with Ofcom and previously Oftel where the services provided are subject to regulation.
Other transactions are at arms length.
The following tables show the capital expenditure on plant equipment and property the net operating assets or liabilities and the net book value of associates and joint ventures by line of business for the years ended 31 March 2005 and 2004.
Net operating assets comprise tangible and intangible xed assets stocks debtors less creditors excluding loans and other borrowings and provisions for liabilities and charges excluding deferred tax.
Year ended or as at 31 March 2005
Net operating assets liabilities Interest in associates and joint ventures BT Retail 154 50 BT Wholesale 1973 11827 BT Global Services 628 2147 78 Total 3011 13746 108 Year ended or as at 31 March 2004
Net operating assets liabilities Interest in associates and joint ventures BT Retail 118 40 9 BT Wholesale 1809 11940 BT Global Services 479 1291 89 Total 2673 13404 121 Information about geographic areas Turnover with external customers Attributable to UK 16967 17190 17536 Attributable to nonUK countries 1656 1329 1191 Group turnover 18623 18519 18727 Turnover attributable to nonUK countries comprises the external turnover of group companies and branches operating outside the UK.
82 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 2.
Segmental analysis continued Group xed assets are located UK 14734 14538 Europe excluding the UK 1164 1029 Americas 633 305 Asia and Pacic 123 143 Total 16654 16015 Restated  see note 1 Geographical segment analysis in accordance with the requirements of SSAP 25 is as follows Total turnover on basis of origin UK 16973 17198 17544 Europe excluding the UK 1480 1272 2151 Americas 206 151 155 Asia and Pacic 372 293 332 Total 19031 18914 20182 Group turnover on basis of origin UK 16967 17190 17536 Europe excluding the UK 1396 1124 978 Americas 190 151 153 Asia and Pacic 70 54 60 Total 18623 18519 18727 The analysis of turnover by geographical area is stated on the basis of origin.
In an analysis of turnover by destination incoming and transit international calls by country of origin and turnover with nonUK joint ventures and associates would be treated differently but would not lead to a materially different geographical analysis.
Group operating prot loss UK 2905 2996 3224 Europe excluding the UK 167 132 627 Americas 61 9 28 Asia and Pacic 10 3 7 Total 2789 2870 2576 Restated  see note 1 Share of operating losses prots of associates and joint ventures including goodwill amortisation UK  1 2 Europe excluding the UK 43 48 305 Americas   1 Asia and Pacic 18 15 27 Total 25 34 329 Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 83 2.
Segmental analysis continued 2005 2004
Interest in associates and joint ventures
Net operating assets Interest in associates and joint ventures
UK 11599 3 11602 11444 7 11451 Europe excluding the UK 1600  1600 1742 24 1766 Americas  199 Asia and Pacic Total 13746 108 13854 13404 121 13525 Net operating assets liabilities comprise tangible and intangible xed assets stocks debtors less creditors excluding loans and other borrowings and provisions for liabilities and charges excluding deferred tax.
Turnover
Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover comprised Joint ventures 355 352 425 Associates 53 43 1030 Total 408 395 1455 Operating costs Staff costs Wages and salaries 3656 3675 3617 Social security costs 319 316 275 Pension costs note 28 465 404 322 Employee share ownership Total staff costs 4451 4415 4250 Own work capitalised 722 677 583 Depreciation note 18 2834 2921 3011 Amortisation and impairment of goodwill and other intangibles note 17 22 15 24 Payments to telecommunications operators 3725 3963 3940 Other operating costs 5695 5189 5724 Total operating costs 16005 15826 16366 Operating costs included the following Early leaver costs 166 202 276 Research and development 257 334 380 Rental costs relating to operating leases including plant and equipment hire of 14 million 2004  25 million 2003  34 million 326 370 395 Foreign currency losses gains 3 5 12 Amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items comprising Property rationalisation provision 59  198 Rectication costs  30 BT Wholesale bad debt release  23 Total exceptional items 59 7 198 Goodwill amortisation 16 12 20 Total amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items 75 19 218 Restated  see note 1 Amount set aside for the year for allocation of ordinary shares in the company to eligible employees The directors believe that the nature of the groups business is such that the analysis of operating costs required by the Companies Act 1985 is not appropriate.
As required by the Act the directors have therefore adapted the prescribed format so that operating costs are disclosed in a manner appropriate to the groups principal activity.
84 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 5.
Groups share of operating loss prot of associates and joint ventures The groups share of operating loss prot of associates and joint ventures comprised Joint ventures 31 38 119 Associates 6 4 210 Groups share of operating loss prot of associates and joint ventures
Exceptional costs relating to impairment of assets in joint ventures 25 Exceptional costs relating to the impairment of goodwill  26 Exceptional costs relating to the release of surplus exit costs  150 Amortisation of goodwill arising in joint ventures and associates  2 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings In January 2005 the group sold its 4% interest in Intelsat for net proceeds of US120 million 64 million which resulted in a prot on disposal of 46 million.
In December 2004 the group sold its 15.8% interest in Eutelsat SA for net proceeds of 356 million resulting in a prot on disposal of 236 million.
In November 2004 the group completed the sale of its 11.9% shareholding in StarHub Pte Ltd for net proceeds of 77 million resulting in a prot on disposal of 38 million.
Other gains of 38 million were recognised during the year ended 31 March 2005.
The net proceeds received in relation to these disposals was 63 million.
In December 2003 the group sold its 7.8% interest in Inmarsat Ventures plc for total cash consideration of US118 million 67 million realising a prot on disposal of 32 million.
Other gains of 6 million and losses of 2 million were recognised during the year ended 31 March 2004.
The consideration received in relation to these disposals was 6 million.
In the year ended 31 March 2003 disposals of subsidiary undertakings resulted in losses of 9 million the consideration received in relation to these disposals was 3 million.
In January 2003 the group sold its 26% interest in Cegetel Groupe SA to Vivendi Universal SA for consideration of E4000 million 2603 million in cash.
The prot on disposal was 1509 million before the recognition of an exceptional interest charge of 293 million on closing out xed interest rate swaps following receipt of the sale proceeds and includes a writeback of 862 million of goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
In December 2002 the group sold its interest in Blu SpA for consideration of 29 million.
The prot on disposal was 19 million.
In October 2002 the group sold its 2% interest in Mediaset for consideration of 87 million in cash.
The prot on disposal was 14 million.
In May 2002 and November 2002 the group sold its remaining holding of shares in BSkyB received for the exchange of the residual interest in British Interactive Broadcasting for consideration of 192 million recognising a prot of 131 million.
Other gains of 39 million and losses of 7 million were recognised during the year ended 31 March 2003.
These gains and losses included a writeback of 7 million of goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
The consideration received in relation to these disposals was 114 million.
Interest receivable 2005 Income from listed investments 47 13 2 Other interest receivable Joint ventures 9 21 Associates  5 Total interest receivable 265 298 195 Includes an exceptional credit of 34 million in the year ended 31 March 2004 being one off interest recognised on full repayment of loan notes received as part of the original consideration from the disposal of Yell.
Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 85 8.
Interest payable 2005 Interest payable and similar charges in respect of Bank loans and overdrafts 71 87 82 Interest payable on nance leases 58 19 Other borrowings ab 914 1114 1527 Group 1043 1220 1609 Joint ventures 23 19 17 Associates  8 Total interest payable 1066 1239 1634 Includes an exceptional charge of 89 million in the year ended 31 March 2004 being the premium on repurchasing 813 million of the groups issued bonds.
Includes an exceptional charge of 293 million in the year ended 31 March 2003 on the termination of interest rate swap agreements following the receipt of the Cegetel sale proceeds.
Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 2005 United Kingdom Corporation tax at 30% 542 328 447 Prior year adjustments 4 12 NonUK taxation Current 4 37 47 Taxation on the groups share of results of associates and joint ventures 1 81 Prior year adjustments 3  26 Total current taxation 540 365 561 Deferred taxation credit charge at 30% Origination and reversal of timing differences 18 184 29 Prior year adjustments 1 10 73 Total deferred taxation 17 174 102 Total tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 523 539 459 The tax credit relating to exceptional items is 16 million 2004  29 million 2003  139 million.
A tax charge on recognised gains and losses not included in the prot and loss account of 7 million 2004  47 million 2003  16 million related to exchange movements offset in reserves.
Current tax and total tax on prot on ordinary activities differs from the amount computed by applying the corporation tax rate to prot on ordinary activities before taxation.
The differences were attributable to the following factors % % % UK corporation tax rate 30.0 30.0 30.0 Nondeductible depreciation amortisation and impairment 0.2 0.9 0.4 Nondeductible nonUK losses 1.6 1.6 3.3 Lower higher taxes on nonUK prots 0.6 0.2 0.4 Excess depreciation over capital allowances  3.2 3.4 Pension provisions and prepayments 0.7 9.9 3.2 Other timing differences 0.1 2.8 0.7 Lower effective tax on gain on disposal of xed asset investments and group undertakings 4.6 1.3 16.5 Higher effective tax on gain on disposal of non qualifying assets   2.0 Prior year adjustments 0.1  2.0 Other 4.4 3.2 0.8 Current tax  effective corporation tax rate 23.1 18.7 17.7 Deferred taxes on excess depreciation over capital allowances  3.2 3.4 Pension provisions and prepayments 0.7 9.9 3.2 Other timing differences 0.1 2.8 0.7 Prior year adjustments  0.5 2.3 Total tax  effective corporation tax rate 22.3 27.7 14.5 Factors that may affect future tax charges The group operates in countries where the tax rate is different to the UK corporate tax rate primarily the USA the Netherlands the Republic of Ireland Germany and Spain.
As at 31 March 2005 the group had overseas corporate tax losses estimated to be 1 billion which are not recognised as deferred tax assets.
In addition the group has unutilised capital losses estimated to be in excess of 10 billion which were not recognised as deferred tax assets.
86 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 10.
Minority interests 2005 Minority interests in losses prots Group 1 8 4 Associates  8 Total minority interests 1 8 12 Dividends 2005 pence per share pence per share pence per share Interim dividend paid 3.90 3.20 2.2telProposed nal dividend 6.50 5.30 4.2telTotal dividends 10.40 8.50 6.5tel12.
Earnings loss per share The basic earnings loss per share are calculated by dividing the prot for the nancial year attributable to shareholders by the weighted average number of shares in issue after deducting the companys shares held by employee share ownership trusts and treasury shares.
In calculating the diluted earnings loss per share share options outstanding and other potential ordinary shares have been taken into account.
The weighted average number of shares in the years were millions of shares millions of shares millions of shares Basic 8524 8621 8616 Dilutive ordinary shares from share options outstanding and shares held in trust 57 55 52 Total diluted 8581 8676 8668 Options over 207 million shares 2004  259 million 2003  177 million were excluded from the calculation of the total diluted number of shares as they were antidilutive.
The items in the calculation of earnings loss per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items were pence per share pence per share pence per share Attributable to exceptional items and goodwill Goodwill amortisation 0.2 0.1 0.3 16 12 22 Property rationalisation costs 0.7  2.3 59  198 Rectication costs  0.3   30 BT Wholesale bad debts release  0.2   23 Goodwill impairment in associates and joint ventures  0.3   26 Impairment in associates and joint ventures 0.3  25 Release of surplus exit costs   1.8   150 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 4.3 0.4 19.8 358 32 1705 Loss on sale of group undertakings   0.1   9 Finance cost of novating interest rate swaps   3.4   293 Interest receivable on Yell loan notes  0.4   34 Premium on repurchasing bonds  1.1   89 Tax credit 0.2 0.3 1.
Net credit charge attributable to exceptional items and goodwill amortisation 3.3 0.5 17.0 274 39 1465 Basic earnings per shareprot for the nancial year after goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 21.4 16.4 31.4 1821 1414 2702 Less Basic earnings loss per shareprot loss for the nancial year attributable to exceptional items and goodwill amortisation 3.3 0.5 17.0 274 39 1465 Basic earnings per shareprot for the nancial year before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 18.1 16.9 14.4 1547 1453 1237 Restated  see note 1 Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items is provided to help readers evaluate the performance of the group.
Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 87 13.
Reconciliation of operating prot to operating cash ows 2005 Group operating prot 2789 2870 2576 Depreciation 2834 2921 3011 Amortisation and impairment 22 15 24 Increase decrease in stocks 12 6 31 Decrease in debtors 206 414 764 Decrease in creditors 39 159 306 Decrease increase in pension prepayment and increase decrease in pension liabilities 49 655 314 Decrease increase in provisions 12 49 171 Other 61 38 66 Net cash inow from operating activities 5898 5389 6023 Restated  see note 1 Management of liquid resources 2005 Purchase of shortterm investments and payments into shortterm deposits over 3 months 3043 5306 3990 Sale of shortterm investments and withdrawals from shortterm deposits over 3 months 3754 4467 4082 Net movement of shortterm investments and shortterm deposits under 3 months not repayable on demand 124 1962 1821 Net cash inow outow from management of liquid resources 587 1123 1729 Movements in all shortterm investments and deposits not repayable on demand are reported under the heading of management of liquid resources.
Acquisitions and disposals Acquisition of subsidiary companies and businesses
Albacom
Other
Total
Year ended 31 March 2005 m m m m
Cash Deferred 38 1 39 Total In the period since acquisition these businesses have contributed 123 million to turnover and an operating loss of 9 million and are therefore not considered material to be shown separately on the face of the prot and loss account.
Year ended 31 March 2004
Consideration
Cash 33 Deferred 3 Total 36 Year ended 31 March 2003
Other
Total
Consideration
Cash 13 13 Carrying value of Concert global venture 338  338 In addition net cash of 56 million was received in settlement of the unwind of the Concert global venture.
88 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 15.
Acquisitions and disposals continued On 25 February 2005 the group acquired Infonet Services Corporation for total consideration of 520 million including acquisition costs 315 million net of cash in the business.
This gave rise to goodwill of 264 million.
Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value Fixed assets 195 100 95 Current assets 93 19 74 Current liabilities 99 4 95 Provisions for liabilities and charges 4 18 22 Minority interest 1  1 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets 184 133 51 Goodwill 264 Total cost 315 The fair value adjustments are revaluations of the assets and liabilities to reect their fair value.
Since the acquisition was made towards the end of the year ended 31 March 2005 the fair values of the identiable assets and liabilities have been determined on a provisional basis.
Goodwill arising on acquisition of Infonet is being amortised over 20 years.
In the period from 1 April 2004 to 24 February 2005 Infonet generated operating losses after tax of US83 million year to 31 March 2004  US66 million losses.
In December 2004 the group agreed to acquire the 74% interest in Albacom SpA not already held giving BT full ownership for total consideration of 131 million including deferred consideration of 38 million.
The deferred consideration is dependent upon the financial performance of Albacom in the 2009 financial year and the minimum payable is 38 million.
The transaction completed 4 February 2005.
This gave rise to goodwill of 9 million.
Prior to becoming a subsidiary undertaking Albacom SpA was accounted for as a joint venture undertaking.
In accordance with FRS 2 Accounting for Subsidiary Undertakings and in order to give a true and fair view purchased goodwill has been calculated as the sum of the goodwill arising on each purchase of shares in Albacom being the difference at the date of each purchase between the fair value of the consideration given and the fair value of the identiable assets and liabilities attributable to the interest purchased.
This represents a departure from the statutory method under which goodwill is calculated as the difference between cost and fair value on the date that Albacom became a subsidiary undertaking.
The statutory method would not give a true and fair view because it would result in the groups share of Albacoms retained reserves during the period that it was a joint venture undertaking being recharacterised as goodwill.
The effect of this departure is to reduce retained prots by 313 million and to reduce purchased goodwill by 313 million.
Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value Fixed assets 378 11 367 Current assets 211  211 Current liabilities 301 14 315 Longterm debt 139  139 Minority interest 2  2 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets 147 25 122 Goodwill 9 Total cost 131 The fair value adjustments include the elimination of goodwill recorded in the books of Albacom and the revaluation of lease obligations to fair value.
Since the acquisition was made towards the end of the year ended 31 March 2005 the fair values of the identiable assets and liabilities have been determined on a provisional basis.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition of Albacom is being amortised over 20 years.
In the period from 1 April 2004 to 3 February 2005 Albacom generated operating losses after tax of E195 million year to 31 March 2004  E263 million losses.
Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 89 15.
Acquisitions and disposals continued During the year ended 31 March 2005 the acquisition of other subsidiary companies and businesses was principally BIC Systems Group Ltd and the consideration given comprised Book value and fair value Fixed assets 1 Current assets 4 Current liabilities 2 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets 3 Goodwill 16 Total cost 19 On 5 January 2004 the group acquired the UK trade and assets of BT Expedite Limited formerly NSB Retail plc for consideration of 17 million 2 million deferred.
The net liabilities acquired amounted to 1 million giving rise to goodwill of 18 million which is being amortised over a period of 5 years.
On 15 March 2004 the group acquired controlling interest in Transcomm plc for consideration of 15 million.
The groups share of the net assets acquired was 2 million giving rise to goodwill of 13 million which is being amortised over a period of 13 years.
On 13 January 2004 the group took full control of Siosistemi SpA for consideration of 4 million including deferred consideration of 1 million.
Net assets of 1 million were acquired giving rise to goodwill of 4 million which is being amortised over a period of 10 years.
On completion of the unwind of Concert on 1 April 2002 the former Concert businesses customer accounts and networks were returned to the two parent companies with BT and ATandT each taking ownership of substantially those parts of the Concert global venture originally contributed by them.
As part of the settlement with ATandT for the unwind of the Concert global venture BT received net cash of US72 million 56 million.
This net settlement included the receipt of US350 million reflecting the allocation of the businesses and the payment of US278 million to achieve the equal division of specified working capital and other liability balances.
The results of the acquired businesses both pre and post acquisition cannot be separately identified and therefore cannot be reported.
Book value and fair value Fixed assets 398 Current assets 301 Current liabilities 405 Provisions for liabilities and charges 2 Longterm debt 10 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets 282 Net receivable from ATandT 56 Total net assets acquired 338
Total cost 338 The consideration was satised through the unwind of the Concert global venture the carrying value of which was 338 million.
Accordingly there is no further prot or loss on the unwind and no goodwill on the acquisition.
During the year ended 31 March 2003 the acquisition of other subsidiary companies and businesses and the consideration given comprised Book value and fair value Fixed assets 1 Current liabilities 1 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets Goodwill 13 Total cost 13 Acquisition of associates and joint ventures On 31 July 2003 the groups effective interest in Albacom SpA increased by 3% to 26%.
Disposal of subsidiaries In the year ended 31 March 2003 BT disposed of subsidiaries with net assets of 12 million.
Consideration amounted to 3 million resulting in a loss on disposal of 9 million.
90 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 16.
Net debt At 1 April Cash ow
Other
Currency movement At 31 March Analysis of net debt Cash in hand and at bank 109 97    206 Overnight deposits 292 85    377 Bank overdrafts 2  2 Other current asset investments 4871 587  64  4220 Shortterm investments and cash less bank overdrafts 5270 405  64  4801 Debt due within one year excluding bank overdrafts 1269 1215 20 4422  4496 Debt due after one year 12426 77 139 4399 2 8091 Total debt excluding bank overdrafts 13695 1292 159 23 2 12587 Net debt 8425 887 159 87 2 7786 Reconciliation of net cash ow to movement in net debt Increase decrease in cash in the year 182 44 19 Cash outow from decrease in debt 1292 2301 2515 Cash outow inow from increase in liquid resources 587 1123 1729 Decrease in net debt resulting from cash ows 887 1222 4225 Currency and translation movements 2 4 67 Increase decrease in net debt on acquisition or disposal of subsidiary undertakings 159 1 13 Other noncash movements 87 69 43 Decrease in net debt in the year 639 1148 4128 Net debt at 1 April 8425 9573 13701 Net debt at 31 March 7786 8425 9573 Intangible xed assets
Telecommunication licences and other
Cost
1 April 2004 2585 9 2594 Acquisitions 289 192 481 Disposals 1  1 Currency movements 3 1 2 Total cost at 31 March 2005 2870 202 3072
1 April 2004 2383 7 2390 Acquisitions 3838 Charge for the year 16 6 22 Disposals 1  1 Total amortisation at 31 March 2005 2398 51 2449 Net book value at 31 March tel623 Net book value at 31 March Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 91 18.
Tangible xed assets Land and buildings Plant and equipment
Total
Cost
1 April 2004 929 35579 820 37328 Acquisitions of subsidiary undertakings Additions 9 601 2394 3004 Transfers 49 2218 2267 Disposals and adjustments 120 1067 15 1202 Currency movements Total cost at 31 March 2005 965 38108 956 40029
1 April 2004 340 21566  21906 Acquisitions of subsidiary undertakings 41 489  530 Charge for the year 45 2789  2834 Disposals and adjustments 66 1053  1119 Currency movements 1 33  34 Total depreciation at 31 March 2005 361 23824  24185 Net book value at 31 March 2005 604 14284 956 15844 Engineering stores   72 72 Total tangible xed assets at 31 March 2005 604 14284 1028 15916 Net book value at 31 March 2004 589 14013 820 15422 Engineering stores   65 65 Total tangible xed assets at 31 March 2004 589 14013 885 15487 The net book value of land and buildings comprised Freehold 373 363 Long leases over 50 years unexpired 50 13 Short leases 181 213 Total net book value of land and buildings 604 589 The net book value of assets held under finance leases included within plant and equipment was 503 million at 31 March 2005 2004  620 million.
The depreciation charge for the year to 31 March 2005 on those assets was 154 million 2004  174 million.
Expenditure on tangible xed assets comprised Plant and equipment Transmission equipment 1488 1324 Exchange equipment 143 150 Other network equipment 648 585 Computers and ofce equipment 312 205 Motor vehicles and other 349 316 Land and buildings 64 73 3004 2653 Increase in engineering stores 7 20 Total expenditure on tangible xed assets 3011 2673 92 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 19.
Fixed asset investments Interests in associates and joint ventures
Loans
Share of post acquisition losses
Total
Cost
1 April 2004 as previously stated 608 28 302 405 739 Prior period adjustment note 1  53 53 1 April 2004 as restated 608 28 302 352 686 Additions 1 28  2 31 Disposals 6  4 228 230 Transfer to subsidiaries 276 49 310  15 Share of losses for the year   31  31 Currency movements 2 1  1 4 Other movements  2 1  1 Total cost at 31 March 2005 329 6 18 127 444 Provisions and amounts written off 1 April 2004 213   149 362 Disposals 4   29 33 Total provisions and amounts written off at 31 March 2005 209   120 329 Net book value at 31 March 2005 120 6 18 7 115 Net book value at 31 March 2004 395 28 302 203 324 Subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures Details of the principal operating subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates are set out on page 122.
Associates and joint ventures 2005
Goodwill  1 Share of other net assets 28 23 Total associates 28 24 Joint ventures Loans 6 28 Share of other net assets 74 69 Total joint ventures 80 97 Net book value at 31 March 108 121 The groups proportionate share of its associates and joint ventures assets and liabilities in aggregate at 31 March was as follows Fixed assets 219 347 Current assets 118 149 Current liabilities 137 217 Net current liabilities 19 68 Longterm liabilities 98 187 Share of net assets 102 92 The groups proportionate share of its associates and joint ventures losses less prots before taxation excluding minority interests totalled 39 million losses less prots 2004  51 million prots less losses 2003  310 million and its share of their losses less prots attributable to shareholders excluding minority interests totalled 40 million for the year ended 31 March 2005 losses less prots 2004  51 million prots less losses 2003  229 million.
Other investments In the group balance sheet at 31 March 2005 listed investments were held with a book value of nil 2004 22 million and a market value of nil 2004  20 million.
Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 93 20.
Debtors 2005 Trade debtors 1927 2126 Amounts owed by joint ventures trading 1 5 Other debtors 495 327 Accrued income 1423 1392 Pension fund prepayment 1118 1172 Other prepayments 423 167 Total debtors 5387 5189 Trade debtors are stated after deducting 338 million 2004  345 million for doubtful debts.
The amount charged to the group profit and loss account for doubtful debts for the year ended 31 March 2005 was 150 million 2004  136 million net of an exceptional credit of 23 million 2003  264 million.
Falling due after more than one year.
Current asset investments Listed investments 1106 1247 Other shortterm deposits and investments 3491 3916 Total current asset investments 4597 5163 Market value of listed investments 1106 1247 Included within other shortterm deposits and investments in the 2004 financial year is 144 million invested with a swap counterparty.
The counterparty had security over this investment in the event of BT defaulting on the swap.
Loans and other borrowings 2005 US dollar 8.875% notes 2030 minimum 8.625% 1604 1686 5.75% bonds tel3.5% indexed linked notes tel8.625% bonds tel7.75% notes 2016 minimum 7.5% Euro 7.125% notes 2011 minimum 6.875% US dollar 8.375% notes 2010 minimum 8.125% 1754 1795 US dollar 8.765% bonds telEuro 11.875% senior notes 2009  3 US dollar convertible 2008 0.75% 88 97 US dollar 7% notes tel12.25% bonds tel7.375% notes 2006 minimum 7.125% Euro 6.375% notes 2006 minimum 6.125% 1923 1861 US dollar 7.875% notes 2005 minimum 7.624% 1861 1902 US dollar 6.75% bonds 2004  597 Total listed bonds debentures and notes 11172 11875 Lease nance 993 1099 Bank loans due 20072009 average effective interest rate 9.7% 240 480 Floating rate note 20052009 average effective interest rate 3.8% 90 101 Floating rate loan 2006 average effective interest rate 5.6% 92 140 Bank overdrafts and other shortterm borrowings 2 2 Total loans and other borrowings 12589 13697 The interest rate payable on these notes will be subject to adjustment from time to time if either Moodys or Standard and Poors SandP reduces the rating ascribed to the groups senior unsecured debt below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of SandP.
In this event the interest rate payable on the notes and the spread applicable to the floating notes will be increased by 0.25% for each ratings category adjustment by each ratings agency.
In addition if Moodys or SandP subsequently increase the rating ascribed to the groups senior unsecured debt then the interest rate then payable on notes and the spread applicable to the floating notes will be decreased by 0.25% for each rating category upgrade by each rating agency but in no event will the interest rate be reduced below the minimum interest rate reflected in the table above.
The interest rates payable on loans and borrowings disclosed above reect the coupons on the underlying issued loans and borrowings and not the interest rates achieved through applying associated currency and interest rate swaps.
94 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 22.
Loans and other borrowings continued Apart from the lease nance all borrowings at 31 March 2005 are unsecured.
Lease nance is repayable by instalments.
Repayments fall due as follows Within one year or on demand 4498 1271 Between one and two years 788 4361 Between two and three years 849 777 Between three and four years 98 854 Between four and ve years 275 100 After ve years 6081 6334 Total due for repayment after more than one year 8091 12426 Total loans and other borrowings 12589 13697 Other creditors 2005 Trade creditors 2921 2307 Amounts owed to joint ventures trading 1 1 Corporation taxes 645 441 Other taxation and social security 468 448 Other creditors 1041 1365 Accrued expenses 719 704 Deferred income 1617 1532 Dividends payable 551 454 Total other creditors 7963 7252 Restated  see note 1 Provisions for liabilities and charges Provisions for liabilities and charges excluding deferred taxation
Pension provisions
Total
Balances at 1 April Acquisition of subsidiaries  7 15 22 Charged against prot for the year Unwind of discount 3   3 Utilised in the year 63 1 18 82 Total provisions at 31 March Property provisions comprise amounts provided for obligations to complete nearly finished new properties and remedial work to be undertaken on properties and the onerous lease provision on rationalisation of the groups London office portfolio.
The provisions will be utilised over the remaining lease periods.
Provision for unfunded pension obligations which will be utilised over the remaining lives of the beneficiaries.
Other provisions include amounts provided for legal or constructive obligations arising from insurance claims and litigation which will be utilisedas the obligations are settled.
Deferred taxation Deferred tax is provided for in full on certain timing differences.
BT does not discount the provision.
Balance at 1 April 2004 2191 Charge against prot for the year 17 Total deferred tax provisions at 31 March 2005 2174 Tax effect of timing differences due to Excess capital allowances 1941 1960 Pension prepayment 329 335 Other 96 104 Total provision for deferred taxation 2174 2191 Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 95 25.
Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds
Share premium account
Other
Prot and loss account
Balances at 1 April 2002 as previously stated 434 2  1025 1819 358 Prior period adjustment note 1   152 152 1 April 2002 as restated 434 2  1025 1971 510 Goodwill previously written off to reserves taken back to the prot and loss account Employee share option schemes  0.2 million shares issued note 31 Transfer between reserves Currency movements including 106 million net movements in respect of foreign currency borrowings Consideration received on employee share option plans     27 27 Amounts credited in respect of employee share plans     48 48 Prot for the year as restated     2702 2702 Dividends 6.5p per ordinary share     560 560 Balances at 1 April 2003 as restated 434 2  998 1147 2581 Purchase of own shares shares cancelled 2  2  64 64 shares held as treasury shares     80 80 Currency movements including 133 million net movements in respect of foreign currency borrowings Amounts credited in respect of employee share plans     36 36 Prot for the year as restated     1414 1414 Dividends 8.5p per ordinary share     732 732 Balances at 1 April 2004 as restated 632 3066 Purchase of own shares held as treasury shares Currency movements including 27 million net movements in respect of foreign currency borrowings Arising on share issues  1    1 Amounts credited in respect of employee share plans     22 22 Prot for the year     1821 1821 Dividends 10.4p per ordinary share     883 883 Balances at 31 March  2416 3851 Aggregate goodwill at 31 March 2005 in respect of acquisitions completed prior to 1 April 1998 of 385 million 2004  385 million 2003  385 million has been written off against retained earnings in accordance with the groups accounting policy.
The goodwill written off against retained earnings will be charged in the profit and loss account on the subsequent disposal of the business to which it related.
Release of statutory reserves in subsidiary undertakings on cessation of associated activities.
The cumulative foreign currency translation adjustment which increased retained earnings at 31 March 2005 was 152 million 2004  133 million 2003  222 million.
During the year ended 31 March 2005 the company repurchased 101280000 2004  80571000 of its own shares of 5p each representing 1% 2004  1% of the calledup share capital for an aggregate consideration of 195 million 2004  144 million.
At 31 March 2005 134497000 shares 2004  44349000 shares with an aggregate nominal value of 7 million are held as treasury shares at cost.
Of the total shares repurchased during the year ended 31 March 2004 36222000 shares with an aggregate nominal value of 2 million were cancelled immediately.
Related party transactions In the year ended 31 March 2005 the groups turnover with its associates and joint ventures amounted to nil 2004 1 million 2003  3 million and the group purchased 7 million 2004  60 million 2003  69 million in services and products from these undertakings.
The amount of debt outstanding with these undertakings at 31 March 2005 was 6 million 2004  28 million.
The maximum debt outstanding during the year was 40 million 2004  43 million.
As at the latest practicable date 13 May 2005 the amount of debt outstanding was 6 million.
There were a number of transactions during the year between the company and its subsidiary undertakings which are eliminated on consolidation and therefore not disclosed.
Financial commitments and contingent liabilities Contracts placed for capital expenditure not provided in the accounts 735 879 Operating lease payments payable within one year of the balance sheet date were in respect of leases expiring Within one year 11 8 Between one and ve years 43 29 After ve years 321 330 Total payable within one year 375 367 96 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 27.
Financial commitments and contingent liabilities continued Future minimum operating lease payments for the group at 31 March 2005 were as follows 2005 Payable in the year ending 31 Marchtel 376tel 373 2010 370 Thereafter 8587 Total future minimum operating lease payments 10457 Operating lease commitments were mainly in respect of leases of land and buildings.
At 31 March 2005 other than disclosed below there were no contingent liabilities or guarantees other than those arising in the ordinary course of the groups business and on these no material losses are anticipated.
The group has insurance cover to certain limits for major risks on property and major claims in connection with legal liabilities arising in the course of its operations.
Otherwise the group generally carries its own risks.
The group has provided guarantees relating to certain leases entered into by O2 UK Limited prior to its demerger with O2 on 19 November 2001.
O2 plc has given BT a counterindemnity for these guarantees.
The maximum likely exposure is US76 million 41 million as at 31 March 2005 although this could increase by a further US563 million 298 million in the event of credit default in respect of amounts used to defease future lease obligations.
The guarantee lasts until O2 UK Ltd has discharged all its obligations which is expected to be when the lease ends on 30 January 2017.
The company does not believe there are any pending legal proceedings which would have a material adverse effect on the nancial position or results of operations of the group.
Proceedings have been initiated in Italy against 21 defendants including a former BT employee in connection with the Italian UMTS auction.
Blu in which BT held a minority interest participated in that auction process.
The hearings are continuing in Rome.
If the proceedings are successful BT could be held liable with others for any damages.
The company has concluded that it is not appropriate to make a provision in respect of any such potential claim.
The European Commission is formally investigating the way the UK Government has set BTs property rates and those paid by Kingston Communications.
The Commission is examining whether the Government has complied with EC Treaty rules on state aid in assessing BTs rates.
BTs rates were set by the Valuation Ofce after lengthy discussions based on well established principles in a transparent process.
In BTs view any allegation of state aid is groundless and BT is condent that the Government will demonstrate the fairness of the UK ratings system.
A nding against HM Government could result in BT having to repay any amount of state aid it may be determined to have received.
The company has concluded that it is not appropriate to make a provision in respect of any such potential nding.
Pension costs
The group continues to account for pension costs in accordance with UK Statement of Standard Accounting Practice
24 Pension Costs SSAP 24.
In addition disclosures have been presented in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard No.
17 Retirement Benets FRS 17.
The group offers retirement plans to its employees.
The groups main scheme the BT Pension Scheme BTPS is a dened benet scheme where the benets are based on employees length of service and nal pensionable pay.
The
BTPS is funded through a legally separate trustee administered fund.
This scheme has been closed to new entrants since 31 March 2001 and replaced by a dened contribution scheme.
Under this dened contribution scheme the prot and loss charge represents the contribution payable by the group based upon a xed percentage of employees pay.
The total pension costs of the group expensed within staff costs in the year was 465 million 2004  404 million 2003  322 million of which 430 million 2004  376 million 2003  306 million related to the groups main dened benet pension scheme the BTPS.
The increase in the pension cost in the 2005 nancial year reects the introduction of Smart Pensions a salary sacrice scheme under which employees elect to stop making employee contributions and for the company to make additional contributions in return for a reduction in gross contractual pay.
As a result there has been a switch between wages and salaries and pension costs of 99 million in the year.
The increase in the pension cost in the 2004 nancial year reects the amortisation charge for the pension decit partly offset by a reduction in the number of active members of the BTPS and the interest credit relating to the balance sheet prepayment.
This total pension cost includes the cost of providing enhanced pension benets to leavers which amounted to nil 2004  1 million 2003  60 million.
The pension cost applicable to the groups main dened contribution schemes in the year ended 31 March 2005 was 11 million 2004  7 million 2003  4 million and 1.2 million 2004  0.7 million 2003  0.4 million of contributions to the schemes were outstanding at 31 March 2005.
The group occupies four properties owned by the scheme on which an annual rental of 7 million is payable.
The BTPS assets are invested in UK and overseas equities UK and overseas properties xed interest and index linked securities deposits and shortterm investments.
At 31 March 2005 the UK equities included 17 million 2004  33 million 2003  37 million ordinary shares of the company with a market value of 36 million 2004  58 million 2003  58 million.
Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 97 28.
Pension costs continued BT Pension Scheme Funding valuation A triennial valuation is carried out for the independent scheme trustees by a professionally qualied independent actuary using the projected unit method.
The purpose of the valuation is to design a funding plan to ensure that present and future contributions should be sufcient to meet future liabilities.
The triennial valuation as at 31 December 2002 forms the basis of determining the groups pension fund contributions for the year ending 31 March 2005 and future periods until the next valuation is completed.
The funding valuation is performed at 31 December because this is the nancial year end of the BTPS.
The valuation basis for funding purposes is broadly as follows and scheme assets are valued at market value at the valuation date and and scheme liabilities are measured using a projected unit method and discounted at the estimated rate of return reecting the assets of the scheme.
The last three triennial valuations were determined using the following longterm assumptions Real rates per annum Nominal rates per annum valuation % valuation % valuation % valuation % valuation % valuation % Return on existing assets relative to market values 4.52 2.38 3.80 7.13 5.45 7.95 after allowing for an annual increase in dividends of 1.00 1.00 0.75 3.53 4.03 4.78 Return on future investments 4.00 4.00 4.25 6.60 7.12 8.42 Average increase in retail price index    2.50 3.00 4.00 Average future increases in wages and salaries 1.50 1.75 1.75 4.04 4.80 5.82 Average increase in pensions    2.50 3.00 3.754.00 There is a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 1.25% for the first three years.
The mortality assumption reects improvements in life expectancy since the 1999 valuation and incorporates further future improvements.
The assumed rate of investment return salary increases and mortality all have a signicant effect on the funding valuation.
A 0.25 percentage point change in these assumptions would have the following effects on the funding decit Impact on funding decit
Decrease bn 0.25 percentage point change in Investment return 0.9 0.9 Wage and salary increases 0.2 0.2 An additional year of life expectancy would result in a 0.7 billion increase in the decit.
At 31 December 2002 the assets of the BTPS had a market value of 22.8 billion 1999  29.7 billion and were sufcient to cover 91.6% 1999  96.8% of the benets accrued by that date after allowing for expected future increases in wages and salaries but not taking into account the costs of providing incremental pension benets for employees leaving under release schemes since that date.
This represents a funding decit of 2.1 billion compared to 1.0 billion at 31 December 1999.
The funding valuation uses conservative assumptions whereas had the valuation been based on the actuarys view of the median estimate basis the funding decit would have been reduced to 0.4 billion.
Although the market value of equity investments had fallen the investment income and contributions received by the scheme exceeded the benets paid by 0.3 billion in the year ended 31 December 2002.
As a result of the triennial funding valuation the group agreed to make employers contributions at a rate of 12.2% of pensionable pay from April 2003 and annual deciency payments of 232 million.
This compared to the employers contribution rate of 11.6% and annual deciency payments of 200 million that were determined under the 1999 funding valuation.
In the year ended 31 March 2005 the group made regular contributions of 376 million 2004  284 million 2003  278 million and additional special contributions for enhanced pension benets to leavers in the year ended 31 December 2003 of 6 million 2004  130 million 2003  129 million and deciency contributions of nil 2004 612 million 2003  200 million as a result of the early payment of 380 million made in the 2004 nancial year that was scheduled for payment in subsequent years.
Under the terms of the trust deed that governs the BTPS the group is required to have a funding plan that should address the decit over a maximum period of 20 years whilst the agreed funding plan addresses the decit over a period of 15 years.
The group will continue to make deciency payments until the decit is made good.
The BTPS was closed to new entrants on 31 March 2001 and the age prole of active members will consequently increase.
Under the projected unit method the current service cost as a proportion of the active members pensionable salaries is expected to increase as the members of the scheme approach retirement.
Despite the scheme being closed to new entrants the projected payment prole extends over more than 60 years.
98 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 28.
Pension costs continued SSAP 24 accounting valuation The SSAP 24 valuation is broadly on the following basis and scheme assets are valued at market value and and scheme liabilities are measured using the projected unit method and discounted at the estimated rate of return reecting the assets of the scheme.
The pension cost for the 2003 nancial year was based on the SSAP 24 valuation at 31 March 2000.
At 31 March 2000 there was a SSAP 24 decit of 0.2 billion and the regular cost for the 2003 and 2002 nancial years was 11.6% of pensionable salaries.
The SSAP 24 valuation at 31 March 2000 was based on the same assumptions as the December 1999 funding valuation with the exception that over the long term it has been assumed that the return on the existing assets of the scheme relative to market values would be a nominal 5.6% per annum which equates to a real return of 2.5% per annum.
The pension costs for the 2005 and 2004 nancial years were based upon the SSAP 24 valuation at 31 March 2003.
At 31 March 2003 there was a SSAP 24 decit of 1.4 billion before taking account of the balance sheet prepayment and the regular cost is 11.3% of pensionable salaries.
The SSAP 24 valuation at 31 March 2003 is based on the 31 December 2002 funding valuation rolled forward and uses the same assumptions as set out above with the following exceptions and return on existing assets is assumed to be a nominal 7.1% per annum which equates to a real return of 4.7% and average increase in retail price index is assumed to be 2.25% per annum and and the average future increases in wages and salaries is assumed to include a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 0.75% for the rst three years before returning to 1.5%.
The cumulative difference since the adoption of SSAP 24 between the cash contributions paid by the group to the pension scheme and the prot and loss charge is reected on the balance sheet.
The cumulative cash contributions exceed the prot and loss charge and the resulting difference is shown as a prepayment on the balance sheet.
At 31 March 2005 the prepayment was 1118 million 2004  1172 million.
The pension charge to the prot and loss account will also include the amortisation of the combined pension fund position and pension prepayment over the average remaining service lives of scheme members which amounts to 13 years and the cost of enhanced pension benets provided to leavers.
FRS 17  Retirement benets The group continues to account for pensions in accordance with SSAP 24.
Full implementation of FRS 17 has been deferred by the Accounting Standards Board and would have applied to the group for the 2006 nancial year.
However in the 2006 nancial year the group will adopt International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS.
The requirements for disclosure under FRS 17 remain in force between its issue and adoption of IFRS and the required information is set out below.
FRS 17 species how key assumptions should be derived and applied.
These assumptions are often different to the assumptions adopted by the pension scheme actuary and trustees in determining the funding position of pension schemes.
The accounting requirements under FRS 17 are broadly as follows and scheme assets are valued at market value at the balance sheet date and scheme liabilities are measured using a projected unit method and discounted at the current rate of return on high quality corporate bonds of equivalent term to the liability and and movement in the scheme surplusdecit is split between operating charges and nancing items in the prot and loss account and in the statement of total recognised gains and losses actuarial gains and losses.
The nancial assumptions used to calculate the BTPS liabilities under FRS 17 at 31 March 2005 are Real rates per annum Nominal rates per annum % % % % % % Average future increases in wages and salaries 1.00 1.00 1.50 3.73 3.63 3.78 Average increase in pensions in payment and deferred pensions   2.70 2.60 2.25 Rate used to discount scheme liabilities 2.63 2.83 3.08 5.40 5.50 5.40 Ination  average increase in retail price index   2.70 2.60 2.25 There is a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 0.75% for the first year 2004  two years 2003  three years.
Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 99 28.
Pension costs continued The expected nominal rate of return and fair values of the assets of the BTPS at 31 March were 31 March 2005 31 March 2004 31 March 2003 Expected long term rate of return per annum Asset fair value Expected long term rate of return per annum Asset fair value Expected long term rate of return per annum Asset fair value % bn % % bn % % bn % NonUK equities 8.0 9.0 30 8.2 8.1 30 8.2 6.4 30 Fixedinterest securities 5.4 4.6 16 5.3 4.0 15 5.2 3.1 14 Indexlinked securities 4.4 2.8 10 4.4 2.3 9 4.3 1.7 8 Cash and other 4.0   4.0   4.0 0.4 1 The longterm expected rate of return on investments does not affect the level of the decit but does affect the level of the expected return on assets within the net nance cost charged to the prot and loss account under FRS 17.
The net pension decit set out below under FRS 17 is as if this standard was fully applied.
The fair value of the BTPS assets the present value of the BTPS liabilities based on the nancial assumptions set out above and the resulting decit together with those of unfunded pension liabilities at 31 March 2005 and 31 March 2004 are shown below.
The fair value of the BTPS assets is not intended to be realised in the short term and may be subject to signicant change before it is realised.
The present value of the liabilities is derived from longterm cash ow projections and is thus inherently uncertain.
31 March 2005 31 March 2004
Present value of liabilities
Assets
Present value of liabilities
BTPS 29550 34270 4720 26900 32000 5100 Other liabilities 26 87 61 3636 Total decit 4781 5136 Deferred tax asset at 30% 1434 1541 Net pension liability 3347 3595 If the above amounts had been recognised in the nancial statements the groups net assets and prot and loss reserve at 31 March would be as follows Net assets deciency Net assets as reported 3851 3066 SSAP 24 pension prepayment net of deferred tax 776 820 SSAP 24 pension provision net of deferred tax 31 25 Net pension liability under FRS 17 3347 3595 Net deciency including net pension liability 241 1324 Prot and loss reserve Prot and loss reserve as reported 2416 1632 SSAP 24 pension prepayment net of deferred tax 776 820 SSAP 24 pension provision net of deferred tax 31 25 Net pension liability under FRS 17 3347 3595 Prot and loss reserve including net pension liability 1676 2758 Restated  see note 1 100 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 28.
Pension costs continued On the basis of the above assumptions and in compliance with FRS 17 the amounts that would have been charged to the consolidated prot and loss account and the statement of total recognised gains and losses for the year ended 31 March 2005 would be as follows Analysis of amounts that would be charged to operating prot on an FRS 17 basis Current service cost 540 438 Past service cost  1 Total operating charge 540 439 Amount that would be charged credited to net interest payable on an FRS 17 basis Expected return on pension scheme assets 1918 1560 Interest on pension scheme liabilities 1720 1615 Net nance income expense 198 55 Amount that would be charged to prot before taxation on an FRS 17 basis 342 494 Analysis of the amount that would be recognised in the consolidated statement of total recognised gains and losses on an FRS 17 basis Actual return less expected return on pension scheme assets 1664 4130 Experience losses arising on pension scheme liabilities 437 290 Changes in assumptions underlying the present value of the pension scheme liabilities 933 500 Actuarial gain recognised 294 3340 The net pension cost of 342 million for the year ended 31 March 2005 2004  494 million under FRS 17 is 123 million lower 2004  90 million higher than the prot and loss charge recognised under SSAP 24.
The movements in the net pension liability on an FRS 17 basis during the year were Decit at 1 April 5136 9033 Current service cost 540 438 Contributions 413 1051 Past service costs  1 Other nance income expense 198 55 Acquisitions 10 Actuarial gain recognised 294 3340 Decit at 31 March 4781 5136 Net pension liability post tax at 31 March 3347 3595 The history of experience gains losses which would have been recognised under FRS 17 weretel Difference between expected and actual return on scheme assets Amount m 1664 4130 6995 Percentage of scheme assets 5.6% 15.4% 32.5% Experience gains and losses on scheme liabilities Amount m 437 290 1056 Percentage of the present value of scheme liabilities 1.3% 0.9% 3.5% Total amount recognised in statement of total recognised gains and losses Amount m 294 3340 7599 Percentage of the present value of scheme liabilities 0.9% 10.4% 24.9% Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 101 29.
Directors emoluments The emoluments of the directors for the year ended 31 March 2005 and the benets received under the longterm incentive plans were in summary as follows Salaries 3237 3150 3212 Performancerelated and special bonus 1449 2074 2309 Deferred bonus in shares 600 1037 1484 Other benets 419 467 644 5705 6728 7649 Payments to nonexecutive directors 391 337 294 Total emoluments 6096 7065 7943 Gain on the exercise of share options Value of shares vested under the Retention Share Plan 2132 412 411 More detailed information concerning directors remuneration shareholdings pension entitlements share options and other longterm incentive plans is shown in the audited part of the report on directors remuneration on pages 62 to 68.
People employedtel Year end
Year end
Year end
Number of employees in the group Employee share plans The company has an employee share investment plan and savingsrelated share option plans for its employees and those of participating subsidiaries further share option plans for selected group employees and an employee stock purchase plan for employees in the United States.
It also has several share plans for executives.
Share option schemes On the demerger of O2 BTs share option plans ceased to operate and were replaced by similar BT Group Employee Sharesave plans and the BT Group Global Share Option Plan.
The BT Group Legacy Option Plan was operated on 17 December 2001 following the scheme of arrangement and demerger in November 2001.
Replacement unapproved options over BT Group shares were granted to all participants in the executive option plans who had released their options over British Telecommunications plc shares.
The value of the replacement options was determined by averaging the combined prices of BT Group plc and O2 plc shares over the 20 dealing days following the demerger on 19 November 2001.
This resulted in a factor of 1.3198 being applied to the former option over British Telecommunications plc shares in order to give the number of BT Group shares under the new option.
The option prices of the original options were also adjusted to take account of the different number of shares under option.
102 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 31.
Employee share plans continued In the year ended 31 March 2005 options over 31 million shares were granted under the BT Group Global Share Option Plan.
The options will be exercisable subject to continued employment and meeting corporate performance targets on the third anniversary of the date of grant.
Options outstanding under these share option plans at 31 March 2005 and 2004 together with their exercise prices and dates were as follows Normal dates of exercise Option price per share millions Option price per share millions BT Group Employee Sharesave plans 2009 146p 71 Total 262 233 BT Group Legacy Option Plan 20012011 318p602p 15 318p602p 16 Total 15 16 BT Group Global Share Option Plan 20042014 176p199.5p 59 176p199.5p 63 20052012 163p263p 51 163p263p 61 20062014 176p199.5p 51 176p199.5p 54 20072015 179p215p 30 Total 191 178 Total outstanding options 468 427 The option prices of shares under the BT Group Legacy Option Plan were adjusted at the time of the demerger as detailed on page 102.
The weighted average fair value of share options granted during the year ended 31 March 2005 has been estimated on the date of grant using a binomial option pricing model.
The following weighted average assumptions were used in that model an expected life extending one month later than the rst exercise date estimated annualised dividend yield of approximately 5% 2004  5% 2003  5% risk free interest rates of approximately 5% 2004  4% 2003  5% and expected volatility of approximately 25% 2004  25% 2003  40%.
The weighted average fair value of the share options granted in the year ended 31 March 2005 was 41p 2004  42p 2003  55p for Sharesave options exercisable three years after the date of grant and 52p 2004  51p 2003  72p for Sharesave options exercisable ve years after the date of grant.
The BT Group Global Share Option Plan and the BT Group Incentive Share Plan an executive share plan were valued using Monte Carlo simulations.
The weighted average fair value of options granted under the BT Group Global Share Option Plan has been estimated as 36p.
The weighted average fair value of awards of shares granted under the Incentive Share Plan has been estimated as 98p.
The total value of share options granted by BT in the year ended 31 March 2005 was 77 million 2004  136 million 2003  41 million.
In accordance with UK accounting practices no compensation expense is recognised for options granted where the exercise price equals the market price at date of grant or options granted under approved Sharesave plans.
See United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles  IV Accounting for share options for the treatment under US GAAP.
Options granted exercised and lapsed under these share option plans during the years ended 31 March 2003 2004 and 2005 and options exercisable at 31 March 2003 2004 and 2005 were as follows
Executive option plans millions
Exercise price range
Outstanding 31 March p727p 231p Granted 16telp199.5p 175p Outstanding 31 March tel427 154p727p 196p Outstanding 31 March tel468 146p602p 188p Exercisable 31 March 2003  11 11 255p727p 491p Exercisable 31 March 2004  13 13 255p727p 476p Exercisable 31 March .5p602p 288p Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 103 31.
Employee share plans continued Incentive Share Plan and Retention Share Plan The BT Incentive Share Plan ISP and the BT Retention Share Plan RSP were introduced for employees of the group in 2000.
Under the plans company shares are acquired by an employee share ownership trust and are conditionally awarded to participants.
Under the ISP participants are normally only entitled to these shares in full at the end of a threeyear period if the company has met the relevant predetermined corporate performance measure and if the participants are still employed by the group.
If the company has exceeded the predetermined corporate performance measure the participants may be awarded up to double the shares conditionally awarded.
The corporate performance measure is BTs total shareholder return TSR measured against a group of companies from the European Telecom Sector at the beginning of the relevant performance period.
The ISP was operated in the 2005 nancial year with 1406 participants receiving awards over 12654013 shares.
The ISP was not operated in the 2004 nancial year.
Under the RSP the length of retention period before awards vest is exible.
Awards may vest in annual tranches.
The shares are transferred at the end of a specied period only if the individual is still employed by the group.
During the 2005 nancial year 1340256 2004  720472 shares vested in 11 2004  7 participants in the RSP.
Deferred Bonus Plan The BT Deferred Bonus Plan DBP was established in 1998 and awards are granted annually to employees of the group.
Under this plan shares in the company are acquired by an employee share ownership trust and transferred to participants at the end of three years if he or she has continued to be employed by the group throughout that period.
On 2 August 2004 1280934 shares 1 August 2003  653899 were transferred to 219 participants 1 August 2003 225 at the end of the threeyear deferred period.
At 31 March 2005 27.8 million shares 2004  30.5 million shares in the company were held in trust for employee share plans of which 12.7 million shares 2004  no shares were held for the ISP 2.8 million shares 2004  3.0 million shares were held for the RSP and 7.9 million shares 2004  6.5 million shares were held for the DBP.
Dividends or dividend equivalents earned on the shares during the conditional periods are reinvested in company shares for the potential benet of the participants.
Additional information relating to the plans is as follows Year ended 31 March 2005
RSP
DBP
Total
Value of range of possible future transfers nil to 26.1 5.7 16.1 47.9 Provision for the costs of the plans charged to the prot and loss account in year 3.2 2.1 5.3 10.6 Nominal value of shares held in trust 0.6 0.1 0.4 1.1 Market value of shares held in trust 26.1 5.7 16.1 47.9 Year ended 31 March 2004
RSP
DBP
Total
Value of range of possible future transfers nil to  5.3 11.4 16.7 Provision for the costs of the plans charged to the prot and loss account in year  9.3 8.2 17.5 Nominal value of shares held in trust  0.2 0.3 0.5 Market value of shares held in trust  5.3 11.4 16.7 Of the total BT Group plc shares held 4.5 million shares were held at 31 March 2005 in trust for future awards under employee share plans.
These shares had a nominal value of 0.2 million and a market value of 9.3 million at 31 March 2005.
The values of possible future transfers of shares under the plans were based on the BT Group plc share price at 31 March 2005 of 205.5p 2004  177p.
The provisions for the costs of the ISP and RSP were based on best estimates of the companys performance over the plans conditional periods relating to those portions of the plan conditional periods from commencement up to the nancial year end.
104 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 31.
Employee share plans continued Employee Share Investment Plan From December 2001 the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP has been in operation.
The ESIP which has been approved by HM Revenue and Customs gives UK employees an opportunity to purchase shares partnership shares monthly out of pretax salary up to a maximum value of 1500 per year.
During the 2005 nancial year 6.1 million shares 2004  6.0 million shares including 0.2 million shares purchased by dividend reinvestment were purchased by the Trustee of the ESIP on behalf of 13017 2004  13974 employees at a total cost of 11.7 million 2004  11.1 million.
The free shares element of the ESIP allows BT to provide free shares to UK employees which are held in trust for at least three years.
A phantom plan which delivers cash awards equivalent to the value of the free shares operates for employees outside the UK.
In 2005 0.5% of pretax prots amounting to 11 million was allocated to the ESIP and the phantom plan for employees outside the UK 2004  20 million.
Up to 2% of pre tax prots would have been available subject to meeting two corporate performance targets one of increasing earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items by 8% and the other of reducing customer dissatisfaction by 25% on a compound annual basis over the past three years.
Although these targets were not met a discretionary payment was made.
The ESIP replaced the BT Employee Share Ownership Scheme which operated for employee prot sharing until 2001.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan The BT Group Employee Stock Purchase Plan ESPP for employees in the US enables participants to purchase ADSs quarterly at a price the Base Option Price which is 85% of the market price of an ADS at the start of the offer or in the case of employees who join the ESPP after the start of the offer 85% of the market price on their eligibility date whichever is higher.
Up to 15 May 2005 934782 shares 93478 ADSs have been transferred to participants out of treasury under the ESPP up to 15 May 2004 69164 new shares were issued and 226218 shares were transferred out of treasury.
The second offer with a Base Option Price of US25.61 ended in December 2004.
A third offer was launched in December 2004 with a Base Option Price of US31.52 and will run until December 2005.
Auditors
The auditors remuneration for the year ended 31 March 2005 for the group was 4396000 2004  3790000 2003  2943000.
The audit fees payable to the companys auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP for the company and UK subsidiary undertakings statutory accounts were 2454000 2004  2482000 2003  1910000.
The audit fee of the company was 35000 2004  32000 2003  31000.
The following fees for audit and nonaudit services were paid or are payable to the companys auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP for the years ended 31 March 2005 31 March 2004 and 31 March 2003 Audit services Statutory audit 4148 3767 2916 Regulatory audit 1423 1950 1690 5571 5717 4606 Further assurance services Corporate nance advice 989 462 265 1099 544 1094 Tax services 2912 2656 2245 Other services Systems advice   3765 Other 43tel110 4531 Total 10016 9027 12476 Total fees paid or payable to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP in the UK for non audit services in the year ended 31 March 2005 were 5171000 2004  4545000 2003  8980000.
In order to maintain the independence of the external auditors the Board has determined policies as to what non audit services can be provided by the companys external auditors and the approval processes related to them.
Under those policies work of a consultancy nature will not be offered to the external auditors unless there are clear efciencies and value added benets to the company.
BTs regulatory obligations require it to publish audited regulatory nancial statements.
The fees for regulatory work principally reect the audit fees associated with those regulatory nancial statements.
The fees for tax services include tax compliance and tax advisory services.
The fees for systems advice in the year ended 31 March 2003 related to advisory services provided in connection with the implementation of certain billing systems.
These services which were provided by PwC Consulting the consulting business of PricewaterhouseCoopers that was sold to IBM in October 2002 commenced in 2002 and were completed in 2003.
Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 105 33.
Financial instruments and risk management The group holds or issues nancial instruments mainly to nance its operations for the temporary investment of short term funds and to manage the currency and interest rate risks arising from its operations and from its sources of nance.
In addition various nancial instruments  for example trade debtors and trade creditors  arise directly from the groups operations.
The group nances its operations primarily by a mixture of issued share capital retained prots deferred taxation longterm loans and shortterm loans principally by issuing commercial paper and mediumterm notes.
The group borrows in the major longterm debt markets in major currencies.
Typically but not exclusively the bond markets provide the most costeffective means of longterm borrowing.
The group uses derivative nancial instruments primarily to manage its exposure to market risks from changes in interest and foreign exchange rates.
The derivatives used for this purpose are principally interest rate swaps gilt locks currency swaps and forward currency contracts.
The types of nancial instrument used for investment of shortterm funds are prescribed in group treasury policies with limits on the exposure to any one organisation.
Shortterm investing in nancial instruments is undertaken on behalf of the group by substantial external fund managers who are limited to dealing in debt instruments and certain dened derivative instruments and are given strict guidelines on credit diversication and maturity proles.
During the year ended 31 March 2005 the groups net debt reduced from 8.4 billion to 7.8 billion mainly from working capital inows and proceeds from the sale of investments.
During the 2005 nancial year the group restructured some of its swaps portfolio.
As a result the group terminated 2.9 billion of crosscurrency and sterling interest rate swaps with some swaps being replaced with new swaps which had the same economic hedging effect.
This resulted in the group paying 107 million in reducing gross debt and receiving a net 14 million of interest receipts.
The interest receipts and payments on restructuring have been included within deferred income and other debtors respectively and will be amortised to the prot and loss account over the term of the underlying hedged debt.
The groups xedoating interest rate prole on net debt is 955 at 31 March 2005.
During the year ended 31 March 2004 the groups net debt reduced from 9.6 billion to 8.4 billion mainly from working capital inows.
During the 2004 nancial year the group restructured some of its swaps portfolio to mitigate credit risk to certain counter parties.
As a result the group terminated 7 billion of crosscurrency interest rate swaps and replaced these with new swaps which had the same economic hedging effect.
This resulted in the group paying 445 million in reducing gross debt and receiving 420 million of interest.
The interest receipt has been included in deferred income and will be amortised to the prot and loss account over the term of the underlying debt.
The groups xedoating interest rate prole on net debt was 7624 at 31 March 2004.
During the year ended 31 March 2003 the groups net debt reduced from 13.7 billion to 9.6 billion.
2.6 billion was realised from the disposal of the groups interest in Cegetel Groupe SA in the year and the group has closed out 2.6 billion of associated xed interest rate swaps.
The groups xedoating interest rate prole on net debt therefore remained at 8812 at 31 March 2003.
The group uses nancial instruments to hedge some of its currency exposures arising from its nonUK assets liabilities and forward purchase commitments.
The group also hedges some of its interest liabilities.
The nancial instruments used comprise borrowings in foreign currencies forward foreign currency exchange contracts gilt locks and interest and currency swaps.
There has been no change in the nature of the groups risk prole between 31 March 2005 and the date of these nancial statements.
The notional amounts of derivatives summarised below do not necessarily represent amounts exchanged by the parties and thus are not necessarily a measure of the exposure of the group through its use of derivatives.
The amounts exchanged are calculated on the notional amounts and other terms of the derivatives which relate to interest and exchange rates.
The group has entered into interest rate swap agreements with banks and other institutions to vary the amounts and periods for which interest rates on borrowings are xed.
Under interest rate swaps the group agrees with other parties to exchange at specied intervals the differences between xed rate and oating rate interest amounts calculated by reference to an agreed notional principal amount.
Under gilt locks forward sales of UK government longdated treasury stock were entered into for periods of up to one year.
This hedge effectively xed in the interest on part of the groups then future borrowings all of which have now been taken on.
At 31 March 2005 the group had outstanding interest rate swap agreements having a total notional principal amount of 5297 million 2004  5210 million.
Cross currency swaps and forward foreign exchange contracts have been entered into to reduce the foreign currency exposure on the groups operations and the groups net assets.
The group also enters into forward foreign exchange contracts to hedge investments interest expense and purchase and sale commitments denominated in foreign currencies principally US dollars and the euro.
The remaining terms of the currency swaps are up to 26 years and the terms of currency forward exchange contracts are typically less than one year.
The purpose of the groups foreign currency hedging activities is to protect the group from the risk that the eventual net inows and net outows will be adversely affected by changes in exchange rates.
At 31 March 2005 the group had outstanding foreign currency swap agreements and forward exchange contracts having a total notional principal amount of 9819 million 2004  11367 million.
106 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 33.
Financial instruments and risk management continued The values of forward foreign currency contracts at 31 March 2005 were 427 million 2004  301 million for purchases of currency and 782 million 2004  1223 million for sales of currency.
These values have been estimated by calculating their present values using the market discount rates appropriate to the terms of the contracts in effect at the balance sheet dates.
At 31 March 2005 the group had deferred unrealised gains of 2 million 2004  nil and losses of nil 2004 5 million based on dealerquoted prices from hedging purchase and sale commitments and in addition had deferred realised net losses of 5 million 2004  3 million gains.
These are included in the prot and loss account as part of the hedged purchase or sale transaction when it is recognised or as gains or losses when a hedged transaction is no longer expected to occur.
The group considers that it is not exposed to major concentrations of credit risk.
The group however is exposed to creditrelated losses in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to nancial instruments but does not expect any counterparties to fail to meet their obligations.
The group limits the amount of credit exposure to any one counterparty.
The group does not normally see the need to seek collateral or other security.
The longterm debt instruments issued in December 2000 and February 2001 both contained covenants that if the group credit rating was downgraded below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of SandP additional interest would accrue from the next interest coupon period at the rate of 0.25 percentage points for each ratings category adjustment by each ratings agency.
In May 2001 Moodys downgraded BTs credit rating to Baa1 which increased BTs interest charge by approximately 32 million per annum.
BTs current credit rating from SandP is A minus.
Based upon the total debt of 9 billion outstanding on these instruments at 31 March 2005 BTs annual interest charge would increase by approximately 26 million if BTs credit ratings were to be downgraded by one credit rating category by both agencies below a longterm debt rating of Baa1A minus.
If BTs credit rating with Moodys was to be upgraded by one credit rating category the annual interest charge would be reduced by approximately 13 million.
The following table shows the carrying amounts and fair values of the groups nancial instruments at 31 March 2005 and 2004.
The carrying amounts are included in the group balance sheet under the indicated headings with the exception of derivative amounts which are included in debtors or other creditors or as part of net debt as appropriate.
The fair values of the nancial instruments are the amount at which the instruments could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties other than in forced or liquidation sale.
Carrying amount Fair value
Assets
Cash at bank and in hand 20telShortterm investments 4592 5117 4592 5117 Fixed asset investments
Shortterm borrowings Longterm borrowings excluding nance leases 10904 11800 12246 13506 Derivatives relating to investments and borrowings net
Liabilities 685 748 1435 1182 Derivative nancial instruments held or issued to hedge the current exposure on expected future transactions net
Liabilities   2 The fair values of listed shortterm investments were estimated based on quoted market prices for those investments.
The carrying amount of the other shortterm deposits and investments approximated to their fair values due to the short maturity of the instruments held.
The fair values of listed fixed asset investments were estimated based on quoted market prices for those investments.
The fair value of the groups bonds debentures notes and other longterm borrowings has been estimated on the basis of quoted market prices for the same or similar issues with the same maturities where they existed and on calculations of the present value of future cash flows using the appropriate discount rates in effect at the balance sheet dates where market prices of similar issues did not exist.
The fair value of the groups outstanding foreign currency and interest rate swap agreements was estimated by calculating the present value using appropriate discount rates in effect at the balance sheet dates of affected future cash flows translated where appropriate into pounds sterling at the market rates in effect at the balance sheet dates.
Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 107 33.
Financial instruments and risk management continued The following information is provided in accordance with the requirements of FRS 13  Derivatives and other nancial instruments disclosures.
Except for disclosures under currency exposures below the nancial information excludes all of the groups shortterm debtors and creditors.
Financial liabilities After taking into account the various interest rate swaps and forward foreign currency contracts entered into by the group the interest rate prole of the groups nancial liabilities at 31 March was 2005 2004 Fixed rate nancial liabilities Floating rate nancial liabilities
Fixed rate nancial liabilities Floating rate nancial liabilities
Currency m m m m m m m m Total Sterling 7488 5101  12589 7747 5950  13697 For the xed rate nancial liabilities the average interest rates and the average periods for which the rates are xed are 2005 2004
Weighted average period for which rate is xed
Weighted average period for which rate is xed Currency % Years % Years Sterling 8.8 11 8.7 13 The oating rate nancial liabilities bear interest at rates xed in advance for periods ranging from one day to one year by reference to LIBOR.
The maturity prole of nancial liabilities is as given in note 22.
Financial assets After taking into account the various interest rate swaps and forward foreign currency contracts entered into by the group the interest rate prole of the groups nancial assets at 31 March was 2005 2004 Fixed rate Floating rate Financial assets Fixed rate Floating rate Financial assets nancial Financial on which no nancial nancial on which no assets assets interest is paid Total assets assets interest is paid Total Currency m m m m m m m m Sterling 106 4697 8 4811 1310 3962 167 5439 Euro  1 1  23 23 Other  4 4  41 41 Total 106 4697 13 4816 1310 3962 231 5503 The sterling xed rate nancial assets yield interest at a weighted average of 4.4% 2004  4.5% for a weighted average period of 22 months 2004  22 months.
The oating rate nancial assets bear interest at rates xed in advance for periods up to one year by reference to LIBOR.
108 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 33.
Financial instruments and risk management continued Currency exposures The table below shows the currency exposures of the groups net monetary assets liabilities in terms of those transactional exposures that give rise to net currency gains and losses recognised in the prot and loss account.
Such exposures comprise the monetary assets and monetary liabilities of the group that are not denominated in the operating or functional currency of the operating unit involved other than certain nonsterling borrowings treated as hedges of net investments in nonUK operations.
At 31 March these exposures were as follows 2005 2004
US dollar
Other
Total
Sterling
US dollar
Other
Total
Functional currency of group operation Sterling  53 6 1 48 43 7 151 Euro 2 2 2 24 The amounts shown in the table above take into account the effect of any currency swaps forward contracts and other derivatives entered into to manage those currency exposures.
At 31 March 2005 the group also held various forward currency contracts that the group had taken out to hedge expected future foreign currency purchases and sales.
Fair values of nancial assets held for trading 2005 Net gain included in prot and loss account 18 61 Fair value of nancial assets held for trading at 31 March 546 785 The net gain was derived from government bonds commercial paper and similar debt instruments.
The average fair value of nancial assets held during the year ended 31 March 2005 did not differ materially from the year end position.
Hedges
Gains and losses on instruments used for hedging are not recognised until the exposure that is being hedged is itself recognised.
Unrecognised and deferred gains and losses on instruments used for hedging and those recognised in the years ended 31 March 2005 and 31 March 2004 are as follows 2005 2004
Losses
Gains
Losses
Gains and losses recognised in the year but arising in previous years unrecognised at the balance sheet date 4telcarried forward in the year end balance sheet pending recognition in the prot and loss account 54telexpected to be recognised in the following year unrecognised at balance sheet date 36 51 9 carried forward in the year end balance sheet pending recognition in the prot and loss account Excluding gains and losses on hedges accounted for by adjusting the carrying amount of a fixed asset.
Unused committed lines of credit Unused committed lines of credit for shortterm nancing available at 31 March 2005 totalled approximately 145 million 2004  145 million which was in support of a commercial paper programme or other borrowings.
These lines of credit are available for up to one year.
Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 109 34.
Company balance sheet 2005 Fixed assets Investment in subsidiary undertaking 9971 9971 Total xed assets 9971 9971 Current assets
Investments
Cash at bank and in hand 118 62 Total current assets 141 520 Creditors amounts falling due within one year Net current liabilities assets 438 50 Total assets less current liabilities 9533 10021 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 432 432 Share premium account 3 2 Capital redemption reserve 2 2 Prot and loss account 9096 9585 Total equity shareholders funds 9533 10021 Debtors consists of amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings of 22 million 2004  456 million.
The company invested in a listed investment with a book value and market value of 1 million 2004  1 million and short term loans to subsidiary undertakings of nil 2004  1 million.
Creditors consists of dividends payable of 551 million 2004  454 million amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings of 17 million 2004  9 million and other creditors of 11 million 2004  7 million.
Capital and reserves are shown on page 111.
The nancial statements of the company on pages 110 to 111 were approved by the board of directors on 18 May 2005 and were signed on its behalf by Sir Christopher Bland
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director 110 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Notes to the nancial statements 34.
Company balance sheet continued
Share premium account
Prot and loss account
Balances at 1 April 2002 434 2  9537 9973 Prot for the nancial year    560 560 Dividends 6.5p per ordinary share    560 560 Balances at 31 March 2003 434 2  9537 9973 Purchase of own shares shares cancelled 2  2 64 64 treasury shares    80 80 Prot for the nancial year Dividends 8.5p per ordinary share    732 732 Balances at 31 March 585 10021 Purchase of own shares held as treasury shares Arising on share issues  1   1 Shares distributed under employee share plans    19 19 Prot for the nancial year Dividends 10.4p per ordinary share    883 883 Balances at 31 March 096 9533 The authorised share capital of the company throughout the years ended 31 March 2005 and 31 March 2004 was 13463 million representing 269260253648 ordinary shares of 5p each.
The allotted called up and fully paid ordinary share capital of the company at 31 March 2005 was 432 million 2004  432 million representing 8634629038 ordinary shares of 5p each 2004  8634629038.
Of the authorised but unissued share capital at 31 March 2005 26 million ordinary shares 2004  26 million were reserved to meet options granted under employee share option schemes described in note 31.
The share premium account representing the premium on allotment of shares is not available for distribution.
The profit for the financial year dealt with in the profit and loss account of the company and after taking into account dividends from subsidiary undertakings was 570 million 2004  924 million.
As permitted by Section 230 of the Companies Act 1985 no profit and loss account of the company is presented.
During the year ended 31 March 2005 the company repurchased 101280000 2004  80571000 of its own shares of 5p each representing 1% 2004  1% of the calledup share capital for an aggregate consideration of 195 million 2004  144 million.
At 31 March 2005 134497000 shares 2004  44349000 shares with an aggregate nominal value of 7 million are held as treasury shares at cost.
Of the total shares repurchased during the year ended 31 March 2004 36222000 shares with an aggregate nominal value of 2 million were cancelled immediately.
Post balance sheet events In March 2005 the group agreed to acquire Radianz the leading nancial services extranet provider from Reuters for consideration of 107 million for the business plus any cash remaining on the balance sheet net of working capital adjustments at completion date.
Regulatory clearance was received in April and the transaction completed on 29 April 2005.
Notes to the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 111 The United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles are divided into the following sections 113 Differences between United Kingdom and United States generally accepted accounting principles 116 Net income and shareholders equity reconciliation statements 116 Minority interests 117 Accounting for share options 117 Consolidated statements of cash ows 117 Current asset investments 118 Pension costs 120 Income statement in US GAAP format 120 US GAAP developments 121 Supplemental unaudited pro forma information relating to businesses acquired during the year ended 31 March 2005 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 112 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 The groups consolidated nancial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the UK UK GAAP which differ in certain respects from those applicable in the US US GAAP.
The following are the main differences between UK and US GAAP which are relevant to the groups nancial statements.
Under UK GAAP the sale of BTs property portfolio is treated as a xed asset disposal and the subsequent leaseback is an operating lease.
Under US GAAP the transaction is regarded as nancing and the land and buildings are recorded on the balance sheet at their net book value an obligation equivalent to the cash proceeds is recognised and the gain on disposal is deferred until the properties are vacated by BT.
Rental payments made by BT are reversed and replaced by a nance lease interest charge and a depreciation charge.
Under UK GAAP pension costs are accounted for in accordance with UK Statement of Standard Accounting Practice
24 with costs being charged against prots over employees working lives.
Under US GAAP pension costs are determined in accordance with the requirements of US Statements of Financial Accounting Standards SFAS Nos. and 88.
Differences between the UK and US GAAP gures arise from the requirement to use different actuarial methods and assumptions and a different method of amortising surpluses or decits.
Under UK GAAP the cost of providing incremental pension benets in respect of workforce reductions is taken into account when determining current and future pension costs unless the most recent actuarial valuation combined with the provision for pension costs in the group balance sheet under UK actuarial conventions shows a decit.
In this case the cost of providing incremental pension benets is included in redundancy charges in the year in which the employees agree to leave the group.
Under US GAAP the associated costs of providing incremental pension benets are charged against prots in the period in which the termination terms are agreed with the employees.
The fair value of termination benets for employees who are to be retained beyond their minimum contractual retention period is recognised on a straight line basis over the future service period.
Under UK GAAP the group does not capitalise interest.
To comply with US GAAP the estimated amount of interest incurred whilst constructing major capital projects is included in xed assets and depreciated over the lives of the related assets.
The amount of interest capitalised is determined by reference to the average interest rates on outstanding borrowings.
At 31 March 2005 under US GAAP gross capitalised interest of 349 million 2004 358 million with regard to the company and its subsidiary companies was subject to depreciation generally over periods of 3 to 25 years.
Under UK GAAP in respect of acquisitions completed prior to 1 April 1998 the group wrote off goodwill arising from the purchase of subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures on acquisition against retained earnings.
The goodwill is reected in the net income of the period of disposal as part of the calculation of the gain or loss on divestment.
Following the implementation of UK Financial Reporting Standard No.
10 FRS 10 goodwill arising on acquisitions completed after 1 April 1998 is capitalised and amortised on a straight line basis over its useful economic life.
All unamortised and preApril 1998 goodwill will be brought back to the prot and loss account on disposal.
Under US GAAP up to 31 March 2002 goodwill arising on the acquisition of subsidiaries associates and joint ventures was capitalised as an intangible asset and amortised over its useful life.
BT adopted SFAS No.
142 on 1 April 2002 and goodwill is no longer amortised but tested annually for impairment.
In connection with the adoption of SFAS No.
142 transitional and annual impairment reviews were performed.
There was no transitional impairment charge recorded.
As a result of the annual impairment review no goodwill impairment charge was recognised in the year ended 31 March 2005 2004  nil 2003  54 million.
Goodwill of 16 million 2004  12 million 2003 20 million amortised under UK GAAP is written back through the income statement.
Certain intangible xed assets recognised under US GAAP purchase accounting requirements are subsumed within goodwill under UK GAAP.
The intangible assets acquired in the 2005 nancial year comprise customer relationships and brand relating to Infonet  see note 15.
Under US GAAP these separately identied intangible assets are valued and amortised over their useful lives which range from 5 to 15 years.
Under UK GAAP investments are held on the balance sheet at historical cost.
Gains and losses on instruments used for hedges are not recognised until the exposure being hedged is recognised.
Under US GAAP trading securities and availableforsale securities are carried at market value with appropriate valuation adjustments recorded in prot and loss and shareholders equity respectively.
United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 113 i Differences between United Kingdom and United States generally accepted accounting principles continued Certain derivative nancial instruments which qualify for hedge accounting under UK GAAP do not qualify for hedge accounting under US GAAP.
Under US GAAP nancial instruments do not qualify for hedge accounting due to the extensive documentation requirements.
These nancial instruments under US GAAP are carried at market value with valuation adjustments recorded in the income statement.
The reassessment and purchase of derivatives in the year ended 31 March 2005 gave rise to an adjustment reducing net income by 299 million net of tax 2004  reduction 133 million 2003 reduction 610 million.
The net unrealised holding gain on equity investments held as available forsale securities for the year ended 31 March 2005 was 19 million 2004  5 million 2003  22 million.
Certain share options have been granted under BT saveasyouearn plans at a 20% discount.
Under UK GAAP the share issues are recorded at their discounted price when the options are exercised.
Under US GAAP a plan is considered compensatory when the discount to market price is in excess of 15%.
Compensation cost is recognised for the difference between the exercise price of the share options granted and the quoted market price of the shares at the date of grant or measurement date and accrued over the vesting period of the options.
Under UK GAAP the economic interest in the associates operating prots before minority interest is reported as part of the total operating prot.
For those associates in which a minority interest is recognised in their respective statements of prot and loss such minority interest is reported as minority interest in the consolidated prot and loss account.
Under US GAAP the minority interest in the associates is reclassied from minority interest and reported within the share of results of associates.
Under UK GAAP provision is made for deferred tax in so far as a liability or asset arose as a result of transactions that had occurred by the balance sheet date and give rise to an obligation to pay more tax in the future or a right to pay less tax in the future.
Under US GAAP deferred taxation is provided for on a full liability basis.
Future tax benets are recognised as deferred tax assets to the extent that their realisation is more likely than not.
At 31 March 2005 total deferred tax liabilities were 2715 million primarily in respect of accelerated capital allowances and total deferred tax assets were 2221 million primarily in respect of pension obligations.
The total valuation allowance recognised for deferred tax assets was as follows 2005 2004 Movement in year m m m Capital losses 4436 4843 407 Overseas losses not utilised 860 572 288 6001 5834 167 At 31 March 2005 the group had operating losses and capital losses carried forward.
The groups capital losses have no expiry date restrictions.
The expiry date of operating losses carried forward is dependent upon the tax law of the various territories in which the losses arise.
A summary of expiry dates for losses in territories in which restrictions do apply is set out below
Valuation allowance Expiry of losses Restricted losses Americas 79 20152025 Europe 222 20062020 Total restricted losses 301 Unrestricted losses Operating losses 559 No expiry Capital losses 4436 No expiry Total unrestricted losses 4995 Total 5296 114 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles i Differences between United Kingdom and United States generally accepted accounting principles continued The following is a reconciliation from UK to US GAAP of BTs deferred tax assets and liabilities net of related valuation allowance.
2005 2004 Deferred tax assets Deferred tax liabilities Deferred tax assets Deferred tax liabilities m m m m UK GAAP 106 2280 113 2304 Tax effect of US GAAP Adjustments Pension 1566  1714 Property 43telFinancial instruments 111  14 Capitalised interest 53 59 Other  7 Rollover relief in respect of reinvested gains 56 59 Deferred tax balances under US GAAP net of related valuation allowance 2221 2715 2240 2780 k Dividends Under UK GAAP dividends are recorded in the year in respect of which they are declared in the case of interim or any special dividends or proposed by the board of directors to the shareholders in the case of nal dividends.
Under
US GAAP dividends are recorded in the period in which dividends are declared.
Under UK GAAP if there is an indication of impairment the assets should be tested for impairment and if necessary written down to the value in use calculated based on discounted future pretax cash ows related to the asset or the income generating unit to which the asset belongs.
US GAAP requires that an entity assess whether impairment has occurred based on the undiscounted future cash ows.
An impairment loss exists if the sum of these cash ows is less than the carrying amount of the asset.
The impairment loss recognised in the income statement is based on the assets fair value being either market value or the sum of discounted future cash ows.
Tangible assets that were not impaired under US GAAP are depreciated over their remaining useful lives.
There are timing differences between UK GAAP and US GAAP for recognition of gains on the sale of certain businesses.
Foreign exchange movements taken to reserves under UK GAAP are reported in the income statement under US GAAP.
Historical GAAP differences on disposed businesses are also shown under this line item.
Under UK GAAP in the 2003 nancial year a provision in connection with the rationalisation of the groups London ofce property portfolio was recorded.
Under US GAAP in accordance with SFAS No 146 these costs are not recognised until the group fully exits and therefore ceases to use the affected properties.
All these properties were exited by 31 December 2004.
Under UK GAAP longterm contracts to design build and operate software solutions are accounted for under SSAP 9 Stocks and longterm contracts and FRS 5 Reporting the substance of transactions under which turnover is recognised as earned over the contract period.
Under US GAAP revenue of 162 million under these contracts is deferred in the 2005 nancial year under SOP 97 2Software revenue recognition and SAB 104 as vendor specic objective evidence to support the fair value of the separate elements to be delivered is unavailable.
There was no impact on net income.
Total deferred revenue and costs not recorded in UK GAAP at 31 March 2005 was 239 million 2004  77 million.
United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 115 ii Net income and shareholders equity reconciliation statements The following statements summarise the material estimated adjustments gross of their tax effect which reconcile net income and shareholders equity from that reported under UK GAAP to that which would have been reported had US GAAP been applied.
Net income Years ended 31 March Net income applicable to shareholders under UK GAAP 1821 1414 2702 Restatement under UITF 38 and UITF 17  See note 1  3 16 Net income applicable to shareholders under UK GAAP as previously reported 1821 1417 2686 Adjustment for Sale and leaseback of properties 83 85 114 Pension costs 212 428 177 Redundancy charges 20 20 Capitalisation of interest net of related depreciation 13 23 17 Goodwill 16 12 35 Intangible asset amortisation   26 Financial instruments 411 82 731 Impairment 24 24 24 Employee share plans 15 8 11 Property rationalisation provision 5 142 147 Disposals of businesses   130 Deferred taxation 3 4 976 1057 661 4266 Tax effect of US GAAP adjustments 240 222 132 Net income as adjusted for US GAAP 1297 883 4134 Basic earnings per American Depositary Share as adjusted for US GAAP Diluted earnings per American Depositary Share as adjusted for US GAAP Each American Depositary Share is equivalent to ten ordinary shares.
Shareholders equity At 31 March Shareholders equity under UK GAAP 3851 3066 Restatement under UITF 38 and UITF 17  see note 1  28 Shareholders equity under UK GAAP as previously reported 3851 3094 Adjustment for Sale and leaseback of properties 1460 1377 Pension costs 5219 5714 Redundancy charges  20 Capitalisation of interest net of related depreciation 178 195 Goodwill 51 124 Intangible assets 78 Financial instruments 371 8 Impairment 77 100 Property rationalisation provision  5 Deferred taxation 56 59 Dividend declared after the nancial year end 551 454 2320 3166 Tax effect of US GAAP adjustments 1736 1711 Shareholders equity as adjusted for US GAAP 584 1455 iii Minority interests Under US GAAP the income to minority interests would have been unchanged 2004  unchanged 2003  27 million reduction after adjusting for goodwill amortisation and accounting for associates and joint ventures.
Net assets attributable to minority interests would have been unchanged 2004  unchanged after adjusting for nancial instruments.
116 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles iv Accounting for share options Under UK GAAP the company does not recognise compensation expense for the fair value at the date of grant of share options granted under the employee share option schemes.
Under US GAAP the company adopted the disclosureonly provisions in SFAS No.
123 Accounting for StockBased Compensation.
Accordingly the company accounts for share options in accordance with APB Opinion No.
25 Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees under which no compensation expense on xed plans other than SAYE plans is recognised.
Had the group recognised compensation cost for options granted in accordance with SFAS No.
123 the groups pro forma net income loss basic earnings loss per share and diluted earnings loss per share under US GAAP would have been 1289 million 2004  862 million 2003  4127 million 15.1p 2004  10.0p 2003  47.9p and 15.0p 2004  9.9p 2003 47.6p respectively.
See note 31 for the SFAS No.
123 disclosures of the fair value of options granted under employee schemes at date of grant.
Under UK GAAP the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows are presented in accordance with UK Financial Reporting Standard No.
1 FRS 1.
The statements prepared under FRS 1 present substantially the same information as that required under SFAS No.
Under SFAS No.
95 cash and cash equivalents include cash and shortterm investments with maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase.
Under FRS 1 cash comprises cash in hand and at bank and overnight deposits net of bank overdrafts.
Under FRS 1 cash ows are presented for operating activities returns on investments and servicing of nance taxation capital expenditure and nancial investments acquisitions and disposals dividends paid to the companys shareholders management of liquid resources and nancing.
SFAS No.
95 requires a classication of cash ows as resulting from operating investing and nancing activities.
Cash ows under FRS 1 in respect of interest received interest paid net of that capitalised under US GAAP and taxation would be included within operating activities under SFAS No.
Cash ows from purchases sales and maturities of trading securities while not separately identied under UK GAAP would be included within operating activities under US GAAP.
Capitalised interest while not recognised under UK GAAP is included in investing activities under US GAAP.
Dividends paid are included within nancing activities under US GAAP.
The following statements summarise the statements of cash ows as if they had been presented in accordance with US GAAP and include the adjustments which reconcile cash and cash equivalents under US GAAP to cash at bank and in hand reported under UK GAAP.
Net cash provided by operating activities 4586 4632 3395 Net cash used provided by investing activities 2012 3460 1253 Net cash used in nancing activities 2269 3093 2852 Net decrease increase in cash and cash equivalents 305 1921 1796 Effect of exchange rate changes on cash  5 13 Cash and cash equivalents under US GAAP at beginning of year 1007 2933 1124 Cash and cash equivalents under US GAAP at end of year 1312 1007 2933 Shortterm investments with original maturities of less than three months 1106 898 2842 Cash at bank and in hand under UK GAAP at end of year 206 109 91 vi Current asset investments Under US GAAP investments in debt securities would be classied as either trading availableforsale or heldtomaturity.
Trading investments would be stated at fair values and the unrealised gains and losses would be included in income.
Securities classied as availableforsale would be stated at fair values with unrealised gains and losses net of deferred taxes reported in shareholders equity.
Debt securities classied as heldtomaturity would be stated at amortised cost.
The following analyses do not include securities with original maturities of less than three months.
At 31 March 2005 the group held trading investments as dened by US GAAP with fair values totalling 339 million 2004  423 million.
Heldtomaturity securities at 31 March 2005 and 2004 consisted of the following
Estimated fair value Commercial paper mediumterm notes and other investments at 31 March 2005 2003 2003 Commercial paper mediumterm notes and other investments at 31 March 2004 3629 3629 The contractual maturities of the heldtomaturity debt securities at 31 March 2005 were as follows
Estimated fair value Maturing on or before 31 March 2006 1999 1999 Maturing after 1 year through 5 years 44 Total at 31 March 2005 2003 2003 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 117 vi Current asset investments continued Available for sale investments at 31 March 2005 and 2004 consisted of the following
Estimated fair value Commercial paper mediumterm notes and other investments at 31 March 2005 1149 1149 Commercial paper mediumterm notes and other investments at 31 March telThe contractual maturities of the available for sale investments at 31 March 2005 were as follows
Estimated fair value Maturing on or before 31 March 2006 1149 1149 Maturing after 1 year through 5 years Total at 31 March 2005 1149 1149 vii Pension costs The following position for the main pension scheme is computed in accordance with US GAAP pension accounting rules under SFAS No.
87 and SFAS No.
88 the effect of which is shown in the above reconciliation statements.
The pension cost determined under SFAS No.
87 was calculated by reference to an expected longterm rate of return on scheme assets of 7.27% 2004  7.35% 2003  6.90%.
The components of the pension cost for the main pension scheme comprised Service cost 507 388 453 Interest cost 1745 1657 1707 Expected return on scheme assets 1897 1646 1813 Amortisation of prior service costs 24 24 24 Amortisation of net obligation at date of limited application of SFAS No.
Amortisation of loss gain 263 378 22 Additional cost of termination benets  160 Pension cost for the year under US GAAP 642 804 461 The information required to be disclosed in accordance with SFAS No.
132R concerning the funded status of the main scheme at 31 March 2004 and 31 March 2005 based on the valuations at 1 January 2004 and 1 January 2005 respectively is given below.
Minimum liability intangible asset and other comprehensive income Plan assets at fair value 29169 26675 Accumulated benet obligation 33160 31137 Minimum liability 3991 4462 Net amount recognised at end of year 2535 2275 Minimum additional liability 1456 2187 Intangible asset as at 31 March 2004 Unrecognised prior service cost 55 79 Accumulated other comprehensive income 1401 2108 Changes in benet obligation Benet obligation at the beginning of the year 32448 30277 Service cost 507 388 Interest cost 1745 1657 Employees contributions 50 148 Additional cost of termination benets  1 Actuarial movement 943 1428 Other changes 7 5 Benets paid or payable 1364 1456 Benet obligation at the end of the year 34336 32448 118 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles vii Pension costs continued The benet obligation and pension cost for the main pension scheme were determined using the following assumptions at 1 January 2003 2004 and 2005 per annum % per annum % per annum % Discount rate 5.3 5.5 5.6 Rate of future pay increases 3.6 3.6 3.8 Rate of future pension increases 2.6 2.6 2.25 Contributions expected to be paid to the plan during the next scal year are estimated at 459 million.
Estimated future benet payments are as follows Year ending 31 March 2006 1392 Year ending 31 March 2007 1432 Year ending 31 March 2008 1477 Year ending 31 March 2009 1532 Year ending 31 March 2010 1598 1 April 2010 to 31 March 2015 9039 Changes in scheme assets 2005 2004 m m Fair value of scheme assets at the beginning of the year 26675 22757 Actual return on scheme assets 3419 4195 Employers contributions 382 1026 Employees contributions 50 148 Other changes 7 5 Benets paid or payable 1364 1456 Fair value of scheme assets at the end of the year 29169 26675 Funded status under US GAAP 2005 2004 m m Projected benet obligation in excess of scheme assets 5167 5773 Unrecognised prior service costs Other unrecognised net actuarial losses 2577 3419 Net amount recognised under US GAAP 2535 2275 The employers contributions for the year ended 31 March 2005 includes special contributions of 6 million paid in June 2004 2004  362 million paid in December 2003 and 380 million paid in March 2004.
Unrecognised prior service costs on scheme benefit improvements are being amortised over periods of 15 or 16 years commencing in the years of the introduction of the improvements.
Asset allocation The Trustees of the main pension scheme approve the target asset allocation as well as deviation limits.
The objective of the investment activities is to maximise investment return within an acceptable level of risk taking into consideration the liabilities of the main pension scheme.
Year ended 31 December 2004 Fair value bn %
Equities 20.2 69 63 Fixed interest bonds 4.4 15 16 Index linked securities 2.7 9 9 Property 1.9 7 12 Year ended 31 December 2003 Fair value bn %
Equities 17.1 65 65 Fixed interest bonds 3.9 15 15 Index linked securities 2.1 8 8 Property 3.2 12 12 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 119 vii Pension costs continued The assumption for the expected return in scheme assets is a weighted average based on an assumed expected return for each asset class and the proportions held of each asset class at the beginning of the year.
The expected returns on bonds are based on the gross redemption yields at the start of the year.
Expected returns on equities and property are based on a combination of an estimate of the risk premium above yields on government bonds and consensus economic forecasts of future returns.
The expected return of 7.27% per annum used for the calculation of pension costs for the year ending 31 March 2005 is consistent with that adopted for FRS 17.
The group prot and loss accounts on pages 75 to 77 comply with UK GAAP and the directors believe they are in the most appropriate format for shareholders to understand the results of our business.
We believe that it is important to show our results before deducting goodwill amortisation and exceptional items because these items predominantly relate to corporate transactions rather than the trading activities of the group.
For SEC reporting purposes this presentation would be considered non GAAP and therefore the group has also prepared the following income statement which meets the SEC reporting format set forth in Item 10 of Regulation SX.
The nancial numbers disclosed in the following income statement are prepared under UK GAAP.
Revenue 18623 18519 18727 Operating expenses Payroll costs 3729 3738 3667 Depreciation and amortisation 2856 2936 3035 Payments to telecommunication operators 3725 3963 3940 Other operating expenses 5695 5189 5724 Total operating expenses 16005 15826 16366 Net operating income 2618 2693 2361 Other income net 551 227 1922 Net interest expense 801 941 1439 Income taxes 523 539 459 Minority interests 1 8 12 Equity in losses earnings of investees 25 34 329 Net income 1821 1414 2702 Earnings per share  basic 21.4p 16.4p 31.4p Earnings per share  diluted 21.2p 16.3p 31.2p Restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see note 1 on page 81.
In December 2004 the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.
123R SFAS 123R Share Based Payment which revises SFAS 123 and supersedes APB 25.
SFAS 123R requires that the cost of all sharebased payment transactions be recognised in the nancial statements.
SFAS 123R also establishes fair value as the measurement method in accounting for sharebased payments to employees.
BT adopted SFAS 123R on 1 April 2005 using the modied prospective transition method.
BT estimates the application of the expensing provisions of SFAS 123R will result in a pretax expense of approximately 45 million in the 2006 nancial year subject to additional grants and awards.
In December 2004 the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.
153 SFAS 153 Exchanges of Nonmonetary Assets  an amendment of APB Opinion No.
29 SFAS 153 addresses the measurement of exchanges of nonmonetary assets.
It eliminates the exception from fair value measurement for nonmonetary exchanges of similar productive assets in paragraph 21b of APB Opinion No.
29 Accounting for Nonmonetary Transactions and replaces it with an exception for exchanges that do not have commercial substance.
A nonmonetary exchange has commercial substance if the future cash ows of the entity are expected to change signicantly as a result of the exchange.
As required by SFAS 153 we will adopt this new accounting standard effective 1 July 2005.
The adoption of SFAS 153 is not expected to have a material impact on our nancial position results of operations or cash ows.
In November 2004 the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.151 SFAS 151 Inventory Costs  an amendment of ARB No.
43 Chapter 4 which claries that abnormal amounts of idle facility expense freight handling costs and wasted material spoilage should be recognised as a current period expense.
In addition SFAS 151 requires that allocation of xed production overhead to the costs of conversion be based on the normal capacity of the production facilities.
SFAS 151 is effective for scal years beginning after 15 June 2005.
BT does not believe that the implementation of this standard will have a material impact on its nancial position results of operations or cash ows.
120 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ix US GAAP developments continued In September 2004 the EITF reached a consensus on EITF Issue No.
0214 Whether an Investor Should Apply the Equity Method of Accounting to Investments Other Than Common Stock in which the Task Force reached the consensus that an investor that has the ability to exercise signicant inuence over the operating and nancial policies of the investee should apply the equity method of accounting when it has an investment in common stock andor an investment that is insubstance common stock.
The consensus of this EITF is to be applied in reporting periods beginning after September 15 2004.
We do not believe the adoption of this standard will have a material impact on our nancial position results of operations or cash ows.
In October 2004 the EITF reached a consensus on Issue No.
041 Accounting for Preexisting Relationships between the Parties to a Business Combination EITF 041.
EITF 041 addresses the accounting treatment of preexisting relationships between the parties of a business combination.
The consensus of EITF 041 should be applied to business combinations consummated and goodwill impairment tests performed in reporting periods beginning after the FASB ratied the consensus at its October 13 2004 meeting.
The group will adopt the provisions of EITF 041 as of April 1 2005.
If it is determined that assets of an acquired entity are related to a preexisting contractual relationship thus requiring accounting separate from the business combination BT will evaluate whether the acquiring entity of the group should recognise contractual relationships as assets separate from goodwill in that business combination.
In March 2004 the EITF reached a consensus on EITF Issue No.
031 The Meaning of OtherThanTemporary Impairment and Its Application to Certain Investments EITF 031.
The guidance prescribed a threestep model for determining whether an investment is otherthantemporarily impaired and requires disclosure for unrealized losses on investments.
In September 2004 the FASB issued FASB Staff Position EITF 0311 Effective Date of Paragraphs 1020 of EITF Issue No.
031 FSP EITF 0311.
FSP EITF 0311 delays the effective date for the measurement and recognition guidance contained in paragraphs 1020 of EITF 031.
The disclosure requirements of EITF 031 remain effective for scal years ending after June 15 2004.
No effective date for the measurement and recognition guidance has been established in FSP EITF 0311.
During the period of delay FSP EITF 0311 states that companies should continue to apply current guidance to determine if an impairment is otherthantemporary.
The adoption of EITF 031 excluding paragraphs 1020 did not impact the groups consolidated position results of operations or cash ows.
The group will assess the impact of paragraphs 1020 of EITF 031 once the guidance has been nalised.
31 March 2005 The following US GAAP pro forma information summarises the results of operations for the years indicated as if the Infonet and Albacom acquisitions had been completed as of the beginning of the years presented.
The pro forma amounts do not purport to be indicative of the results that would have actually been obtained if the acquisitions had occurred as of the beginning of the years presented or that may be obtained in the future.
Turnover 19069 19262 Prot for the nancial year 1187 698 Earnings per share 13.9p 8.1p United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 121 BT Group plc is the parent company of the group.
Brief details of its principal operating subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates at 31 March 2005 other than the company all of which were unlisted unless otherwise stated were as follows
Group interest in allotted capital
Subsidiary undertakings Albacom SpA de Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Italy British Telecommunications plc Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary UK BT Americas Inc.
Communication related services and products provider 100% common USA BT Australasia Pty Limited Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary 100% preference
BT Cableships Limited Cableship owner 100% ordinary International BT Centre Nominee 2 Limited Property holding company 100% ordinary UK BT Communications Management Limited Telecommunication services provider 100% ordinary UK BT ESPANA Compania de Servicios Globales de Telecommunicaciones
Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Spain BT Fleet Limited Fleet management company 100% ordinary UK BT Germany GmbH and Co.
Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Germany BT Global Services Limited International telecommunication network systems provider 100% ordinary UK BT Holdings Limited Investment holding company 100% ordinary UK BT Hong Kong Limited Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary 100% preference Hong Kong BT Limited International telecommunication network systems provider 100% ordinary International BT Nederland NV Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Netherlands BT Subsea Cables Limited Cable maintenance and repair 100% ordinary UK BT US Investments LLC Investment holding company 100% ordinary USA Communications Networking Services
Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary UK Communications Global Network Services Limited Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Bermuda Esat Telecommunications Limited dg Telecommunication services provider 100% ordinary Ireland Farland BV cd Provider of transborder bre network across BTs partners in Europe 100% ordinary International Infonet Services Corporation df Global managed network service provider 100% common USA Infonet USA Corporation df Global managed network service provider 100% common USA Syntegra Limited Systems integration and application development 100% ordinary UK Syntegra Groep BV Systems integration and application development 100% ordinary Netherlands Syntegra SA Systems integration and application development 100% ordinary France Syntegra USA Inc.
Systems integration and electronic business outsourcing services 100% common International The group comprises a large number of companies and it is not practical to include all of them in this list.
The list therefore only includes those companies that have a more significant impact on the profit or assets of the group.
A full list of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates will be annexed to the companys next annual return filed with the Registrar of Companies.
The proportion of voting rights held corresponds to the aggregate interest percentage held by the holding company and subsidiary undertakings.
All overseas undertakings are incorporated in their country of operations.
Subsidiary undertakings operating internationally are all incorporated in England and Wales except Farland BV and Syntegra USA Inc. which are incorporated in the Netherlands and USA respectively.
Held through intermediate holding company.
In February 2005 BT acquired the remaining 74% economic interest in Albacom SpA and is now 100% owned.
In February 2005 BT acquired the Infonet group of companies.
In April 2005 Esat Telecommunications Limited changed its name to BT Communications Ireland Limited.
Share capital bn  billions Percentage Country of m millions Activity Issued owned operations Joint Ventures LG Telecom Mobile cellular telephone system provider and operator Won 1386bn 16.586% Republic of South Korea Issued share capital comprises ordinary or common shares unless otherwise stated.
All investments are held through intermediate holding companies.
Incorporated in the country of operations.
Held through intermediate holding company.
Subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates 122 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Year ended 31 March 2005 Unaudited Quarters 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Total turnover 4622 4768 4692 4949 19031 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 55 166 108 79 408 Group turnover 4567 4602 4584 4870 18623 Other operating income Group operating prot 62tel2789 Groups share of operating loss prot of associates and joint ventures 5 3 31 8 25 Total operating prot 61tel2764 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings Prot on sale of property xed assets 15 7  22 Net interest payable 204 207 200 190 801 Prot on ordinary activities before taxation 41tel2343 Tax on prot on ordinary activities 111 140 137 135 523 Prot on ordinary activities after taxation 30tel1820 Minority interests 1   1 Prot for the nancial period 30tel1821 Basic earnings per share 3.6p 5.0p 7.7p 5.1p 21.4p Diluted earnings per share 3.5p 5.0p 7.6p 5.1p 21.2p Prot before goodwill amortisation exceptional items and taxation 43tel2085 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 3.7p 4.8p 4.8p 4.9p 18.1p Diluted earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 3.7p 4.8p 4.7p 4.8p 18.0p Year ended 31 March 2004 Unaudited Quarters 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Total turnover 4693 4667 4676 4878 18914 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 107 99 98 91 395 Group turnover 4586 4568 4578 4787 18519 Other operating income Group operating prot 72tel2870 Groups share of operating loss prot of associates and joint ventures 3 4 5 32 34 Total operating prot 72tel2836 Prot loss on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 1  33 4 36 Prot on sale of property xed assets  Net interest payable 225 234 260 222 941 Prot on ordinary activities before taxation 49tel1945 Tax on prot on ordinary activities 153 132 133 121 539 Prot on ordinary activities after taxation 34tel1406 Minority interests 6 1  1 8 Prot for the nancial period 35tel1414 Basic earnings per share 4.1p 4.3p 4.5p 3.5p 16.4p Diluted earnings per share 4.0p 4.3p 4.4p 3.5p 16.3p Prot before goodwill amortisation exceptional items and taxation 50tel2013 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 4.1p 4.4p 4.4p 3.9p 16.9p Diluted earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 4.1p 4.4p 4.4p 3.9p 16.8p Restated  see note 1 Quarterly analysis of turnover and prot BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20Fteltel 2005 Financial ratios Basic earnings per share on continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items  pence Basic earnings loss per share on continuing activities  pence Basic earnings loss per share  pence Return on capital employed % bc Interest cover Restated following adoption of UITF 17 and UITF 38 see note 1 on page 81.
The ratio is based on profit before tax goodwill amortisation and interest on longterm borrowings to average capital employed.
Capital employed is represented by total assets excluding goodwill less current liabilities excluding corporate taxes and dividends payable and provisions other than those for deferred taxation.
Yearend figures are used in the computation of the average except in the case of shortterm investments and borrowings where average daily balances are used in their place.
Return on capital employed is based upon the continuing activities.
Return on capital employed before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was 16.0% 2004  15.3%.
The number of times net interest payable is covered by total operating profit before goodwill amortisation.
Interest cover before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was 3.6 times 2004  3.3 times.
Expenditure on research and development Total expenditure 364 362 380tel Expenditure on tangible xed assets Plant and equipment Transmission equipment 1655 1373 1277 1324 1488 Exchange equipment 47tel143 Other network equipment 91tel648 Computers and ofce equipment 40tel312 Motor vehicles and other 23tel349 Land and buildings 3860 3110 2454 2653 3004 Increase decrease in engineering stores 3 10 9 20 7 Total continuing activities 3857 3100 2445 2673 3011 Total discontinued activities 1129 808 Total expenditure on tangible xed assets 4986 3908 2445 2673 3011 Increase decrease in creditors 230 Cash outow on purchase of tangible xed assets 4756 4069 2580 2684 3056 Financial statistics have been restated where necessary to provide consistency with the presentation of the 2005 nancial year gures.
Financial statistics Years ended 31 March 124 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20Fteltel Call growth decline % growth decline in UK xednetwork call volumes minutes over the previous year 18 19 13 2 18 Growth is estimated by reference to growth in absolute call minutes.
UK exchange line connections Business 000 8918 9072 9198 9071 8705 % growth decline over previous year 5.5 1.7 1.4 1.4 4.0 Residential 000 19981 20093 20357 20550 20850 % growth decline over previous year 0.3 0.6 1.3 0.9 1.5 Service providers 000 012 % growth decline over previous year 29.5 16.4 62.5 314 168 Total exchange line connections 000 28966 29221 29646 29998 30567 % growth over previous year 1.4 0.9 1.5 1.2 1.9 Included above Wholesale DSL connections 000 49 170 800 2215 4932 % growth over previous year na 247 371teltel 2005 People employed Continuing activities 000 116.8 108.6 104.7 99.9 102.1 Discontinued activities 000 20.2 Operational statistics Years ended 31 March BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 125 The business of BT is affected by a number of factors not all of which are wholly within BTs control.
Although many of the factors inuencing BTs performance are macro economic and likely to affect the performance of businesses generally some aspects of BTs business make it particularly sensitive to certain areas of business risk.
This section highlights some of those specic areas.
However it does not purport to be an extensive analysis of the factors affecting the business and some risks may be unknown to us and other risks currently believed to be immaterial could turn out to be material.
All of these could materially adversely affect our business turnover prots assets liquidity and capital resources.
They should also be considered in connection with the forward looking statements in this document and the cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 128 of this document.
If BTs activities are subject to signicant price and other regulatory controls its market share competitive position and future protability may be affected Most of BTs xed network activities in the UK are subject to signicant regulatory controls.
The controls regulate among other things the prices BT may charge for many of its services and the extent to which it has to provide services to its competitors.
In recent years the effect of these controls has been to cause BT to reduce its prices.
BT cannot assure its shareholders that the regulatory authorities will not increase the severity of the price controls nor extend the services to which controls apply including any new services that BT may offer in the future nor extend the services which it has to provide its competitors.
These controls may adversely affect BTs market share the severity of competition and its future protability.
During 2004 and 2005 Ofcom has been undertaking a strategic review of the UK telecommunications market in order to formulate the principles on which it can base its regulatory decisions in the future.
This review is scheduled to be completed in 2005.
It is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome or implications for BT of Ofcoms review.
Further details on the regulatory framework in which BT operates can be found in Business Review  regulation competition and prices on pages 15 to 22 of this document.
BT faces strong competition in UK xed network services BT continues to have a signicant market share in some aspects of UK xed network services.
In particular in the 2005 nancial year we estimate we had a market share of 64% of consumer calls and 42% of business calls in the UK.
Regulators have promoted competition in this area by allowing BTs competitors to site equipment in or adjacent to its exchanges local loop unbundling to make it easier for BTs customers to route some or all of their calls over competitors networks carrier preselection and by the introduction of a wholesale access product wholesale line rental.
Reduction in BTs market share in the xed network may lead to a fall in BTs turnover and an adverse effect on protability.
Unlike its competitors BT continues to be obliged by the current regulatory regime to serve customers in the UK whether or not such provision of service is economic and the competitive measures described above may have the effect of accelerating the diversion of its more protable existing customers without it being able to reduce its costs commensurately.
There is also competition for voice and data trafc volumes between xed network operators and those operators offering VoIP Voice over IP and mobile services.
These changes in the regulatory environment and ensuing increased competition on BTs xed network may cause adverse effects on its business results of operations nancial condition and prospects.
BTs business is dependent on the ability to exploit technological advances quickly and successfully BT operates in an industry with a recent history of fast technological changes.
It expects that new products and technologies will continue to emerge and that existing products and technologies will develop further.
BT needs to continually develop its services and products to exploit those next generation technologies.
However BT cannot predict the actual effect of these technological changes on its business or on its ability to provide competitive services.
For example there is evidence of substitution by customers using mobile phones for daytoday voice calls in place of making such calls over the xed network.
Additionally some calls are now being routed over the internet in place of the traditional switched network.
If these trends accelerate BTs xed network assets may be used uneconomically and its investment in these assets may not be recovered through prots on xednetwork calls and line rentals.
The complexity of the 21st Century Network may also result in delays to the delivery of expected benets.
Impairment writedowns may be incurred and margins may decline if xed costs cannot be reduced in line with falling turnover.
BT is carrying out a transformation strategy including the targeting of signicant growth in new wave business areas BT has a strategy to transform its business.
This may result in changes to its products services markets and culture.
If the groups transformation strategy is unsuccessful there is a risk that the future turnover and protability will decline.
In particular BT has targeted signicant growth in new business areas such as broadband mobility and Information and Communications Technology ICT solutions.
In view of the likely level of competition and uncertainties regarding the level of economic activity there can be no certainty that BT will meet its growth targets in these areas with a consequential impact on future turnover and protability.
BTs businesses may be adversely affected if they fail to perform on major contracts BT has entered into a number of complex and high value services contracts with customers.
Failure to manage and meet BTs commitments under these contracts may lead to a reduction in BTs future turnover protability and cash generation.
BTs businesses may be adversely affected if their networks or systems experience any signicant failures or interruptions BTs businesses are dependent on their ability to transfer substantial volumes of data speedily and without interruption.
Any signicant failure or interruption of such data transfer due to factors outside their control could have a material adverse effect on the businesses and their results from operations.
BT has a business continuity strategy designed to deal with such catastrophic events including for example major terrorist action industrial action extreme virus attack hurricane or ooding that may impact the ability to maintain an effective service to customers.
A failure to deliver that strategy may result in a material loss and there can be no assurance that material adverse events will not occur.
Declining investment returns and longer life expectancy may result in the funding cost of the dened benet pension scheme becoming a signicant burden on the nancial resources of BT The dened benet pension scheme the BT Pension Scheme BTPS was closed to new members on 31 March 2001 and has been replaced by a dened contribution scheme BTRP.
The latest full triennial actuarial valuation of the BTPS was completed as at 31 December 2002.
As a result BT agreed to make normal contributions of 12.2% of pensionable pay and annual deciency payments of 232 million.
This will apply until the next triennial actuarial valuation is completed as at 31 December 2005.
In March 2004 a 380 million prepayment of deciency contributions was made representing most of the deciency contributions for the 2005 and 2006 nancial years.
The results of future scheme valuations will be impacted by the future investment market performance interest and ination rates and the general trend towards longer life expectancy all of which are outside the control of BT.
In the event that investment returns decline or life expectancy increases the cash funding cost to BT may increase and may have a signicant effect on the nancial resources of BT.
Risk factors 126 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 128 Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 129 Listings 129 Share and ADS prices 129 Capital gains tax CGT Rights issue Demerger of O2 130 Analysis of shareholdings 130 Dividends 130 Dividend mandate 131 Dividend investment plan 131 Global Invest Direct 131 Total shareholder return 131 Results announcements 132 Individual savings accounts ISAs 132 ShareGift 132 Unclaimed Assets Register 132 Exchange rates 132 Share buy back 132 Memorandum and Articles of Association
Articles
135 Material contracts 135 Taxation US Holders Taxation of dividends Taxation of capital gains Passive foreign investment company status US information reporting and backup withholding UK stamp duty UK inheritance and gift taxes in connection with ordinary shares andor ADSs 138 Exchange controls and other limitations affecting security holders 138 Documents on display 138 Publications 138 Electronic communication 139 Shareholder communication Private shareholders Institutional investors and analysts Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 127 Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements Certain statements in this annual report are forwardlooking and are made in reliance on the safe harbour provisions of the US Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
These statements relate to analyses and other information which are based on forecasts of future results and estimates of amounts not yet determinable.
These statements include without limitation those concerning BTs transformation strategy and its ability to achieve it expected cost savings growth of and opportunities available in the communications industry and BTs positioning to take advantage of those opportunities expectations regarding competition market shares prices and growth expectations regarding the convergence of technologies growth and opportunities in new wave business such as networked IT services broadband and mobility BTs network development and plans for the 21st century network plans for the launch of new products and services network performance and quality the impact of regulatory initiatives on operations including the regulation of the UK xed wholesale and retail businesses BTs possible or assumed future results of operations andor those of its associates and joint ventures BTs future dividend policy capital expenditure and investment plans adequacy of capital nancing plans demand for and access to broadband and the promotion of broadband by thirdparty service providers and those preceded by followed by or that include the words believes expects anticipates intends or similar expressions.
Due to a number of new and revised Standards included within the body of Standards that comprise IFRS International Financial Reporting Standards there is not yet a signicant body of established practice on which to draw in forming opinions regarding interpretation and application.
Accordingly practice is continuing to evolve.
At this preliminary stage therefore the full nancial effect of reporting under IFRS as it will be applied and reported on in the groups rst IFRS nancial statements cannot be determined with certainty and may be subject to change.
Although BT believes that the expectations reected in these forwardlooking statements are reasonable it can give no assurance that these expectations will prove to have been correct.
Because these statements involve risks and uncertainties actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forwardlooking statements.
Factors that could cause differences between actual results and those implied by the forwardlooking statements include but are not limited to material adverse changes in economic conditions in the markets served by BT and its lines of business future regulatory actions and conditions in its operating areas including competition from others in the UK and other international communications markets selection by BT and its lines of business of the appropriate trading and marketing models for its products and services technological innovations including the cost of developing new products and the need to increase expenditures for improving the quality of service the anticipated benets and advantages of new technologies not being realised developments in the convergence of technologies prolonged adverse weather conditions resulting in a material increase in overtime staff or other costs the timing of entry and protability of BT and its lines of business in certain communications markets signicant changes in market shares for BT and its principal products and services uctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates and general nancial market conditions affecting BTs performance.
Certain of these factors are discussed in more detail elsewhere in this annual report including without limitation in Risk factors.
T undertakes no obligation to update any forwardlooking statements whether as a result of new information future events or otherwise.
128 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Additional information for shareholders Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 129
The principal listing of BT Groups ordinary shares is on the London Stock Exchange.
American Depositary Shares ADSs each representing 10 ordinary shares have been issued by JPMorgan Chase Bank as Depositary for the American Depositary Receipts ADRs evidencing the ADSs and are listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
ADSs also trade but are not listed on the London Stock Exchange.
Trading on the New York Stock Exchange is under the symbol
Share and ADS prices Pence per ordinary share US per
High pence
High
Low
Years ended 31 March Year ended 31 March 2004 1 July  30 September 2003 206.75 180.00 33.70 28.90 1 October  31 December 2003 190.50 171.25 34.22 29.76 1 January  31 March 2004 189.75 173.25 34.80 32.40 Year ended 31 March 2005 1 July  30 September 2004 197.50 177.50 36.80 32.66 1 October  31 December 2004 206.00 180.50 40.07 32.61 1 January  31 March 2005 216.25 196.50 40.93 37.71
November 2004 199.25 185.50 37.40 34.37 December 2004 206.00 196.50 40.07 38.22 February 2005 216.25 203.50 40.93 38.59 The pre19 November 2001 prices shown have been adjusted for the rights issue and demerger that occurred in the 2002 financial year.
The prices are the highest and lowest closing middle market prices for BT ordinary shares as derived from the Daily Ofcial List of the London Stock Exchange and the highest and lowest closing sales prices of ADSs as reported on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape.
Fluctuations in the exchange rate between the pound sterling and the US dollar affect the dollar equivalent of the pound sterling price of the companys ordinary shares on the London Stock Exchange and as a result are likely to affect the market price of the ADSs on the New York Stock Exchange.
Capital gains tax CGT The rights issue in June 2001 and the demerger of O2 in November 2001 adjusted the value for capital gains tax purposes of BT shares.
Rights issue An explanatory note on the effects of the rights issue on the CGT position relating to BT shareholdings is available from the Shareholder Helpline see page 139.
Demerger of O2  capital gains tax calculation The conrmed ofcial opening prices for BT Group and O2 shares on 19 November 2001 following the demerger were 285.75p and 82.75p respectively.
This means that of the total combined value of 368.50p 77.544% is attributable to BT Group and 22.456% to O2.
Accordingly for CGT calculations the base cost of BT Group shares and O2 shares is calculated by multiplying the acquisition cost of a BT shareholding by 77.544% and 22.456% respectively.
130 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Additional information for shareholders Analysis of shareholdings Ordinary shares of 5p each
Number of holdings
Number of shares held millions
1600  9999 175825 11.7 506 5.9 10000  99999 5539 0.4 108 1.3 5000000 and above abcd Total 1503855 100.0 8634 100.0 28 million shares were held in trust by Ilford Trustees Jersey Limited for allocation to employees under the employee share plans.
Under the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan 52 million shares were held in trust on behalf of 84803 participants who were beneficially entitled to the shares.
136 million shares were held in the corporate nominee BT Group EasyShare on behalf of 127161 beneficial owners.
250 million shares were represented by ADSs.
Analysis by size of holding is not available for this holding.
134 million shares were held as treasury shares.
13.7% of the shares were in 1474873 individual holdings of which 124457 were joint holdings and 86.3% of the shares were in 28982 institutional holdings.
So far as the company is aware the company is not directly or indirectly owned or controlled by another corporation or by the UK Government or any other foreign government or by any other natural or legal person severally or jointly.
There are no arrangements known to the company the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change in control of the company.
At 13 May 2005 there were 8634629038 ordinary shares outstanding including 134277107 shares held as treasury shares.
At the same date approximately 25 million ADSs equivalent to 250 million ordinary shares or approximately 2.9% of the total number of ordinary shares outstanding on that date were outstanding and were held by 2579 record holders of ADRs.
At 31 March 2005 there were 3593 shareholders with a US address on the register of shareholders.
Dividends
Since shortly after its incorporation in 1984 British Telecommunications plc paid interim dividends annually in February and nal dividends in September.
However as part of BTs debt reduction and restructuring plans neither a nal dividend for the year ended 31 March 2001 nor an interim dividend for the year ended 31 March 2002 was paid to shareholders.
A nal dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2004 was paid on 6 September 2004 to shareholders on the register on 6 August 2004 and an interim dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2005 was paid on 7 February 2005 to shareholders on the register on 31 December 2004.
The dividends paid or payable on BT shares and ADSs for the last ve years are shown in the following table.
The dividends on the ordinary shares exclude the associated tax credit.
The amounts shown are not those that were actually paid to holders of ADSs.
For the tax treatment of dividends paid see Taxation of dividends below.
Dividends have been translated from pounds sterling into US dollars using exchange rates prevailing on the date the ordinary dividends were paid.
Per ordinary share Per ADS Per ADS Years ended 31 March
Final pence
Interim
Final
Total
Interim
US
Final
US
Total
US
Qualifying holders of ADSs on record as of 5 August 2005 are entitled to receive the final dividend which will be paid on 12 September 2005 subject to approval at the annual general meeting.
The US dollar amount of the final dividend of 65 pence per ADS to be paid to holders of ADSs will be based on the exchange rate in effect on 5 September 2005 the date of payment to holders of ordinary shares.
As dividends paid by the company are in pounds sterling exchange rate uctuations will affect the US dollar amounts received by holders of ADSs on conversion by the Depositary of such cash dividends.
Dividend mandate Any shareholder wishing dividends to be paid directly into a bank or building society account should contact the Shareholder Helpline see page 139.
Dividends paid in this way will be paid through the Bankers Automated Clearing System BACS.
Alternatively a form may be downloaded from the internet at sitesharesandperformance Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 131 Dividend investment plan The dividend investment plan replaced the share dividend plan for shareholders following the 1999 interim dividend.
Under the dividend investment plan cash from participants dividends is used to buy further BT Group shares in the market.
Shareholders could elect to receive additional shares in lieu of a cash dividend for the following dividends Date paid Price per share pence 2000 nal 18 September 2000 809.6 2001 interim 12 February 2001 621.8 2002 nal 9 September 2002 191.19 2003 interim 10 February 2003 178.23 2003 nal 8 September 2003 184.41 2004 interim 9 February 2004 175.98 2004 nal 6 September 2004 183.69 2005 interim 7 February 2005 209.95 Global Invest Direct Details of the direct purchase plan run by the ADR Depositary JPMorgan Chase Bank Global Invest Direct including reinvestment of dividends are available from JPMorgan Chase Bank on 1tel toll free within the USA or 1tel from outside the USA or on written request to the ADR Depositary.
Total shareholder return Total shareholder return TSR is the measure of the returns that a company has provided for its shareholders reecting share price movements and assuming reinvestment of dividends.
It is therefore a good indicator of a companys overall performance.
Over the past ve years as shown in the TSR chart below BT Groups TSR as adjusted for the rights issue and demerger was negative 70% compared to a FTSE 100 TSR of negative 12%.
This was primarily due to a fall in BTs share price which like many stocks in the telecoms media and technology TMT sector declined in the rst two years of the period.
In the period between the demerger on 19 November 2001 and 31 March 2005 BTs TSR was negative 17% almost in line with the FTSEurorst 300 Telco Index negative 16%.
However in the last 12 months BTs TSR has outperformed both the FTSE 100 and FTSEurorst 300 Telco Index with a 21.8% return compared to a 15.4% return for each of those indices.
BTs total shareholder return TSR performance vs the FTSE 100 over ve nancial years to 31 March 2005 BTs TSR performance vs the FTSEurorst 300 Telco Index since demerger 1 April 2000  100.
Source Datastream The graph shows the relative TSR performance adjusted for the rights issue and demerger of our mobile business in the 2002 nancial year of BT and the FTSE 100.
19 November 2001  100.
Source Datastream The graph shows the relative TSR performance of BT and the FTSEurorst 300 Telco Index since demerger.
Results announcements Expected announcements of results 1st quarter 28 July 2005 2nd quarter and half year 10 November 2005 3rd quarter and nine months February 2006 4th quarter and full year May 2006 2006 annual report and accounts published June 2006 132 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Additional information for shareholders Individual savings accounts ISAs Information about investing in BT shares through an ISA may be obtained from Halifax Share Dealing Limited Trinity Road Halifax W. orkshire HX1 2RG telephonetel.
ISAs are also offered by other organisations.
ShareGift
The Orr Mackintosh Foundation operates a charity share donation scheme for shareholders with small parcels of shares whose value makes it uneconomic to sell them.
Details of the scheme are available from ShareGift at www. haregift. rg or telephonetel or can be obtained from the Shareholder Helpline.
Unclaimed Assets Register BT is among a growing number of companies which subscribe to the Unclaimed Assets Register which provides a search facility for nancial assets such as shareholdings and dividends which have become separated from their owners.
The Register donates a proportion of its public search fees to charity via ShareGift.
For further information on the Unclaimed Assets Register visit site or telephonetel.
Exchange rates BT publishes its consolidated nancial statements expressed in pounds sterling.
The following tables detail certain information concerning the exchange rates between pounds sterling and US dollars based on the noon buying rate in New York City for cable transfers in pounds sterling as certied for customs purposes by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York the Noon Buying Rate.
Years ended 31 Marchtel 2004 2005
Month
November
December
January
February
March
April
The average of the Noon Buying Rates in effect on the last day of each month during the relevant period.
On 13 May 2005 the most recent practicable date for this annual report the Noon Buying Rate was US1.85 to 1.00.
Share buy back The following table gives details of the purchase by BT of its own shares during the 2005 nancial year.
Calendar month Total number of shares purchased Average price paid per share pence  net of dealing costs Total number of shares purchased as part of publicly announced plans or programmes Maximum number of shares that may yet be purchased under the plans or programmes April 2004 Nil NA Nil 786429000 May 4500000 182.28 4500000 781929000 June 12030000 188.80 12030000 769899000 July Nil NA Nil 859000000 August 26750000 180.61 26750000 832250000 September 11200000 181.65 11200000 821050000 October 500000 185.61 500000 820550000 November 6200000 195.25 6200000 814350000 December 10800000 201.31 10800000 803550000 January 2005 Nil NA Nil 803550000 February 7750000 208.85 7750000 795800000 March 21550000 202.12 21550000 774250000 Total 101280000 191.64 101280000 774250000 Purchases from April to June 2004 were made in accordance with a resolution passed at the AGM held on 16 July 2003.
Purchases from August 2004 to March 2005 were made in accordance with a resolution passed at the AGM on 14 July 2004.
Authority was given to purchase up to 867 million shares on 16 July 2003 and 859 million shares on 14 July 2004.
These authorities expire at the close of the following AGM or 15 months following the date of approval if earlier.
The authority given in July 2003 expired on 14 July 2004.
There are no plans or programmes BT has determined to terminate prior to expiration or under which BT does not intend to make further purchases.
Memorandum and Articles of Association The following is a summary of the principal provisions of BTs memorandum and articles of association Memorandum and Articles a copy of which has been led with the Registrar of Companies.
Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 133
The Memorandum provides that the companys principal objects are among other things to carry on any business of running operating managing and supplying telecommunication systems and systems of any kind for conveying receiving storing processing or transmitting sounds visual images signals messages and communications of any kind.
Articles
In the following description of the rights attaching to the shares in the company a holder of shares and a shareholder is in either case the person entered on the companys register of members as the holder of the relevant shares.
Shareholders can choose whether their shares are to be evidenced by share certicates i. or held in electronic i. uncerticated form in CREST the electronic settlement system in the UK.
Subject to the restrictions described below on a show of hands every shareholder present in person or by proxy at any general meeting has one vote and on a poll every shareholder present in person or by proxy has one vote for each share which they hold.
Voting at any meeting of shareholders is by a show of hands unless a poll is demanded by the chairman of the meeting or by at least ve shareholders at the meeting who are entitled to vote or their proxies or by one or more shareholders at the meeting who are entitled to vote or their proxies and who have between them at least 10% of the total votes of all shareholders who have the right to vote at the meeting.
No person is unless the Board decide otherwise entitled to attend or vote at any general meeting or to exercise any other right conferred by being a shareholder if he or any person appearing to be interested in those shares has been sent a notice under section 212 of the Companies Act 1985 which confers upon public companies the power to require information with respect to interests in their voting shares and he or any interested person has failed to supply to the company the information requested within 14 days after delivery of that notice.
These restrictions end seven days after the earlier of the date the shareholder complies with the request satisfactorily or the company receives notice that there has been an approved transfer of the shares.
Whenever the share capital of the company is split into different classes of shares the special rights attached to any of those classes can be varied or withdrawn either i with the sanction of an extraordinary resolution passed at a separate meeting of the holders of the shares of that class or ii with the consent in writing of the holders of at least 75% in nominal value of the issued shares of that class.
At any separate meeting the necessary quorum is two persons holding or representing by proxy not less than one third in nominal amount of the issued shares of the class in question but at any adjourned meeting any person holding shares of the class or his proxy is a quorum.
The company can issue new shares and attach any rights and restrictions to them as long as this is not restricted by special rights previously given to holders of any existing shares.
Subject to this the rights of new shares can take priority over the rights of existing shares or existing shares can take priority over them or the new shares and the existing shares can rank equally.
The company may by ordinary resolution i consolidate and divide all or any of its share capital into shares of a larger amount ii divide all or part of its share capital into shares of a smaller amount iii cancel any shares which have not at the date of the ordinary resolution been taken or agreed to be taken by any person and reduce the amount of its share capital by the amount of the shares cancelled and iv increase its share capital.
The company may also i buy back its own shares and ii by special resolution reduce its share capital any capital redemption reserve and any share premium account.
The companys shareholders can declare dividends by passing an ordinary resolution provided that no dividend can exceed the amount recommended by the directors.
Dividends must be paid out of prots available for distribution.
If
Fixed dividends will be paid on any class of shares on the dates stated for the payments of those dividends.
The directors can offer ordinary shareholders the right to choose to receive new ordinary shares which are credited as fully paid instead of some or all of their cash dividend.
Before they can do this the companys shareholders must have passed an ordinary resolution authorising the directors to make this offer.
Any dividend which has not been claimed for ten years after it was declared or became due for payment will be forfeited and will belong to the company unless the directors decide otherwise.
134 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Additional information for shareholders e Distribution of assets on winding up If the company is wound up whether the liquidation is voluntary under supervision of the court or by the court the liquidator can with the authority of an extraordinary resolution passed by the shareholders divide among the shareholders all or any part of the assets of the company.
This applies whether the assets consist of property of one kind or different kinds.
For this purpose the liquidator can place whatever value the liquidator considers fair on any property and decide how the division is carried out between shareholders or different groups of shareholders.
The liquidator can also with the same authority transfer any assets to trustees upon any trusts for the benet of shareholders which the liquidator decides.
The liquidation of the company can then be nalised and the company dissolved.
No past or present shareholder can be compelled to accept any shares or other property under the Articles which could give that shareholder a liability.
Certicated shares of the company may be transferred in writing either by an instrument of transfer in the usual standard form or in another form approved by the Board.
The transfer form must be signed or made effective by or on behalf of the person making the transfer.
The person making the transfer will be treated as continuing to be the holder of the shares transferred until the name of the person to whom the shares are being transferred is entered in the register of members of the company.
The Board may refuse to register any transfer of any share held in certicated form and which is in favour of more than four joint holders or and unless the transfer form to be registered is properly stamped to show payment of any applicable stamp duty and delivered to the companys registered ofce or any other place the Board decide.
The transfer must have with it the share certicate for the shares to be transferred any other evidence which the Board ask for to prove that the person wanting to make the transfer is entitled to do this and if the transfer form is executed by another person on behalf of the person making the transfer evidence of the authority of that person to do so.
Transfers of uncerticated shares must be carried out using a relevant system as dened in the Uncerticated Securities Regulations 1995 the Regulations.
The Board can refuse to register a transfer of an uncerticated share in the circumstances stated in the Regulations.
If the Board decide not to register a transfer of a share the Board must notify the person to whom that share was to be transferred no later than two months after the company receives the transfer or instruction from the operator of the relevant system.
The Board can decide to suspend the registration of transfers for up to 30 days a year by closing the register of shareholders.
The register must not be closed without the consent of the operator of a relevant system as dened in the Regulations in the case of uncerticated shares.
BT may sell any shares after advertising its intention and waiting for three months if the shares have been in issue for at least ten years during that period at least three dividends have become payable on them and have not been claimed and BT has not heard from the shareholder or any person entitled to the dividends by transmission.
The net sale proceeds belong to BT but it must pay those proceeds to the former shareholder or the person entitled to them by transmission if that shareholder or that other person asks for them.
Every year the company must hold an annual general meeting.
The Board can call an extraordinary general meeting at any time and under general law must call one on a shareholders requisition.
The only limitation imposed by the Articles on the rights of nonresident or foreign shareholders is that a shareholder whose registered address is outside the UK and who wishes to receive notices of meetings of shareholders or documents from BT must give the company an address within the UK to which they may be sent.
Directors remuneration Excluding remuneration referred to below each director will be paid such fee for his services as the Board decide not exceeding 50000 a year and increasing by the percentage increase of the UK Retail Prices Index as dened by Section  Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 for any 12month period beginning 1 April 1999 or an anniversary of that date.
The company may by ordinary resolution decide on a higher sum.
This resolution can increase the fee paid to all or any directors either permanently or for a particular period.
The directors may be paid their expenses properly incurred in connection with the business of the company.
The Board can award extra fees to a director who holds an executive position acts as chairman or deputy chairman serves on a Board committee at the request of the Board or performs any other services which the Board consider extend beyond the ordinary duties of a director.
The directors may grant pensions or other benets to among others any director or former director or persons connected with them.
However BT can only provide these benets to any director or former director who has not been an employee or held any other ofce or executive position in the company or any of its subsidiary undertakings or to relations or dependants of or people connected to those directors or former directors if the shareholders approve this by passing an ordinary resolution.
Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 135 Directors votes A director need not be a shareholder but a director who is not a shareholder can still attend and speak at shareholders meetings.
Unless the Articles say otherwise a director cannot vote on a resolution about a contract in which the director has a material interest this will also apply to interests of a person connected with the director.
The director can vote if the interest is only an interest in BT shares debentures or other securities.
A director can however vote and be counted in a quorum in respect of certain matters in which he is interested as set out in the Articles.
Subject to the relevant legislation the shareholders can by passing an ordinary resolution suspend or relax among other things the provisions relating to the interest of a director in any contract or arrangement or relating to a directors right to vote and be counted in a quorum on resolutions in which he is interested to any extent or ratify any particular contract carried out in breach of those provisions.
Directors interests If the legislation allows and the director has disclosed the nature and extent of the interest to the Board the director can i have any kind of interest in a contract with or involving BT or in which BT has an interest or with or involving another company in which BT has an interest ii have any kind of interest in a company in which BT has an interest including holding a position in that company or being a shareholder of that company iii hold a position other than auditor in BT or another company in which BT has an interest on terms and conditions decided by the Board and iv alone or through some rm with which the director is associated do paid professional work other than as auditor for BT or another company in which BT has an interest on terms and conditions decided by the Board.
A director does not have to hand over to BT any benet received or prot made as a result of anything permitted to be done under the Articles.
When a director knows that they are interested in a contract with BT they must tell the other directors.
Retirement of directors Provisions of the legislation which read with the Articles would prevent a person from being or becoming a director because that person has reached the age of 70 do not apply to the company.
At every annual general meeting any director who was elected or last reelected a director at or before the annual general meeting held in the third year before the current year shall retire by rotation.
Any director appointed by the directors automatically retires at the next following annual general meeting.
A retiring director is eligible for reelection.
Directors borrowing powers To the extent that the legislation and the Articles allow the Board can exercise all the powers of the company to borrow money to mortgage or charge its business property and assets present and future and to issue debentures and other securities and give security either outright or as collateral security for any debt liability or obligation of the company or another person.
The Board must limit the borrowings of the company and exercise all the companys voting and other rights or powers of control exercisable by the company in relation to its subsidiary undertakings so as to ensure that the aggregate amount of all borrowings by the group outstanding net of amounts borrowed intragroup among other things at any time does not exceed 35 billion.
Material contracts Excluding contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business no contracts have been entered into in the two years preceding the date of this document by BT or another member of the group which are or may be material to the group or contain a provision under which a member of the group has an obligation or entitlement which is or may be material to BT or such other member of the group.
Taxation US Holders This is a summary only of the principal US federal income tax and UK tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs by US Holders as dened below who hold their ordinary shares or ADSs as capital assets.
It does not address all aspects of US federal income taxation and does not address aspects that may be relevant to persons who are subject to special provisions of US federal income tax law including US expatriates insurance companies taxexempt organisations banks regulated investment companies nancial institutions securities brokerdealers traders in securities who elect a marktomarket method of accounting persons subject to alternative minimum tax investors that directly indirectly or by attribution own 10% or more of the outstanding share capital or voting power of BT persons holding their ordinary shares or ADSs as part of a straddle hedging transaction or conversion transaction persons who acquired their ordinary shares or ADSs pursuant to the exercise of options or otherwise as compensation or persons whose functional currency is not the US dollar amongst others.
Those holders may be subject to US federal income tax consequences different from those set forth below.
For purposes of this summary a US Holder is a benecial owner of ordinary shares or ADSs that for US federal income tax purposes is a citizen or individual resident of the United States a corporation or other entity taxable as a corporation for US federal income tax purposes created or organised in or under the laws of the United States or any state thereof an estate the income of which is subject to US federal income taxation regardless of its source or a trust if a US court can exercise primary supervision over the administration of the trust and one or more US persons are 136 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Additional information for shareholders authorised to control all substantial decisions of the trust.
If a partnership holds ordinary shares or ADSs the tax treatment of a partner generally will depend upon the status of the partner and the activities of the partnership. tax consequences of owning and disposing of the ordinary shares or ADSs.
In particular this summary is based on i current UK tax law and UK Inland Revenue practice and US law and US Internal Revenue Service IRS practice including the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended Treasury regulations rulings judicial decisions and administrative practice all as currently in effect ii the United Kingdom United States Income Tax Convention that entered into force on 25 April 1980 and the protocols thereto in effect until 31 March 2003 the 1980 Convention iii the United KingdomUnited States Convention relating to estate and gift taxes and iv the new United KingdomUnited States Tax Convention that entered into force on 31 March 2003 and the protocol thereto the New Convention all as in effect on the date of this Annual Report all of which are subject to change or changes in interpretation possibly with retroactive effect.
US Holders should be aware that the New Convention generally will have effect in respect of dividends paid in 2004 and all subsequent years.
However a US Holder entitled to benets under the 1980 Convention could have elected to have the provisions of the 1980 Convention continue until 1 May 2004 if the election to apply the 1980 Convention would have resulted in greater benets to the Holder.
If a US Holder made a valid election in 2003 the discussion below with respect to dividend payments made pursuant to the 1980 Convention would apply to dividends paid by BT prior to 1 May 2004.
The discussion below notes instances where the relevant provisions of the New Convention will produce a materially different result for a validly electing US Holder.
US Holders should note that certain articles in the New Convention limit or restrict the ability of a US Holder to claim benets under the New Convention and that similar provisions were not contained in the 1980 Convention.
US Holders should consult their own tax advisors as to the applicability of the Conventions and the consequences under UK US federal state and local and other laws of the ownership and disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs.
Taxation of dividends The UK currently does not apply a withholding tax on dividends under its internal tax laws.
For US federal income tax purposes a distribution including any additional dividend income arising from a foreign tax credit claim as described below will be treated as ordinary dividend income.
The amount of the distribution includible in gross income of a US Holder will be the US dollar value of the distribution calculated by reference to the spot rate in effect on the date the distribution is actually or constructively received by a US Holder of ordinary shares or by the Depositary in the case of ADSs.
A US Holder who converts the British pounds into US dollars on the date of receipt generally should not recognise any exchange gain or loss.
A US Holder who does not convert the British pounds into US dollars on the date of receipt generally will have a tax basis in the British pounds equal to its US dollar value on such date.
Foreign currency gain or loss if any recognised by the US Holder on a subsequent conversion or other disposition of the British pounds generally will be US source ordinary income or loss.
Dividends paid by BT to a corporate US Holder will not be eligible for the US dividends received deduction.
For dividend payments subject to the 1980 Convention as described above a US Holder of ordinary shares or ADSs who is a resident of the US and is not a resident of the UK for the purposes of the 1980 Convention generally is entitled to receive in addition to any dividend that BT pays a payment from the UK Inland Revenue in respect of such dividend equal to the tax credit to which an individual resident in the UK for UK tax purposes would have been entitled had that individual received the dividend which is currently equal to oneninth of the dividend received reduced by a UK withholding tax equal to the amount not exceeding 15% of the sum of the dividend paid and the UK tax credit payment.
At current rates the withholding tax entirely eliminates the tax credit payment but no withholding in excess of the tax credit payment will be imposed upon the US Holder.
Thus for example a US Holder who receives a 90 dividend will also be treated as receiving from the UK Inland Revenue a tax credit payment of 10 oneninth of the dividend received but the entire 10 payment will be eliminated by UK withholding tax resulting in a net receipt of The effect on each US Holder will depend on circumstances that are particular to that Holder.
The foreign tax deemed paid generally will be available as a US credit or deduction.
A US Holder validly electing under the 1980 Convention could elect to receive a foreign tax credit or deduction with respect to any UK withholding tax on IRS Form 8833 TreatyBased Return Position Disclosure Under Section 6114 or 7701b.
For purposes of calculating the foreign tax credit dividends paid on the ordinary shares or ADSs will be treated as income from sources outside the United States and generally will constitute passive income or for certain Holders nancial services income.
The rules relating to the determination of the foreign tax credit are very complex.
US Holders who do not elect to claim a credit with respect to any foreign taxes paid in a given taxable year may instead claim a deduction for foreign taxes paid.
A deduction does not reduce US federal income tax on a dollar for dollar basis like a tax credit.
The deduction however is not subject to the limitations applicable to foreign credits.
There will be no right to any payment from the UK Inland Revenue and no notional UK withholding tax applied to a dividend payment made under the New Convention.
Therefore it will not be possible for US Holders to claim a foreign tax credit in respect of any dividend payment made by BT in 2004 or from 1 May 2004 in the case of a US Holder who effectively elected to extend the applicability of the 1980 Convention.
US Holders should consult their own tax advisors to determine whether the US Holder is eligible for benets under the 1980 Convention and the New Convention and whether and to what extent a foreign tax credit will be available with respect to dividends received from BT.
The US Treasury has expressed concern that parties to whom ADSs are released may be taking actions that are inconsistent with the claiming of foreign tax credits for US Holders of ADSs.
Accordingly the analysis of the creditability of British withholding taxes in the case of the US Holder who properly elected to apply the 1980 Convention could be affected by future actions that may be taken by the US Treasury.
Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 137 Certain US Holders including individuals are eligible for reduced rates of US federal income tax currently at a maximum rate of 15% in respect of qualied dividend income received in taxable years beginning before 1 January 2009.
For this purpose qualied dividend income generally includes dividends paid by a nonUS corporation if among other things the US Holders meet certain minimum holding periods and the nonUS corporation satises certain requirements including that either i the shares or ADSs with respect to which the dividend has been paid are readily tradeable on an established securities market in the United States or ii the nonUS corporation is eligible for the benets of a comprehensive US income tax treaty such as both Conventions which provides for the exchange of information.
BT currently believes that dividends paid with respect to its ordinary shares and ADSs should constitute qualied dividend income for US federal income tax purposes.
The US Treasury and the IRS have announced their intention to promulgate rules pursuant to which holders of ADSs or ordinary shares among others will be permitted to rely on certications from issuers to establish that dividends are treated as qualied dividend income.
Each individual US Holder of ordinary shares or ADSs is urged to consult his own tax advisor regarding the availability to him of the reduced dividend tax rate in light of his own particular situation and regarding the computations of his foreign tax credit limitation with respect to any qualied dividend income paid by BT to him as applicable.
Taxation of capital gains Unless a US resident carries on a trade through a branch or agency if an individual or through a permanent establishment if a company in the UK and the disposal of ordinary shares andor ADSs is related to the activities of that trade neither UK capital gains tax nor corporation tax is normally charged on US residents who dispose of ordinary shares andor ADSs.
For US federal income tax purposes a US Holder generally will recognise capital gain or loss on the sale exchange or other disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs in an amount equal to the difference between the US dollar value of the amount realised on the disposition and the US Holders adjusted tax basis determined in US dollars in the ordinary shares or ADSs.
Such gain or loss generally will be US source gain or loss and will be treated as longterm capital gain or loss if the ordinary shares have been held for more than one year at the time of disposition.
Capital gains recognised by an individual US Holder generally are subject to US federal income tax at preferential rates if specied holdings periods are met.
The deductibility of capital losses is subject to signicant limitations.
Passive foreign investment company status A nonUS corporation will be classied as a Passive Foreign Investment Company a PFIC for any taxable year if at least 75% of its gross income consists of passive income or at least 50% of the average value of its assets consist of assets that produce or are held for the production of passive income.
BT currently believes that it did not qualify as a PFIC for the taxable year ending 31 March 2004 for US federal income tax purposes.
If BT were to become a PFIC for any taxable year US Holders would suffer adverse tax consequences.
These consequences may include having gains realised on the disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs treated as ordinary income rather than capital gains and being subject to punitive interest charges on certain dividends and on the proceeds of the sale or other disposition of the ordinary shares or ADSs.
Furthermore dividends paid by BT would not be qualied dividend income and would be subject to the higher rates applicable to other items of ordinary income.
US Holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the potential application of the PFIC rules to BT.
US information reporting and backup withholding Dividends paid on and proceeds received from the sale exchange or other disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs may be subject to information reporting to the IRS and backup withholding at a current rate of 28%.
Certain exempt recipients such as corporations are not subject to these information reporting requirements.
Backup withholding will not apply however to a Holder who provides a correct taxpayer identication number or certicate of foreign status and makes any other required certication or who is otherwise exempt.
US persons who are required to establish their exempt status generally must furnish IRS Form W9 Request for Taxpayer Identication Number and Certication.
NonUS Holders generally will not be subject to US information reporting or backup withholding.
However such Holders may be required to provide certication of nonUS status in connection with payments received in the United States or through certain USrelated nancial intermediaries.
Backup withholding is not an additional tax.
Amounts withheld as backup withholding may be credited against a Holders US federal income tax liability.
A Holder may obtain a refund of any excess amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules by timely ling the appropriate claim for refund with the IRS and furnishing any required information.
UK stamp duty A transfer of an ordinary share will generally be subject to UK stamp duty or UK stamp duty reserve tax at 0.5% of the amount or value of any consideration provided.
A transfer of an ordinary share into a clearance service or American depositary system gives rise to a 1.5% charge of either the amount of the consideration provided or the value of the share issued.
No UK stamp duty will be payable on the transfer of an ADS assuming it is not registered in the UK provided that the transfer documents are executed and always retained outside the UK.
UK inheritance and gift taxes in connection with ordinary shares andor ADSs Where an individual holder who is not a UK national of ordinary shares andor ADSs falls within the scope of the UK US Estate and Gift Tax Convention USdomiciled holders of ordinary shares andor ADSs will not generally be subject to UK inheritance tax on a gift of ordinary shares andor ADSs if the gift is subject to US federal gift tax.
Similarly 138 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Additional information for shareholders ordinary shares andor ADSs passing on the death of a USdomiciled shareholder who is not a UK national will not generally be subject to UK inheritance tax if the estate is subject to US estate tax.
The rules and scope of domicile are complex and action should not be taken without advice specic to the individuals circumstances.
Exchange controls and other limitations affecting security holders There are currently no government laws decrees or regulations in the United Kingdom that restrict the export or import of capital including but not limited to UK foreign exchange control restrictions or that affect the remittances of dividends or other payments to nonresident holders of the companys ordinary shares except as otherwise described in Taxation US Holders above.
There are no limitations under the laws of the United Kingdom restricting the right of nonresidents to hold or to vote shares in the company.
Documents on display All reports and other information that BT les with the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC may be inspected at the SECs public reference facilities at Room 1200 450 Fifth Street Washington DC USA.
These reports may be accessed via the SECs website at www. ec.
Publications
BT produces a series of reports on the companys nancial economic social and environmental performance.
Most of these reports which are available to shareholders on request can be accessed on the internet at siteaboutbt.
More detailed disclosures on BTs implementation of social ethical and environmental policies and procedures are available online through our fully and independently veried social and environment report at sitebetterworld Document Publication date Annual Review including summary nancial statement June Annual Report and Form 20F June Quarterly results releases July November February and May Current Cost Financial Statements for the Businesses and Activities and Statement of Standard Services as required by Ofcom August Social and Environment Report June Statement of Business Practice July 2004 For printed copies when available contact the Shareholder Helpline on Freefonetel or alternatively contact the Registrar in the UK at the address on page 139.
Electronic communication Shareholders can now choose to receive their shareholder documents electronically rather than by post.
Shareholders may elect to receive documents in this way by going to sitesignup and following the online instructions or by calling the Shareholder Helpline.
Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 139 Shareholder communication BT is committed to communicating openly with each of its stakeholder audiences in the manner most appropriate to their requirements.
All investors can visit our website at sitesharesandperformance for more information about BT.
There are direct links from this page to sites providing information particularly tailored for shareholders institutional investors and analysts industry analysts and journalists.
An electronic copy of this document is available at sitesharesandperformance Private shareholders If private shareholders have any enquiries about their shareholding they should contact the Registrar the address can be found below.
Lloyds TSB Registrars maintain BT Groups share register and the separate BT Group EasyShare register.
They also provide a Shareholder Helpline service on Freefonetel.
Institutional investors and analysts Institutional investors and equity research analysts may contact Investor Relations on tel
Industry analysts may contact tel
Shareholder Helpline Tel Freefonetel
Textphone Freefonetel From outside the UK Tel 44tel Fax tel71 Textphone 44tel email email The Registrar ADR Depositary Lloyds TSB Registrars The Causeway Worthing West Sussex BN99 6DA United Kingdom
JPMorgan Chase Bank JPMorgan Service Centre
Box 43013 Providence RI 029403013 United States Tel 1tel toll free or 1tel from outside the USA email email Website site General enquiries BT Group plc BT Centre 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ United Kingdom Tel 020 7356 5000 Fax 020 7356 5520 From overseas Tel 44tel Fax 44tel 140 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Additional information for shareholders A full list of BT contacts and an electronic feedback facility is available at sitetalk Term used in UK annual report US equivalent or denition Accounts Financial statements Associates Equity investees Capital allowances Tax depreciation Capital redemption reserve Other additional capital Creditors Accounts payable and accrued liabilities Creditors amounts falling due within one year Current liabilities Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year Longterm liabilities Debtors amounts falling due after more than one year Other noncurrent assets Employee share plans Employee stock benet plans Finance lease Capital lease Financial year Fiscal year Fixed asset investments Noncurrent investments Freehold Ownership with absolute rights in perpetuity Gearing Leverage Inland calls Local and longdistance calls Interests in associates and joint ventures Securities of equity investees Investment in own shares Treasury shares Loans to associates and joint ventures Indebtedness of equity investees not current Net book value Book value Operating prot Net operating income Other debtors Other current assets Own work capitalised Costs of groups employees engaged in the construction of plant and equipment for internal use Prot Income Prot and loss account statement Income statement Prot and loss account Retained earnings under capital and reserves in balance sheet Prot for the nancial year Net income Prot on sale of xed assets Gain on disposal of noncurrent assets Provision for doubtful debts Allowance for bad and doubtful accounts receivable Provisions Longterm liabilities other than debt and specic accounts payable Recognised gains and losses statement Comprehensive income Reserves Shareholders equity other than paidup capital Share based payment Stock compensation Share premium account Additional paidin capital or paidin surplus not distributable Shareholders funds Shareholders equity Stocks Inventories Tangible xed assets Property plant and equipment Trade debtors Accounts receivable net Turnover Revenues Glossary of terms and US equivalents BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 141 The information in this document that is referred to in the following table shall be deemed to be led with the Securities and Exchange Commission for all purposes Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 1 Identity of directors senior management and advisors Not applicable 2 Offer statistics and expected timetable Not applicable 3 Key information 3A Selected nancial data Fiveyear nancial summary 23 Additional information for shareholders Exchange rates 132 3B Capitalisation and indebtedness Not applicable 3C Reasons for the offer and use of proceeds Not applicable 3D Risk factors Risk factors 126 4 Information on the company 4A History and development of the company Contents page
Business review
Introduction 7 Group structure Background 8 Acquisitions and disposals prior to the 2005 nancial year 8 Acquisitions and disposals in the 2005 nancial year 8 Postbalance sheet acquisitions 8
Financial review
Capital expenditure 38 Acquisitions 39 4B Business overview Business review 6
Financial review
Line of business results 30 Geographical information 40 Our commitment to society 44 Operational statistics 125 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 128 4C Organisational structure Business review Introduction 7 Subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates 122 4D Property plant and equipment Business review Property 15 Financial statistics 124 5 Operating and nancial review and prospects 5A Operating results Financial review 25 Consolidated nancial statements Accounting policies 72 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 128 5B Liquidity and capital resources Financial review 25 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 128 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Loans and other borrowings 94 Financial commitments and contingent liabilities 96 Financial instruments and risk management 106 5C Research and development patents and licences Business review Group strategy Build on our networked IT services capability 9 Research and development and IT support 14 Financial statistics 124 5D Trend information Financial review 25 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 128 5E Offbalance sheet arrangements Financial review Offbalance sheet arrangements 38 5F Tabular disclosure of contractual obligations Financial review Capital resources 38 Cross reference to Form 20F 142 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Cross reference to Form 20F Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 6 Directors senior management and employees 6A Directors and senior management Board of directors and Operating Committee 46 6B Compensation Report on directors remuneration 56 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Pension costs 97 Directors emoluments 102 Employee share plans 102 6C Board practices Board of directors and Operating Committee 46 Report of the directors Directors 48 Corporate governance 50 Report on directors remuneration 56 6D Employees Financial review Group results 28 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements People employed 102 Operational statistics 125 6E Share ownership Report on directors remuneration 56 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Employee share plans 102 7 Major shareholders and related party transactions 7A Major shareholders Report of the directors Substantial shareholdings 48 Additional information for shareholders Analysis of shareholdings 130 7B Related party transactions Report of the directors Interest of management in certain transactions 48 Report on directors remuneration 56 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Related party transactions 96 7C Interests of experts and counsel Not applicable 8 Financial information 8A Consolidated statements and other nancial information See Item 18 below.
Business review
Legal proceedings 22
Financial review
Dividends 36 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Financial commitments and contingent liabilities 96 Additional information for shareholders Dividends 130 Dividend investment plan 131 Memorandum and Articles of Association
Dividends 133 8B Signicant changes Financial review Capital resources 38 9 The offer and listing 9A Offer and listing details Additional information for shareholders Share and ADS prices 129 9B Plan of distribution Not applicable 9C Markets Additional information for shareholders Listings 129 9D Selling shareholders Not applicable 9E Dilution Not applicable 9F Expenses of the issue Not applicable 10 Additional information 10A Share capital Not applicable 10B Memorandum and articles of association Additional information for shareholders Memorandum and Articles of Association 132 10C Material contracts Additional information for shareholders Material contracts 135 Cross reference to Form 20F BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 143 Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 10D Exchange controls Additional information for shareholders Exchange controls and other limitations affecting security holders 138 10E Taxation Additional information for shareholders Taxation US Holders 135 10F Dividends and paying agents Not applicable 10G Statement by experts Not applicable 10H Documents on display Additional information for shareholders Documents on display 138 10I Subsidiary information Not applicable 11 Quantitative and qualitative Financial review disclosures about market risk Treasury policy 37 Foreign currency and interest rate exposure 38 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Accounting Policies Financial instruments 74 Financial instruments and risk management 106 12 Description of securities other than equity securities Not applicable 13 Defaults dividend arrearages and delinquencies Not applicable 14 Material modications to the rights of security holders and use of proceeds Not applicable 15 Controls and procedures Corporate governance US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 54 16A Audit committee nancial expert Corporate governance US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 54 16B Code of ethics Corporate governance US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 54 16C Principal accountants fees and services Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Auditors 105 Corporate governance Audit Committee 51 16E Purchases of equity securities by the issuer and afliated purchasers Additional information for shareholders Share buy back 132 17 Financial statements Not applicable 18 Financial statements Report of the independent auditors 70 Consolidated nancial statements 71 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 112 Quarterly analysis of turnover and prot 123 144 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 21st century network 4 13 21 126 Accounting and presentation changes 81 Accounting policies 4041 7274 Additional information for shareholders 127139 Auditors remuneration 105 Auditors report to shareholders 70 Background 8 Balance sheet 24 39 80 Broadband 3 4 9 10 11 16 21 2833 BT Exact 14 BT Global Services 8 2831 33 8182 BT Retail 8 28 3032 8182 BT Wholesale 8 10 3033 8182 87 Business practice statement of 54 Business review 622 Call volume growth 125 Capital commitments 96 Capital expenditure 24 30 32 33 3839 79 82 Capital gains tax 129 Cash ow statement 24 36 79 88 Cautionary statement 128 Chairmans message 3 Chief Executives statement 4 Community 4445 Company balance sheet 110111 Competition and the UK economy 17 Contact details 139 Contingent liabilities 96 Corporate governance 5055 Creditors 80 95 110 Cross reference to Form 20F 141143 Customer satisfaction 13 44 Debtors 73 80 94 110 Depreciation 31 34 73 84 92 Disposals 8 24 3536 85 8890
Biographies 4647 Emoluments 102 Interests in shares 61 Proposed for election or reelection at AGM 48 Remuneration report on 5668 Report 48 Responsibility statement 69 Dividend investment plan 131 130131 133 Earnings loss per share 23 27 36 7577 87 117 120 Electronic communication 138 Employee share plans 102105 Employees 1314 102 125 Environment 40 4445 Exchange controls 138 Exchange lines 9 17 125 Financial calendar 138 Financial commitments 9697 Financial headlines 2 Financial instruments 74 106109 Financial ratios 124 Financial review 2543 Financial statistics 124 Financing 3637 Fiveyear nancial summary 2324 Foreign currencies 72 106 Going concern 38 54 69 Glossary of terms and US equivalents 140143 Intangible assets 7273 80 91 Interest 23 27 35 38 72 7577 79 8586 106 108 Interest cover 35 124 Internal control and risk management 5354 International Financial Reporting Standards 4143 Investments 8 35 73 80 85 93 Joint ventures and associates 3435 73 7577 82 83 84 Legal proceedings 22 97 Licence 15 20 40 73 91 Listings 129 Loans and other borrowings 24 38 80 9495 Management of liquid resources 88 Material contracts 135 Memorandum and Articles of Association 132135 Minority interests 7577 80 87 93 116 Mobility 4 7 9 1112 28 31 Networked IT Services 4 910 New wave 3 9 28 Ofcom 7 1522 Other operating income 23 33 7577 123 Operating and Financial Review 643 Operating Committee 47 53 Operating costs 23 29 3334 7577 84 Operating prot loss 3435 83 88 Operational statistics 125 Our commitment to society 4445 Pensions 14 39 59 63 73 97101 Political donations 48 Post balance sheet events 111 Price control 18 Prot loss beforeafter tax 2 23 36 7577 Provisions for liabilities and charges 80 95 Publications 138 Purchase of own shares 48 96 111 132 Quarterly analysis of turnover and prot 123 Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds 96 Reconciliation of operating prot to operating cash ows 88 Redundancy costs 23 29 34 73 84 Regulation 3 7 1522 40 Research and development 1415 72 84 124 Restructuring 8 26 Return on capital employed 39 124 Rights issue 8 129 Risk factors 126 Risk management 53 106110 SarbanesOxley Act 5455 Segmental analysis 8184 Share and ADS prices 129 Share capital 24 80 96 110 111 133 Share option schemes 102 Shareholder communication 139 Shareholdings analysis 130 Staff costs 29 34 84 Statement of total recognised gains and losses 78 Stocks 73 80 Strategy 3 4 9 Subsidiary undertakings 7 122 Substantial shareholdings 48 Suppliers payment policy 48 Tangible xed assets 73 92 124 Taxation 36 74 7577 86 Taxation US Holders 135138 Total shareholder return 57 62 131 Treasury policy 37 Turnover 2 8 23 27 28 30 72 7577 8184 123 US GAAP 24 43 112121 Index Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 Growth through transformation BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 BT Group plc Registered ofce 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ Registered in England and Wales No.
Produced by BT Group Designed by Paufey Ltd London Typeset by St Ives Financial Printed in England by Pindar plc Printed on elemental chlorinefree paper sourced from sustainably managed forests site PHME 47821 Growth through transformation Annual Review and summary financial statement 2005 Highlights Group turnover of 18.6 billion New wave turnover of 4.5 billion up 32% Profit before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 2.1 billion up 4% Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 18.1 pence up 7% Net debt reduced from 8.4 billion to 7.8 billion Full year dividend of 10.4 pence up 22% Broadband end users of 4.9 million up 123% Growth through transformation BT is one of the worlds leading providers of communications solutions serving customers in Europe the Americas and Asia Pacific.
Our principal activities include networked IT services local national and international telecommunications services and highervalue broadband and internet products and services.
In the UK we serve over 20 million business and residential customers as well as providing network services to other operators.
In this Annual Review references to BT Group BT the group the company we or our are to BT Group plc which includes the activities of British Telecommunications plc and its subsidiaries or any of them as the context may require.
1 Chairmans message 2 Chief Executives statement 4 Growth through transformation 12 Report of operations and financial review 13 Auditors statement 14 Summary financial statement 16 Summary report on directors remuneration 18 Summary directors report 18 Board of directors 19 Corporate governance 20 Information for shareholders 9Group turnover m years ended 31 March Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items pence years ended 31 March Dividend per share pence years ended 31 March Net debt m as at 31 March Restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see page 14 BT Annual Review 2005 Chairmans message Earnings per share in the 2005 financial year before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items grew by 7% to 18.1 pence.
While continuing to invest for the future we generated free cash flow of 2.3 billion up 10%.
The news on dividends is positive.
We are recommending a fullyear dividend of 10.4 pence per share a pay out ratio of 57% of earnings before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items compared to 50% last year.
We continue with our progressive dividend policy.
The dividend for the 2006 financial year will be at least 60% of underlying earnings subject to the groups overall financial position we expect our pay out ratio to rise to around twothirds of underlying earnings by the 2008 financial year.
We continued with our share buy back programme in the 2005 financial year.
This is being funded from cash generated over and above that required for servicing our debt.
We have reduced net debt to below 8 billion a level with which we are comfortable.
Business progress In support of our strategy for transformation and growth your Board gave backing during the year for a targeted series of acquisitions that will help to build our capabilities as one of the worlds foremost global networked IT services companies.
These acquisitions offered value for money had a compelling strategic fit and brought capabilities to strengthen BT globally.
In addition passing the five million mark for broadband connections in the UK in early April was a key moment in the history of your company.
Regulation
BT welcomed the Strategic Review of Telecommunications by Ofcom.
During the year we have worked to help influence and shape their thinking and made a radical proposal for a new regulatory landscape in the UK.
We continued to argue strongly that structural separation was not in shareholders or customers interests.
We look forward to the published outcome.
Our position remains that a strategic and flexible regulatory regime together with rapid deregulation wherever possible is vital to meeting customers developing needs and creating the conditions in which we and others can continue to invest with confidence.
Board membership There were a number of changes to your Board during the 2005 financial year.
I would like to welcome Hanif Lalani as our new Group Finance Director.
Ian
Livingston who had occupied the finance role with distinction for three years was appointed Chief Executive BT Retail with effect from February 2005.
It is a testament to the strength of BTs management team generally that we were able to appoint people from inside the company to such key roles.
I would also like to thank Pierre Danon who left the Board in February for his significant contribution as Chief Executive of BT Retail for the last four years.
Wider responsibilities It is increasingly important that companies such as BT continue to be good corporate citizens living up to our responsibilities to the communities in which we operate and to the environment.
Im proud to be able to report that for the fourth year in a row BT was the highest placed telecommunications company in the Dow Jones Sustainability Our results for the 2005 financial year were strong.
New wave revenues grew by 32% to 4.5 billion and now represent nearly a quarter of our business.
Earnings per share have more than doubled over the past three years and net debt is more than 20 billion lower than in 2001.
Index.
Our community programmes focus on those issues where communications really can make the difference we have provided longterm support for example for a dramabased education programme to help develop young peoples communications skills and for the work of the childrens charity ChildLine.
Like so many other companies and individuals we wanted to respond to the devastating Asian tsunami in December 2004.
We made a donation of 500000 to the Disasters Emergency Committee DEC and we provided a live call centre for the unprecedented number of calls coming into the DEC.
Im particularly proud of the fact that so many of our employees were involved in fundraising activities and that 16 of our engineers travelled to the affected area to help reestablish communications.
Outlook
The process of transformation on which your company embarked in 2001 is accelerating.
That process is increasingly reflected in your companys results.
We are well set for further success in the years ahead.
Id like to thank shareholders for the loyalty theyve shown.
Your continued confidence  coupled with the loyalty of our customers and suppliers and the imagination and commitment of our employees  is fundamental to our transformation for growth.
Sir Christopher Bland
18 May 2005 2BT Annual Review 2005 Chief Executives statement In 2005 convergence is at the heart of BTs strategy.
By convergence we mean the ability to bring together our capabilities and capacities in new ways to make life better simpler and cheaper for our customers.
For our business customers this means productivity improvements for consumers its about new easier to use services.
For customers of all kinds it means a more joinedup communications experience.
So for example we offer our major corporate customers around the world a unique marriage of our networking experience and infrastructure with IT services.
These used to be separate offerings often supplied by different companies but were bringing them together in one place.
This means that however much their operations are dispersed around the globe our customers can communicate and operate as one anytime anywhere and at lower cost.
What were doing in the mobile market is similarly about convergence  we aim to offer customers a converged combination of the best of fixed and the best of mobile.
Ultimately our customers shouldnt have to worry about fixed or mobile when what they really want is freedom and flexibility.
This means that we have to find ways of helping them communicate wherever they are using whatever device they choose at the right price.
And convergence is also what our twentyfirst century network 21CN programme is all about.
What our customers need to know is that the 21CN can support a range of technologies and services that will enable them to do the things they want to do  faster more seamlessly and more cost efficiently.
And because this new network will support a wide range of innovative services which are currently run on separate networks it will be much more cost efficient for BT.
Global networked IT services We have raised our global profile through targeted acquisitions including Infonet and Radianz and by increasing our holding in Albacom to 100%.
We continued to play to our strengths in the networked IT services market.
A few years ago our position in this market was aspirational today we are competing with the best  and winning.
The BT brand is now a powerful presence in the global networked IT services market.
Its a brand that stands for excellent networking skills and a genuine commitment to finding innovative ways of delivering what our customers want end to end leaving them free to do what theyre good at running their businesses.
Our ICT information and communications technology revenues were 3 billion in the year and the major contracts weve won indicate the confidence that our customers are prepared to put in us.
We now have a track record of meeting the needs of public and private sector customers in for example the financial services and government arenas.
Our networked IT services order intake for the year was over 7 billion.
Broadband
Broadband has been an enormous success story not just for BT but for the UK as a whole which now has the highest levels of broadband access of any country in the G7 group of nations.
We hit our five million broadband lines target a year early.
As broadband access becomes a fact of life for most people in the UK our focus is shifting further towards the retail market where we have fantastic scope to drive further growth.
BTs key strategic imperatives Today BT is a very different company from the one that I joined three years ago.
As our customers needs have changed and continue to change so we have found and continue to find new ways of meeting those needs investing in innovative products and services which add value to our customers and to BT.
That after all is what being a service company means.
Deliver on broadband
Defend our traditional business vigorously Build on our networked IT services capability BTs transformation for growth is fuelled by our eight strategic imperatives five of which are focused on generating new revenues in exciting new markets defending revenues in traditional markets and operating with maximum efficiency.
BT Annual Review 2005 Having got broadband people now want to do more and more with it.
We are increasing speeds by up to four times at no extra cost to our retail customers.
Convergent mobility services The launch in partnership with Vodafone of our mobile virtual network operator in both the business and consumer markets is the key to building a mobility customer base and a path to mobile convergence.
We now have over 372000 contract connections.
Our strategy is to build a foundation for the delivery of highvalue fixedmobile convergent solutions for consumers and businesses.
An early example of this will be Project Bluephone which will give customers the convenience of a mobile phone with the quality and cost advantage of fixedline services.
Twentyfirst century network Our 21CN will help to make the UK one of the most advanced telecommunications countries in the world transform our wholesale business and support the next generation of flexible costefficient services.
At the end of April 2005 we announced the eight preferred suppliers who will help us to implement the 21CN.
The capital expenditure involved is significant but the 21CN will lead to a radical simplification of our networks making it easier to offer compelling propositions to all our customers.
The real challenge is to ensure that we invest in a way that meets customers needs.
Traditional business We are experiencing major changes in our traditional markets as a result of regulation growing competition and significant shifts in our customers buying patterns as they discover the possibilities of technologies such as instant messaging and voice over IP.
Fixedvoice telephone calls may no longer be the only way to measure the success of a communications company but they remain fundamental to our business.
We may have lost some market share to competitors but we will continue to compete aggressively by offering new and better services and improved customer value.
Cost efficiency Taking a leadership position on costs is critical.
Earnings per share is a key measure which means that we have to continue to look at every cost line in the business and challenge it.
Weve made excellent progress on improving our cost efficiency in the past few years and in the 2005 financial year our cost efficiency programmes achieved savings of around 400 million and we aim to deliver at least 300 million to 400 million of savings in each of the next three years.
Relentless customer focus Our 20 million customers are a wonderful asset and we have to continue to show how much we value every one of them.
A key target for us was driving down customer dissatisfaction  weve reduced dissatisfaction levels by 23% on a compound annual basis over the past three years.
There is still more to be done and we must continue this focus.
Our people People bring strategies to life people deliver worldclass customer experiences people make convergence happen.
Two years ago we introduced our new brand values  trustworthy helpful inspiring straightforward heart.
Since then BT people have embraced these values and turned the business inside out and upside down to deliver our strategy finding innovative ways to reinvent BT in our traditional markets at the same time as establishing our BT brand in new markets all the while driving down customer dissatisfaction.
I am constantly amazed by their commitment and by what they have achieved.
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive 18 May 2005 Drive for cost leadership Keep a relentless focus on customer satisfaction Transform our network for the twenty first century Motivate our people and live the BT values The other three are about keeping a rigorous focus on customers needs and developing the technology that will meet those changing needs.
Growth through transformation
Its easy to forget how fast the world can change.
Blink and you might miss it.
When three years ago we said that we would have five million broadband connections by the summer of 2006 no one thought we had a chance.
But now that weve delivered those five million connections more than a year ahead of schedule no one seems very surprised.
After all its been clear for some time that we were going to make it.
Broadband is a huge success story for BT which is transforming itself from a narrowband to a broadband company at the same time as the UK is fast becoming a broadband nation.
In the past few years weve brought broadband to more than 4400 exchanges connected to almost 97% of the UKs homes and businesses.
That figure will reach 99.6% this summer the highest availability in any of the G7 group of countries.
A few years ago only the experts had any clear idea what broadband was all about.
Today its one of the first must have products of the twentyfirst century and one of the fastest growing consumer products of all time with a higher early takeup rate than TVs video recorders or mobile phones.
And the momentum continues to build.
It took us about a year to reach our first million broadband connections the fifth million took just four months.
Since September 2004 weve been connecting a new customer to broadband every ten seconds 247.
Pushing the boundaries Now that broadband has become a genuinely mass market product the nature of the broadband debate has changed.
The focus is moving away from availability and towards the ways in which broadband can transform our lives at work and at home.
For many people broadband initially meant fast alwayson internet access and email  an end to the worldwide wait.
But now theyre beginning to realise that so much more is possible  music and video downloads video emails education services and so on.
Within a couple of years every child in the UK will have the chance to learn via The focus is now moving away from availability and towards the ways in which higherspeed broadband services can transform our lives at work and home.
Alison Ritchie Chief Broadband Officer BT Business
For BT in the twentyfirst century transformation is part of the job description.
While we remain committed to our traditional portfolio of telecommunications services such as voice calls and private circuits we are equally focused on generating new revenues in exciting and fastgrowing new markets particularly broadband networked IT services and mobility.
This transformation is driven by a single overriding goal  sustainable profitable growth.
Achieving this goal is in the best interests of our shareholders our customers our people and the wider communities in which we operate.
4BT Annual Review 2005 BT Annual Review 2005 broadband and up to 18 million of us will be shopping online.
But as the demand for increasingly sophisticated broadband services grows so must technologys ability to cope with it.
Thats why were continuing to push the boundaries of broadband technology.
We transformed our retail broadband offering by moving most of our broadband customers to a new superfast standard speed of up to 2Mbits at no extra cost beginning February 2005.
Customers now have access to speeds up to four times faster than before.
And were not stopping there.
Weve been testing speeds of up to 8Mbits and plan to launch highspeed wholesale products later this year.
And weve even been trialling something called ADSL2 which may support speeds of more than 20Mbits.
Something for everyone For customers at home we have a family of broadband packages designed to meet a wide range of needs.
Key packages include BT Broadband which offers rapid alwayson internet access and BT Yahoo Broadband which gives users access to exciting content as well as a range of other benefits including multiple email addresses protection against junk email parental controls to prevent children accessing unsuitable content and protection against computer viruses.
In July 2004 BT Communicator with Yahoo Messenger became the latest addition to this family enabling customers to manage all their home communications phone calls texts emails and so on on their PC.
And well also use broadband to make new services such as video on demand and interactive TV available to customers.
In the broadband economy Broadband also has a key role to play in the UK economy enhancing competitiveness driving up productivity promoting growth.
Analysts estimate that the UK economy as a whole could be boosted to the tune of 7.5 billion a year by 2007 as a result of productivity gains made possible by broadband.
And whats true of national economies is true of local ones as well many of which are keenly aware of the possibilities.
In February 2005 for example Northern Ireland became the first UK region outside London to have every one of its exchanges upgraded to broadband by BT.
Just a month later  thanks to a partnership between BT and the regional development agency One Northeast  all 181 exchanges in the region had been upgraded.
And in April 2005 we won a contract with the Scottish Executive to bring broadband to the UKs remotest communities by broadbandenabling 378 exchanges.
BT Business Broadband is the leading service provider for small and medium businesses in the UK with over 340000 customers as at 31 March 2005.
At the end of the 2005 financial year we were connecting around 250 business customers to BT Business Broadband every day.
This is excellent business particularly since more than half of them also took value added services from us such as the Internet Security Pack and Internet Business Pack.
BT used to be essentially a narrowband company today we are rapidly becoming a broadband company.
99.6% broadband coverage in the UK by summer 2005 A broadband connection every 10 seconds 24 hours a day 7 days a week 5 million connections Broadband has the power to change the way businesses operate and the way they communicate with customers and employees.
In November 2004 for example we launched BT Business Broadband Voice which enables smaller businesses to use broadband connections for voice calls and cut the costs associated with supporting multiple business lines.
6BT Annual Review 2005 Networked IT services As communications and information technology networks increasingly converge corporations and other large organisations are looking for strategic partners who can develop and run their networks for them leaving them to concentrate on their core business.
In recent years our networking skills have enabled us to establish BT as one of the worlds foremost global networked IT services companies.
Where business is done In the digital networked economy our networking skills and experience are proving critical and the revenues we are generating in this market show how far we have come in a short time.
In the 2005 financial year our ICT information and communications technology revenues were 3.0 billion compared with 2.5 billion in the 2004 financial year see graph below.
And if anyone wanted proof that BT really is transforming itself for growth they would only have to look at some of the recent contracts weve won.
Major contracts Our most highprofile success of the year came in March 2005 when it was announced that BT will become Reuters supplier of network services around the world under a contract expected to be worth up to 1.5 billion over its eight and a halfyear life.
And just a month earlier wed announced a new deal with Barclays to provide enhanced communications infrastructure services for their UK operations.
Taking account of existing business our relationship with Barclays The digital networked economy.
Where business is done.
ICT  revenue growth over three years 2.5bn 2.1bn 3.0bn In 200405 we signed networked IT services contracts worth over 7 billion Reuters is now worth in excess of 500 million over the life of the contract and confirms our growing strength and credibility as a supplier to companies in the financial services market.
Other big wins helped to confirm our European capabilities.
For example we signed an outsourcing contract with French company THALES Group  the international electronics and systems group serving the defence aeronautics security and services market  to provide fixed voice and data network services in 42 countries.
In the Asia Pacific region we were awarded a global network outsourcing contract by South Koreabased CyberLogitec a subsidiary of Hanjin Shipping to integrate the systems that it needs to run its operations in the US Europe and locally.
Worth 18 million this is one of the largest contracts we have ever won in the region.
But its not just major contracts that make for a healthy order book.
We secured over 300 networked IT services contracts each worth between 1 million and 5 million during the 2005 financial year.
Building global presence Our customers for networked IT services are increasingly operating globally and its vital that we should be able to meet their requirements around the world  not just in Europe where we own operations in many countries but elsewhere as well.
There are a number of ways to do this.
Strategic partners can help us reach parts of the world where we dont operate and its certainly possible to deliver a truly global service from any one location to any other without owning everything in between.
But we also believe that it makes excellent commercial sense to acquire operations outside the UK where these offer the right kind of strategic fit at the right price.
In February 2005 we completed the acquisition of Infonet one of the worlds leading providers of international managed voice and data network services for 315 million net of cash in the business.
Infonet brings with it local operations andor distributors in some 70 countries and remote network access in around 180 countries significantly extending our global reach.
Infonet brings local operations andor distributors in 70 countries and remote network access in about 180 countries around the world In the same month we acquired the 74% that we didnt already own of Albacom which provides data transmission voice and internet services to more than 170000 customers in the Italian business communications market.
And in April 2005 we acquired Radianz the leading financial services extranet provider  from Reuters for 107 million another significant step forward in our transformation into a global provider of networked IT services.
8BT Annual Review 2005
Mobility is about much more than mobile phones and text messages.
In a convergent world individuals and businesses want and need to communicate wherever they happen to be using whatever devices mobile and fixedline phones PCs palmtops they choose.
True mobility is about connecting people to people people to systems businesses to businesses and machines to machines any time any place any device.
New illustration here Growth through transformation Access to WiFi hotspots globally The 21CN programme has three broad objectives to enhance the service experience flexibility and value we provide to all our customers to accelerate the delivery of innovative new products and services to market and to reduce costs radically.
We began technical trials during the 2005 financial year.
For example we conducted a trial in which we moved voice traffic from the traditional public voice network onto an internet protocol IP network.
It may have gone largely unnoticed but 7 January 2005 may turn out to be a key date in the history of telecommunications because that was the day that saw the first endtoend IP voice call.
In April 2005 we announced the eight preferred suppliers that we expect will help to build and implement the 21CN.
The announcement was the culmination of two years of discussions with over 300 potential technology suppliers  one of the largest procurement programmes ever undertaken in the communications industry.
And in order to ensure that all other operators understand what the 21CN means for them and have a chance to input their ideas weve launched a programme of industry consultation  Consult21.
Twentyfirst century network The twentyfirst century network 21CN is at the heart of our transformation strategy underpinning broadband networked IT services and convergent mobility services flexibly and cost effectively.
It will lead to a radical simplification of our networks making it easier for us  and the other telecommunications operators who interconnect with our networks  to offer compelling converged propositions for all our customers.
BT Annual Review 2005 The right stuff BT has the right brand channels and network capabilities to really deliver in the fastgrowing mobility market.
What were aiming for is providing all our customers with a winning combination of the quality reliability cost advantages and capacity associated with fixedline communications AND the convenience personalisation and independence associated with mobile communications.
In other words the best of both worlds.
During the 2005 financial year in partnership with Vodafone we launched BT Mobile as a mobile virtual network operator MVNO  a move that puts us well on the road to offering the worlds first fully converged fixedmobile service.
This really is a new way of doing a new kind of business.
And it can be a major growth area for us.
In the 2005 financial year revenue growth in the mobility market was 107%.
And well shortly be launching Project Bluephone  a converged mobile service enabling customers to use a single device that can switch seamlessly between fixed and mobile networks.
True mobility is about connecting people to people people to systems businesses to businesses and machines to machines any time any place any device.
More than 372000 BT Mobile connections Mobility for businesses We launched BT Mobile as an MVNO in the business market in November 2004 offering a wide range of flexible mobile services including mobile conferencing facilities.
Were also a leading UK provider of wireless broadband WiFi.
BT Openzone our public WiFi service gives users a highspeed wireless broadband connection at thousands of hotspots from which they can access the internet send and receive emails with attachments and connect to a corporate network.
As at 31 March 2005 our customers had access to more than 7500 hotspots throughout the UK and more than 20000 around the world.
We are convinced that a partnership strategy is essential for success in this market and we are working hard through the Fixed Mobile Convergence Alliance which is developing open industry standards and through the Wireless Broadband Alliance which is driving the roaming arrangements that will help to make global mobility a reality.
Mobility for consumers In January 2005 we launched the BT Mobile MVNO in the consumer market with a package aimed at families offering a range of benefits including up to five additional handsets free short calls to a designated home number and a single consolidated mobile bill.
BT was the official communications sponsor for Dame Ellen MacArthurs epic nonstop round the world victory 10 BT Annual Review 2005 Keep a relentless focus on improving customer satisfaction Reducing customer dissatisfaction is a key objective for us.
In the 2005 financial year for the third year in a row all lines of business reduced customer dissatisfaction levels.
In total we have achieved a group wide reduction of 23% on a compound annual basis over the past three years.
Transforming the traditional Of course transformation and tradition are not mutually exclusive and theres nothing to say we shouldnt find new ways to do the things weve always done.
In July 2004 for example we abolished the standard rate for telephone calls for all our residential customers and switched them to BT Together Option 1 offering them better value for money and making it easier for them to compare our prices with those of our competitors.
We also introduced Call Mobilea discount package offering customers savings of up to 40% on all fixedtomobile calls.
For business customers we cut the cost of fixedtomobile calls by between 25% and 30% and offered BT Business Plan customers the option of a 30 pence cap on all such calls lasting less than an hour.
As at 31 March 2005 BT Business Plan had over 440000 locations  up 67% on the 2004 financial year.
Traditional business Transformation may be a way of life but that doesnt mean everything has to change.
We will continue to provide all our customers in our traditional markets with an excellent customer experience.
Our values trustworthy helpful inspiring straightforward heart  continue to define the way we do business around here.
Our people continue to live these values.
And being a good corporate citizen is as important now as its ever been.
Continuing to provide all our customers in our traditional markets with We have reduced customer dissatisfaction by 23% on a compound annual basis over the past three years Customer protection remains vitally important to us which is why weve been helping to combat the menace of rogue internet diallers.
BT Modem Protection for example is a free service designed to prevent a customers computer dialling highcost premium rate or international numbers.
At the end of March 2005 around one million customers had signed up for one or more of our barring options.
Drive for cost leadership We remain focused on financial discipline and our cost efficiency programmes achieved savings of around 400 million in the 2005 financial year.
This has enabled us to invest in growing our new wave activities.
We aim to deliver at least 300 million to 400 million of savings in each of the next three years.
We cant starve ourselves to success but reducing the costs of failure complexity and duplication and generally working smarter increases the scope we have to invest for growth.
And technology really can contribute to the cause.
At the end of the financial year for example we had a total of 6.2 million online relationships with customers through our website site and almost two million customers receiving ebills.
BT Annual Review 2005 Highest ranked telecommunications company in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index for the fourth year in a row an excellent customer experience Our wider responsibilities We are privileged to play a role in the wider communities of which we are a part and we recognise that an innovative approach to managing social ethical and environmental issues is good business in every sense.
Increasingly we have to demonstrate social and environmental responsibility when bidding for new business  in the 2005 financial year bids to the value of 2.2 billion required us to demonstrate expertise in managing these issues.
We commit a minimum of 0.5% of our UK pretax profits directly to activities in support of society  we provided over 9 million in the 2005 financial year.
In addition BT operations provided a further 12 million in funding and support in kind.
The focus of our community programmes is on the big issues where better communications can make a real difference.
Thats why weve been sponsoring a dramabased education programme  to date more than two million children have had the chance to enhance their communications skills and why were supporting childrens charity ChildLine in its drive to ensure that every childs call for help is answered.
And were committed to minimising any adverse impact on the environment.
During the year we signed the worlds largest green energy contract which means that almost all our future UK electricity needs will be met from environmentally friendly sources including wind generation solar wave and hydroelectric schemes.
This is expected to reduce our carbon dioxide CO emissions by around 325000 tonnes a year.
We played a role in the response to the Asian tsunami of 26 December 2004.
We set up a live call centre to handle the response to the Disasters Emergency Committees DEC appeal and ran the online donation facility.
Individual employees were also involved in fundraising and 16 BT engineers travelled to the affected area to help reestablish the telecommunications infrastructure.
We also made an immediate donation of 500000.
Digital inclusion is a key public policy issue and we are working with the UK Government and the voluntary sector to find effective ways of using communications technology to tackle social exclusion.
We are for example actively involved in the EverybodyOnline programme  established in partnership with charity campaign group Citizens Online  which aims to increase skills and access to communications technology in deprived communities.
Our Age and Disability Action team promotes equal access to a wide range of products and services including large button phones cordless and handsfree options and a spoken text service.
2 million customers now use ebilling 12 BT Annual Review 2005 Report of operations and financial review of communications products and services including voice data internet and multimedia services and offering a comprehensive range of managed and packaged communications solutions.
On 1 July 2004 we abolished the standard rate for residential customers and switched all existing standard rate customers to BT Together Option 1 offering them better value for money and making it easier for to them to compare BTs prices with those of our competitors.
We also introduced a number of enhancements to our BT Business Plan which had over 440000 locations at the end of the 2005 financial year.
In the 2005 financial year we launched BT Mobile as an MVNO mobile virtual network operator in the business and consumer markets.
This is a major step towards building a mobility customer base and developing and delivering one converged customer experience.
BT is the UKs leading service provider of broadband with 1.75 million consumer and business broadband connections.
We transformed our retail broadband offering by transferring our broadband customers to a high speed up to 2Mbits connection beginning February 2005.
BT Business Broadband remained the leading ISP internet service provider for SMEs typically companies with up to 500 employees with over 340000 customers.
BT Wholesale BT Wholesale provides network services and solutions to over 600 communications companies including fixed and mobile network operators ISPs and service providers.
Interconnecting with over 180 other operators it also carries transit traffic between telecommunications operators.
Its UK network consists of 684 local and 135 trunk processor units 121 million kilometres of copper wire and over seven million kilometres of optical fibre.
BT Wholesale has the most extensive IP backbone network in the UK.
In early April 2005 we provided our five millionth broadband connection more than one year ahead of target.
4419 exchanges had been upgraded for broadband at the end of the 2005 financial year and almost 97% of the UKs homes and businesses were connected to a broadbandenabled exchange.
BTs 21CN programme is at the heart of our transformation strategy underpinning broadband networked IT services and convergent mobility services.
During the 2005 financial year we took steps toward the 21CNs three broad objectives to enhance the service experience flexibility and value we provide all our customers to accelerate the delivery of innovative Operating performance The financial results for the 2005 financial year reflect the continuing strong growth in new wave services as we deliver value from transforming the business.
Our global networked IT services business is growing strongly and our global capabilities have been strengthened by the successful completion of the acquisitions of Albacom and Infonet.
Subsequent to the year end we also completed the acquisition of Radianz.
Profit and loss account Group turnover from new wave businesses showed strong growth of 32% to 4.5 billion in the year driven by growth in global networked IT services broadband and mobility.
Turnover from our traditional business declined by 7% to 14.0 billion being impacted by regulatory intervention competition and technological changes as we migrate customers to new wave services.
Regulatory reductions in mobile termination rates are passed on to BT customers resulting in lower charges but are profit neutral.
Group turnover of 18.6 billion increased by 2% excluding the impact of acquisitions and regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates.
Group operating profit before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items decreased by 1% to 2.9 billion.
This mainly reflects the cost of supporting networked IT services contracts and investment in new wave activities.
Net interest payable before exceptional items was 0.8 billion for the year an improvement of 0.1 billion reflecting the reduction in net debt.
Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items were 18.1 pence an increase of 7%.
Lines of business The following table sets out the group turnover and group operating profit loss for each of our lines of business.
Group turnover Group operating profit loss 1tel 2004 Years ended 31 March m m m m BT Retail 12562 12940 1120 1232 BT Wholesale 8979 8883 1940 1883 BT Global Services 6381 5782 7 105 Intragroup 9324 9121 Totals 18623 18519 2864 2889 Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items Restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see note c on page 14 BT Retail BT Retail is the UKs largest communications service provider by market share to the residential and business markets supplying over 20 million customers with a wide range new products and services and to reduce costs radically.
Technical fibre and voice trials began in the 2005 financial year.
On 28 April 2005 we announced the preferred suppliers that we expect will help build and implement the 21CN.
BT Global Services BT Global Services is BTs managed services and solutions provider.
Its core target market is 10000 multisite organisations including major companies with significant global requirements and large organisations in target local markets.
BT Global Services provides global reach and a complete range of networked IT services.
Our extensive communications network and strong strategic partnerships enable us to serve customers in the key commercial centres of Europe North America and the Asia Pacific region.
The acquisition of Infonet  one of the worlds leading providers of international managed voice and data network services was a major step forward in addressing the global networked IT services needs of our core customers significantly extending our global reach.
We also acquired the 74% that we did not already own of Albacom which provides data transmission voice and internet services in the Italian business communications market.
In April 2005 we also completed the acquisition of Radianz  the leading financial services extranet provider.
Our most highprofile success of the year in the global market was winning the contract to become Reuters supplier of network services.
The contract is expected to be worth up to 1.5 billion over its lifetime.
In April 2005 we won an extension to July 2012 of a contract to deliver essential telecommunications services to the Ministry of Defence and the UKs armed forces.
The total value of the contract is more than 2.7 billion.
Research and development and IT support Our IT division BT Exact offers the services of IT professionals with knowledge of leadingedge network design and IT systems and application development.
In the 2005 financial year we invested 257 million in research and development.
Balance sheet The group balance sheet continued to strengthen during the year and provides confidence to our customers and suppliers.
Net debt was reduced by a further 0.6 billion to 7.8 billion and is now 20 billion lower than in 2001.
Fixed assets totalled 16.7 billion of which 15.9 billion were tangible fixed assets BT Annual Review 2005 13 principally the UK fixed network.
The return on capital employed before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items on the average capital employed was 16%.
Cash flow Cash inflow from operating activities was 5.9 billion.
Capital expenditure of 3.1 billion increased by 14% reflecting the rising investment in our network transformation.
Free cash flow of 2.3 billion was generated an increase of 10%.
Dividend
The Board recommends a final dividend of 6.5 pence per share to shareholders amounting to 551 million taking the full year dividend to 10.4 pence per share an increase of 22% on the previous year.
This years dividend pay out ratio is 57% of earnings before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items compared to 50% last year.
We continue with our progressive dividend policy.
The dividend for the 2006 financial year will be at least 60% of underlying earnings subject to the groups overall financial position we expect our pay out ratio to rise to around twothirds of underlying earnings by the 2008 financial year.
Customer satisfaction Driving up customer satisfaction is at the heart of our strategy.
In the 2005 financial year for the third year in a row all lines of business reduced dissatisfaction levels.
In the past three years we have achieved a group wide reduction of 23% on a compound annual basis.
Our people As at 31 March 2005 we employed 102100 people throughout the world.
Our core people engagement initiative is the my customer programme which aims to enable BT people to deliver an excellent customer experience through teamwork.
More than 3000 issues have now been resolved.
For the 2005 financial year we allocated 11 million to provide free shares to our employees under the BT Employee Share Investment Plan employees outside the UK receive a cash payment equivalent to the value of the shares.
The amount allocated was linked to the achievement of corporate targets determined by the Board.
Corporate social responsibility Our aim is to manage social ethical and environmental issues in ways that grow shareholder value and help BT and our customers to be more sustainable.
In the 2005 financial year BT was ranked as the top telecommunications company in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index for the fourth year running.
We commit a minimum of 0.5% of our UK pretax profits directly to activities which support society.
Our contribution in the 2005 financial year was over 9 million.
In addition we made charitable donations of 2 million.
More details of our social and environmental performance are available at sitebetterworld Statement of business practice BTs policy is to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity in all our operations in line with our published statement of business practice The Way We Work which is available at sitesocietyvalues Going concern The companys financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2005 have been prepared on a going concern basis as after making appropriate enquiries the directors have a reasonable expectation that the group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS BT continues to report under UK Generally Accepted Accounting Principles UK GAAP for the 2005 financial year but as required by EU regulations will present financial information in accordance with IFRS for the 2006 financial year.
Whilst some of the changes required by IFRS will impact BTs reported profits and net assets this has no impact on the cash flows generated by the business or the cash resources available for investment or distribution to shareholders.
Furthermore the adoption of IFRS does not affect BTs strategy or underlying business performance.
The main areas of change relate to pensions sharebased payments intangible assets leases and financial instruments.
We estimate the unaudited pro forma impact of adopting IFRS on the 2005 financial year reported UK GAAP results will be negligible on the underlying profit before tax and underlying earnings per share.
However due to the inherent volatilities introduced by IFRS no such statement can be made in respect of future years.
This estimate excludes the fair value effects on financial instruments which we are not required to apply until 1 April 2005.
Auditors statement Auditors statement to the members of BT Group plc We have examined the summary financial statement as set out on pages 14 and 15 summary directors report set out on pages 18 and 19 and the directors remuneration disclosures set out on page 17.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditors The directors are responsible for preparing the summarised annual report in accordance with applicable law.
Our responsibility is to report to you our opinion on the consistency of the summary financial statement within the BT Group annual review with the annual financial statements the directors report and the directors remuneration report and its compliance with the relevant requirements of Section 251 of the Companies Act 1985 and the regulations made thereunder.
We also read the other information contained in the summarised annual report and consider the implications for our report if we become aware of any apparent misstatements or material inconsistencies with the summary financial statement.
This statement including the opinion has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Section 251 of the Companies Act 1985 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving this opinion accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this statement is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Basis of opinion We conducted our work in accordance with Bulletin 19996 The auditors statement on the summary financial statement issued by the Auditing Practices Board for use in the United Kingdom.
Opinion
In our opinion the summary financial statement is consistent with the full annual financial statements the directors report and the directors remuneration report of BT Group plc for the year ended 31 March 2005 and complies with the applicable requirements of Section 251 of the Companies Act 1985 and the regulations made thereunder.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors London 18 May 2005 The auditors report on the full annual accounts for the year ended 31 March 2005 is unqualified and does not contain any statement concerning accounting records or failure to obtain necessary information and explanations.
14 BT Annual Review 2005 Summary financial statement Summary group profit and loss account for the year ended 31 March 2005 Before goodwill Goodwill amortisation amortisation and exceptional and exceptional items items Total Total btel 2004 m m m m Group turnover 18623  18623 18519 Group operating profit loss 2864 75 2789 2870 Groups share of operating loss of associates and joint ventures  25 25 34 Total operating profit loss 2864 100 2764 2836 Profit on sale of fixed asset investments and group undertakings  358 358 36 Profit on sale of property fixed assets 22  22 14 Net interest payable 801  801 941 Profit before taxation 2085 258 2343 1945 Profit after taxation 1546 274 1820 1406 Minority interests 1  1 8 Profit for the financial year 1547 274 1821 1414 Dividends 883 732 Retained profit 938 682 Earnings per share 21.4p 16.4p Dividends per share 10.4p 8.5p Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 18.1p 16.9p a Includes goodwill amortisation of 16 million an exceptional property rationalisation charge of 59 million in relation to the groups provincial office portfolio our share of a write down of Albacom SpAs assets prior to Albacom becoming a subsidiary of 25 million and a profit of 358 million mainly from the sale of the groups investments in Intelsat Eutelsat and StarHub.
This resulted in a net credit of 258 million to profit before taxation.
23 million offset by rectification costs relating to a major incident our share of a goodwill impairment charge made by Albacom of 26 million a profit of 32 million on the sale of our interest in Inmarsat and a oneoff interest credit of 34 million offset by a charge for the premium on buying back bonds of 89 million.
This resulted in a net charge of 68 million to profit before taxation. revised 2003 Employee Share Schemes.
An additional charge of 3 million for the 2004 financial year has been made to the group profit and loss account.
The effect on the group balance sheet at 31 March 2004 has been to reduce fixed assets by 53 million to reduce other creditors by 25 million and to reduce shareholders funds by 28 millon.
This summary financial statement was approved by the Board on 18 May 2005 and was signed on its behalf by Sir Christopher Bland
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director Group turnover Turnover from products and services sold to customers by BT.
Net interest payable Interest paid on borrowings less interest received on short term investments.
Earnings per share Our profit for the financial year divided by the average number of shares in issue during the period.
Creditors amounts falling due within one year Principally amounts due to suppliers and loans due for repayment within one year.
Current assets Principally amounts which we have billed our customers but not yet received and short term investments.
Fixed assets This is mainly exchange and network equipment property and similar items which we own and use to run our business goodwill and investments.
Group turnover years ended 31 March Continuing activities Earnings per share pence Continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items Restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 Dividends per share pence BT Annual Review 2005 15 Summary group balance sheet at 31 Marchtel m m Fixed assets 16654 16015 Current assets 10296 10550 Creditors amounts falling due within one year 12461 8523 Net current liabilities assets 2165 2027 Total assets less current liabilities 14489 18042 Creditors amounts falling due after one year 8091 12426 Provisions for liabilities and charges 2497 2504 Minority interests 50 46 Capital and reserves 3851 3066 14489 18042 d BT Group plc the company had capital and reserves at 31 March 2005 of 9.5 billion.
Summary group cash flow statement for the year ended 31 Marchtel m m Net cash inflow from operating activities 5898 5389 Dividends from associates and joint ventures 2 3 Returns on investments and servicing of finance Taxation paid 332 317 Capital expenditure and financial investment 2408 2477 Free cash flow 2282 2071 Acquisitions and disposals 418 60 Equity dividends paid 784 645 Cash inflow before management of liquid resources and financing 1080 1366 Management of liquid resources 587 1123 Financing 1485 2445 Increase in cash in the year 182 44 Decrease in net debt in the year resulting from cash flows 887 1222 e Net of deficiency and special pension contributions of 6 million 2004  742 million. f 2004 includes receipt of funds from restructuring the currency swap portfolio of 420 million.
Important note This summary financial statement does not contain sufficient information to allow for as full an understanding of the results of the group and state of affairs of the company or the group and of their policies and arrangements concerning directors remuneration as would be provided by the BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F Annual Report.
Also for the companys disclosure on any significant ways in which the companys corporate governance practices differ from those followed by US companies under NYSE listing standards please see the corporate governance section of the Annual Report.
Shareholders who would like more detailed information may obtain a copy of the full Annual Report for 2005 andor future years free of charge by calling our Shareholder Helpline on Freefonetel 44tel from outside the UK or can view it online at siteannualreport Forwardlooking statements Please see the cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements in the 2005 Annual Report available as set out in the paragraph above.
Provisions for liabilities and charges Amounts set aside for liabilities that are not yet certain.
Net cash inflow from operating activities Cash receipts less payments from the groups operating activities.
Capital expenditure and financial investment Cash receipts less payments from the purchase and sale of fixed assets.
Free cash flow Cash receipts less payments from the groups activities before corporate transactions dividend payments and financing.
Financing
Cash receipts less payments arising from loan advances or repayments not interest and the issue of shares.
Net debt m as at 31 March Free cash flow before acquisitions disposals and dividends m years ended 31 March Creditors amounts falling due after one year Money borrowed on a long term basis to fund our operations.
16 BT Annual Review 2005 Summary report on directors remuneration bonus is payable in the form of deferred shares under the Deferred Bonus Plan.
The shares are held in trust for three years and act both as an incentive and a retention measure.
Longterm incentives  the BT Equity Incentive Portfolio comprising share options incentive shares and retention shares is designed to ensure that equity participation plays an important part in overall remuneration.
In the financial year 200405 a combination of performancelinked share options and incentive shares replaced the grant of share options.
Awards vest and options become exercisable only if a predetermined performance target has been achieved.
The performance measure is total shareholder return TSR compared with a group of companies from the European Telecom Sector replacing the FTSE 100 as the comparator group.
BTs TSR at the end of the threeyear measurement period must be in the upper quartile for all of the awards to vest or options to become exercisable.
At median 30% of options would be exercisable and 25% of shares under award would vest.
Below that point all of the share awards and options would lapse.
Retention shares are granted in exceptional circumstances to help recruit or retain individuals with critical skills.
In the financial year 200405 six awards were made for recruitment purposes.
In the financial year 200506 the emphasis on some of the components making up remuneration packages will be modified as the present longterm arrangements have not been acting as a sufficiently effective retention tool.
As a result no further options will be granted and this will be balanced by an increase in the maximum award of incentive shares from twothirds to one times base salary.
There will also be an increase in annual bonus potential payable in deferred shares for the financial year 200506 onwards which will vest three years after grant.
Pension arrangements Pensions are based on salary alone bonuses other benefits and longterm incentives are excluded.
Executive directors and most other senior executives who joined the company prior to 1 April 2001 receive their pensions under defined benefit arrangements.
Those with longer BT service are entitled
This is a summary of the full Report on directors remuneration in the Annual Report and Form 20F 2005 a copy of which is available on request or at siteannualreport.
The full report will be voted on at the 2005 Annual General Meeting.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee sets the remuneration policy and individual packages for the Chairman executive directors members of the Operating Committee OC and other senior executives reporting to the Chief Executive.
It also approves changes in the companys longterm incentive plans recommends to the Board those plans which require shareholder approval and oversees their operation.
Remuneration policy for executives BTs executive remuneration policy is to reward employees competitively taking into account individual line of business and company performance market comparisons and the competitive pressures in the information and communications technology industry.
The policy for executive pay in general terms is for base salaries to be positioned around the midmarket with total direct compensation basic salary annual bonus and the value of any longterm incentives to be at the upper quartile only for sustained and excellent performance.
Main components of remuneration Executive benefits packages comprise a mix of basic salary and performancerelated remuneration as follows Basic salary This is reviewed annually.
Basic salaries remained unchanged during the 2004 and 2005 financial years with the exception of increases agreed for Andy Green and Ian Livingston on 1 January 2005 to align their packages with their revised responsibilities in a highly competitive market.
Performancerelated remuneration Annual bonus  the annual bonus plan is designed to reward the achievement of results against set objectives.
Targets in respect of corporate performance set at the beginning of the financial year 200405 for each objective were based on earnings per share free cash flow and customer satisfaction.
Onethird of any total to pension benefits of twothirds of final salary payable at normal retirement age.
Those with shorter BT service are entitled to pension benefits of onethirtieth of salary for each year of service.
Retirement provision for executive directors and other senior executives who joined BT on or after 1 April 2001 is generally made on a defined contribution basis  the company agrees to pay a fixed percentage typically around 30% of the executives salary each year towards the provision of retirement benefits.
Other benefits Other benefits include some or all of company car fuel or driver personal telecommunications facilities and home security medical and dental cover special life cover professional subscriptions and tax planning and financial counselling.
Service agreements The policy is for the Chairman and executive directors to have service agreements providing for one years notice by the company.
If BT terminates the Chairmans contract before it expires  at the end of the 2007 AGM  he is entitled to payment of salary for 12 months from termination or until the 2007 AGM if that is shorter.
Ben Verwaayen is entitled to 700000 on termination by BT.
Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds are entitled to salary and benefits until the earlier of 12 months from notice of BTs termination of the contract or the director obtaining fulltime employment.
See the tables opposite for details of directors emoluments and interests in shares.
31 Mar 31 Mar 31 Mar 31 Mar 31Mar BTs total shareholder return TSR performance over the five financial years to 31 March BT FTSE 100 1 April 2000  100 Source Datastream The graph shows our TSR performance adjusted for the rights issue and demerger of our mobile business in the 2002 financial year relative to the FTSE 100.
BT Annual Review 2005 17 family members.
Option Plan are normally exercisable in full between the third and tenth anniversaries of their date of grant only if a corporate performance target has been met.
Option
They are held in trust for up to three years and are transferred to participants if they are still employed by the company. the value of annual bonuses.
The shares are held in trust for three years and are transferred to participants if they are still employed by the company.
Notes
1 In addition deferred bonuses payable in shares in three years time were awarded to B Verwaayen 224000 A Green 102000 H Lalani 68000 I Livingston 99000 and P Reynolds 106500.
2 Part of the pension allowance of 30% of salary for B Verwaayen 20% of salary until 1January 2005 and 30% of salary for I Livingston was paid to them direct.
Pensions
Sir Christopher Bland is not a member of any of the companys pension schemes but the company matches his contributions up to 10% of the earnings cap to a personal pension plan.
B Verwaayen and I Livingston are not members of any of the companys pension schemes but the company has agreed to pay an amount equal to 30% of salary towards pension provision.
The aggregate value of contributions paid or treated as paid to defined contribution schemes in the 2005 financial year was 61200.
A Green H Lalani and P Reynolds are members of the BT Pension Scheme.
Additional days of pensionable service are being purchased for A Green H Lalani and PReynolds to bring their pensionable service at age 60 up to 40 years.
Directors remuneration The emoluments of the directors for the year ended 31 March 2005 and the benefits received under the longterm incentive plans were in summary as follows Total Total 2005 2004 Salaries includes amounts in note 2 below 3237 3150 Performancerelated and special bonus 1449 2074 Deferred bonus in shares 600 1037 Other benefits 419 467 5705 6728 Payments to nonexecutive directors 391 337 Total emoluments 6096 7065 Gain on the exercise of share options Value of shares vested under the executive share plans 2132 412 Retirement benefits are accruing to three directors under defined contribution arrangements and to three directors and one former director under a defined benefit scheme.
Annual Benefits Basic salary cash excluding Total Total and fees bonus pension Subtotal Other 2005 2004 Sir Christopher Bland 500  32 532  532 532 B Verwaayen 700 448 237 1385 127 1512 1968 A Green H Lalani I Livingston Dr P Reynolds Sir Anthony Greener 115   115  115 96 M van den Bergh 55 55  55 44 C Brendish 50   50  50 39 L R Hughes 21 21  21 40 Baroness Jay 50   50  50 39 J F Nelson 50   50  50 39 C G Symon 50 50  50 40 P Danon  701 750 3381 1449 419 5249 247 5496 6028 Summary of directors interests in shares and share plans as at 31 March 2005 Number of Incentive shares and Deferred Beneficial under retention bonus shareholdings option shares awards Sir Christopher Bland 674183 314244 299753 B Verwaayen 902001 3656458 252798 781024 A Green 120002 1545032 153484 230154 H Lalani 5733 655197 72224 66720 I Livingston 313054 1637155 469517 180258 Dr P Reynolds 67768 1453319 144456 208593 Sir Anthony Greener 60007 M van den Bergh 7540 C Brendish 23920 L R Hughes 6800 Baroness Jay 5572 J F Nelson 50000 C G Symon 10069 2246649 9261405 1392232 1466749 Executive directors are also able to participate in BTs allemployee share investment plan.
18 BT Annual Review 2005 Key to membership of Board committees A Operating B Audit C Remuneration D Nominating E Community Support F Pension Scheme Performance Review
Chairs committee Sir Christopher Bland
Appointed to the Board as Chairman on 1 May 2001.
Chairman of the BBC from 1996 to 2001.
Appointed a non executive director of LWT Holdings in 1982 and chairman from 1983 to 1994 when LWT was acquired by the Granada
A former chairman of an NHS hospital trust.
Aged 66.
Other appointments senior adviser at Warburg Pincus and chairman of the Royal Shakespeare Company.
D E F Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive A Dutch national appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002 and Chief Executive on 1 February 2002.
Formerly vice chairman of the management board of Lucent Technologies in the USA from October 1999.
Aged 53.
Other appointments nonexecutive director of UPS.
Dr Paul Reynolds Chief Executive BT Wholesale Appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
Held a number of senior positions in BT including Director of Multimedia and Managing Director of Networks and Information Services.
Aged 48.
Other appointments nonexecutive director of EAccess a Japanese corporation.
Andy Green Chief Executive BT Global Services Appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
Held a number of senior positions in BT including Chief Executive of BT Openworld and Group Director of Strategy and Development.
Aged 49.
Ian Livingston Chief Executive BT Retail Appointed Chief Executive BT Retail on 7 February 2005.
A Chartered Accountant he was Group Finance Director from April 2002.
Formerly group finance director of Dixons Group and a director of Freeserve from its inception.
Aged 40.
Other appointments nonexecutive director of Hilton Group.
Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director Appointed to the Board as Group Finance Director on 7 February 2005.
A Chartered
Accountant he was formerly Chief Financial Officer for BT Wholesale.
Joined BT in 1983 and held a number of positions including Chief Executive BT Northern Ireland and Chairman OCEAN Communications BTs subsidiary in the Republic of Ireland.
Awarded the OBE in 2003 for services to business in Northern
Aged 43.
AF
Summary directors report Principal activities BT is one of the worlds leading providers of communications solutions serving customers in Europe the Americas and Asia Pacific.
Its principal activities include networked IT services local national and international telecommunications services and highervalue broadband and internet products and services.
In the UK we serve over 20 million business and residential customers with around 29 million exchange lines as well as providing network services to other licensed operators.
BT consists principally of three lines of business BT Retail BT Wholesale and BT Global
Details of our businesses and performance including a number of post balance sheet events are given on pages 12 and 13 of this Annual Review.
Dividends
An interim dividend of 3.9 pence per share 2004 3.2p was paid on 7 February 2005.
The directors recommend a final dividend of 6.5 pence per share 2004 5.3p to be paid on 5 September 2005 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 5 August 2005.
This makes a total dividend for the year of 10.4 pence per share 2004 8.5p an increase of 22%.
Directors
Details of the current members of the Board are shown below.
All served throughout the financial year with the exception of Hanif Lalani who was appointed on 7 February 2005.
Pierre Danon served as a director until 28 February 2005.
Ben Verwaayen Paul Reynolds Carl Symon and Baroness Jay retire from the Board by rotation at the Annual General
Being eligible they offer themselves for reelection.
Hanif Lalani having been appointed by the Board will retire and will be proposed for election.
The contracts of Ben Verwaayen Paul Reynolds and Hanif Lalani are terminable on 12 months notice by the company and six months notice by the director.
The letters of appointment of Carl Symon and Baroness Jay were extended for a second term of three years from 14 January 2005 and are terminable by either party on three months notice.
Annual General Meeting The Notice of the Annual General Meeting to be held at 10.30 am at the Harrogate International Centre Harrogate on 13 July 2005 is contained in a circular which is sent to shareholders with this Review.
Board of directors BT Annual Review 2005 19 Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman Appointed to the Board on 1 October 2000.
He is Deputy Chairman and senior independent director.
Chairman of the Audit and Remuneration
Formerly chairman of Diageo.
Aged 64.
Other appointments chairman of the Qualifications and Curriculum Authority.
B C D Louis R Hughes A US national appointed to the Board on 1 January 2000.
Nonexecutive chairman of Maxager Technology
USA.
Previously president and chief operating officer of Lockheed Martin Corporation and executive vice president of General
Aged 56.
Other appointments from 0904 to 0605 leading the US Government civil reconstruction effort in
Non executive director of AB Electrolux Sweden Sulzer AG and ABB Ltd both Switzerland.
B C Maarten van den Bergh ADutch national appointed to the Board on 1 September 2000.
Retired in 2000 as president of the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company and vice chairman of its committee of managing directors.
Aged 63.
Other appointments chairman of Lloyds TSB Group nonexecutive director of Royal Dutch Petroleum Company and British Airways and a member of the supervisory board of
B C D F John Nelson A Chartered Accountant appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
Retired as chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston Europe CSFB on 31 January 2002.
Prior to joining CSFB in January 1999 he was vice chairman of Lazard Brothers from 1990.
Aged 57.
Other appointments deputy chairman of Kingfisher and a non executive director of Hammerson of which he will become chairman in September 2005.
B D F The Rt.
Hon.
Baroness
Jay of Paddington PC Appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
Formerly Lord Privy Seal Leader of the House of Lords and Minister for Women and Minister of State at the Department of Health.
Aged 65.
Other appointments nonexecutive director of Independent News and Media and a member of its International Advisory Board chairman of the Overseas Development Institute and member of the Committee on Standards in Public Life.
C E Clayton Brendish Appointed to the Board on 1 September 2002.
Retired in 2001 as executive deputy chairman of CMG.
Aged 58.
Other appointments nonexecutive director and external chairman of Meteorological Office Board nonexecutive chairman of Close Beacon Investment Fund and Echo Research Ltd nonexecutive director of Elexon and Herald Investment Trust trustee of Economist Newspapers and Foundation for Liver Research.
B E Carl G Symon A US national appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
Formerly chairman and chief executive officer of IBM UK.
Aged 59.
Other appointments nonexecutive director of RollsRoyce and Rexam chairman of a number of private companies.
B C Nonexecutive directors Corporate governance It is BTs policy to achieve for all our operations best practice in our standards of business integrity.
The directors consider that BT has throughout the year complied with the provisions set out in section 1 of the 2003 Combined Code on Corporate
Board directors and board committees The Board is currently made up of the parttime Chairman the Chief Executive four other executive directors and seven independent nonexecutive directors.
It is BTs policy that the Board will comprise a majority of independent nonexecutive directors.
The roles of the Chairman and the Chief Executive are separate.
The nonexecutive directors provide a strong independent element on the Board.
Sir Anthony Greener the Deputy Chairman is the senior independent director.
Non executive directors are appointed initially for three years at the end of which the appointment may be continued by mutual agreement.
The Chairman and the non executive directors meet regularly without the executive directors.
The Chairman ensures the views of shareholders are known to and appropriately considered by the Board.
The Boards principal focus is the overall strategic direction development and control of the group.
A formal statement of its role is available on the companys website.
Historically the Board has met every month except August.
For the 2006 financial year and going forward the Board will meet at least nine times each year.
During summer 2004 the Board carried out a further evaluation of its performance.
A number of actions were agreed as a result.
As part of this process the Chairman has onetoone sessions with the directors the Deputy Chairman Sir Anthony Greener meets all directors individually to review the Chairmans performance.
To meet best corporate governance practice Audit Remuneration and Nominating Committees have long been an established part of BTs system of governance.
Each committee has written terms of reference which are available on the companys website.
The Audit and Remuneration Committees are made up entirely of independent nonexecutive directors.
The Board considers that several of the Audit Committees members have recent and relevant financial experience.
The Audit Committee reviews the companys published financial results the Annual Report and Form 20F and other published information for statutory and regulatory compliance and reports its views to the Board.
It recommends the appointment reappointment and remuneration of the companys external auditors.
The Board has policies determining what nonaudit services the companys external auditors can provide in order to safeguard their independence and objectivity.
The Nominating Committee ensures an appropriate balance of experience and abilities on the Board using this evaluation to review the size and composition of the Board and to recommend any proposed changes to the Board.
The Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen chairs the Operating Committee which meets weekly.
Internal control and risk management The Board is responsible for the groups systems of internal control and risk management and for reviewing the effectiveness of those systems.
Such systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives any system can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
BT has processes for identifying evaluating and managing the significant risks faced by the group.
These processes have been in place for the whole of the 2005 financial year and have continued up to the date on which this document was approved.
Information for shareholders Apr04 Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Mar05 BTs share price pence over the financial year ended 31 March tel18telSource Bloomberg Dividends for the year ended 31 March 2005 Interim dividend of 3.9 pence per share paid on 7 February 2005.
Final dividend proposed of 6.5 pence per share payable on 5 September 2005.
Calendar of key dates Financial year end 31 March 2005 Annual General Meeting 13 July 2005 Results announcements for the year ended 31 March 2006 First quarter 28 July 2005 Second quarter and half year 10 November 2005 Third quarter and nine months February 2006 Fourth quarter and full year May 2006 2006 report and accounts published June 2006 Dividends for the financial year ended 31 March 2005
3.9 pence per share paid 7 February 2005
Record date 5 August 2005 6.5 pence per share proposed payable 5 September 2005 Dates are based on present expectations Have your dividends paid directly to your bank or building society account Its easy secure reduces our costs  and you still receive your tax information.
Just call our Shareholder Helpline on Freefonetel or go to sitesignup and follow the onscreen instructions.
Corporate overseas and joint shareholders and shareholders with more than 1500 shares will need to ask for the appropriate form to complete or use the online service Share price Shareline  for the daily 9.00 am share price and recorded news about BT call Localltel UK callers only.
Calls charged as a local call from anywhere in the UK.
Share price line  for realtime buying and selling prices for BT shares calltel UK callers only.
This service is provided by Teleshare which is not part of BT.
Calls are charged at 60p per minute including VAT.
Different rates may apply to calls from nonBT networks.
Welcome to new shareholders 20 BT Annual Review 2005 Online communication More shareholders now receive all of their BT shareholder communications online and are discovering the convenience of using the internet and email to find out about their shareholdings and about BT.
ShareholderPlus
Choose to receive all your BT shareholder communications online at sitesignup and you will qualify for ShareholderPlus an exclusive range of shareholder offers on products and services from BT and partner companies.
You can view the current offers at siteshareholderoffers
When you sign up for ShareholderPlus you are automatically registered for Shareview provided in association with Lloyds TSB
This online service enables you to update address andor bank details online view dividend information including tax details buy or sell BT shares online at sitedealing or telephonetel build and manage a full share portfolio appoint a proxy to represent you at company meetings.
Registration is free Just go to sitesignup and follow the onscreen instructions or call the Shareholder Helpline see Contact BT.
You will need your unique eightcharacter shareholder account number printed below your name on the accompanying Admission CardProxy Card and also on your share certificates.
Email alerts To receive monthly email alerts about BT and new shareholder offers click on email alerts at sitesharesandperformance and select your areas of interest.
About BT siteaboutbt has a wealth of constantly updated information about BT and sitesharesandperformance has information of particular interest to our shareholders.
Contact BT You can contact us by telephone email or post.
Telephone
Shareholder Helpline  for general enquiries call Freefonetel 44tel from outside the UK
Send an email to Kevan Dale at email
Please write including a daytime telephone number to Lloyds TSB Registrars The Causeway
West Sussex BN99 6DA Other publications BT produces a series of reports on its financial business social and environmental performance.
Most of these can be found on our website at siteaboutbt.
Contact the Shareholder Helpline for printed copies where available.
Special needs An audio cassette version of the Annual Review including extracts from the 2005 Notice of Annual General Meeting has been produced for shareholders with special needs.
To obtain a copy of this cassette please contact the Shareholder Helpline.
ShareGift
The Orr Mackintosh Foundation operates a charity donation scheme for shareholders with small parcels of shares which may be uneconomic to sell.
Details of the scheme are available from ShareGift at www. haregift. rg or by telephone ontel.
Details can also be obtained from the Shareholder Helpline.
Unclaimed Assets Register BT subscribes to this search facility for financial assets that have become separated from their owners.
The register donates a proportion of its public search fees to charity via ShareGift.
Further information can be found at site or telephonetel.
Capital gains tax The rights issue in June 2001 adjusted the value of your BT shares for capital gains tax CGT purposes.
An explanatory leaflet is available from the Shareholder Helpline.
The demerger of O2 in November 2001 adjusted the value of your BT shares for CGT purposes.
For CGT calculations the base cost of the BT Group shares and O2 shares is calculated by multiplying the acquisition cost of the BT shareholding by 77.544% for the BT Group shares and 22.456% for the O2 shares.
This is in accordance with the confirmed opening prices for BT Group and O2 shares following the demerger.
Sign up for ShareholderPlus for an exclusive range of online shareholder offers.
Other publications BT produces a series of reports on its financial business social and environmental performance.
Most of these can be found on our website.
Contact the Shareholder Helpline for printed copies where available.
A guide to shareholder offers and services BT Group plc Registered office 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ Registered in England and Wales No.
Produced by BT Group Designed and typeset by Pauffley Ltd London Printed in England by Pindar plc Printed on elemental chlorinefree paper sourced from sustainably managed forests site PHME 47822 Consumer services Further information on consumer services featured in this Annual Review is available as follows BT Broadband  Call telor visit sitegetbroadband BT Together  Call telor visit sitetogether BT Mobile  Call telor visit sitebtmobile BT Communicator with Yahoo Messenger Call telor visit sitebtcommunicator Internet Security Pack Call telor visit sitepremiumrates Information on the services we offer is regularly enclosed with BT phone bills.
