Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 annual report BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 BT Group plc Registered ofce 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ Registered in England and Wales No.
Produced by BT Group Designed by Paufey Typeset by Greenaways Printed in England by Pindar plc Printed on paper which meets international environmental standards.
26692 NEWBTAR20Ffcbc 629 pm Page fc1 BT is one of Europes leading providers of telecommunications services.
Its
In the UK BT serves over 20 million business and residential customers with more than 29 million exchange lines as well as providing network services to other licensed operators.
Contents
Financial headlines 3 Chairmans message 4 Chief Executives statement 6 Business review 8 Our commitment to society 24 Fiveyear nancial summary 26 Financial review 28 Board of directors and Operating Committee 50 Report of the directors 52 Corporate governance 53 Report on directors remuneration 58 Statement of directors responsibility 73 Report of the independent auditors 74 Consolidated nancial statements 75 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 127 Subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates 135 Quarterly analysis of turnover and prot 136 Financial statistics 138 Operational statistics 139 Risk factors 140 Additional information for shareholders 141 Glossary of terms and US equivalents 156 Cross reference to Form 20F 157 Index 160 BT Group plc is a public limited company registered in England and Wales with listings on the London and New York stock exchanges.
This is the annual report for the year ended 31 March 2003.
It complies with UK regulations and is the annual report on Form 20F for the Securities and Exchange Commission to meet US regulations.
This annual report has been sent to shareholders who have elected to receive a copy.
A separate annual review and summary nancial statement for the year ended 31 March 2003 has been issued to all shareholders.
In this annual report references to BT Group BT the group the company we or our are to BT Group plc which includes the continuing activities of British Telecommunications plc and its subsidiaries and lines of business or any of them as the context may require.
References to the nancial year are to the year ended 31 March of each year e. ended 31 March 2003.
Unless otherwise stated all nonnancial statistics are at 31 March 2003.
Please see cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 142.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 1 BTs strategy is to create value for shareholders through being the best provider of communications services and solutions for everybody in the UK and for corporate customers in Europe achieving global reach through partnership.
The fundamentals of our strategy are and customer satisfaction and nancial discipline and broadband  at the heart of BT and valueadded solutions for multisite organisations with European operations and a clear network strategy with unied management of all UK networks and a clear strategy for each customer group including new services and brand extension and diverse skilled and motivated people.
2 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 and Group turnover of 18.7 billion 2% up on prior year and Prot before taxation up 44% to 1.8 billion and Earnings per share of 14.2 pence up 61% on prior year and Net exceptional gains of 1.5 billion and Net debt reduced from 13.7 billion to 9.6 billion and Dividends of 6.5 pence per share for the year from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items Years ended 31 March Continuing activities In  million unless otherwise statedtel Group turnover 18727 18447 17141 Exceptional operating costs 48 3990 303 Total operating prot loss 2901 1489 2456 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 1700 169 534 Loss prot on sale of group undertakings 9 148 84 Prot on sale of property xed assets 11 1089 34 Amounts written off investments 7 535 Prot loss before taxation 3157 2493 1937 Prot loss after taxation 2698 2878 1505 Basic earnings loss per share 31.2p 34.8p 20.7p Dividends per share 6.5p 2.0p 7.8p Prot before goodwill amortisation exceptional items and taxation 1829 1273 1763 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 14.2p 8.8p 19.3p Net cash ow from operating activities 6023 5023 5410 Capital expenditure on property plant and equipment 2445 3100 3857 The nancial information above is discussed in the Financial review on pages 28 to 49 together with the reasons for focusing on the results from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
The Consolidated nancial statements are on pages 75 to 135.
Net debt as at 31 March from continuing activities from continuing activities Group turnover years ended 31 March Capital expenditure years ended 31 March BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 3 Financial headlines The year This has been a really good year for BT.
We said 12 months ago that in a turbulent market your company had taken the hard decisions and necessary actions early.
Events have shown that we were right to do so and that we have now established a strong base for sustainable growth.
Earnings per share in the year increased by 61% and net debt reduced by over 4 billion.
The group generated free cash ow of 1.7 billion.
The full year dividend of 6.5 pence per share reects the groups nancial performance operational strength and condence in the future.
In the past two years our net debt has been reduced from 27.9 billion as at 31 March 2001 to 9.6 billion as at 31 March 2003 a reduction of 66%.
The foundations of the progress in 2003 were the achievement of operating efciencies and the sale of noncore assets such as our stake in Cegetel which we sold for 2.6 billion.
Progress was sustained by improving service in our traditional markets and our growing success in such newwave markets as broadband mobility information and communications technology ICT and solutions.
We continue to invest in and to transform our network to help take our 20 million customers into a future shaped by new communications possibilities.
Purpose and responsibilities As a business our purpose is to connect the worlds of our customers.
In achieving that purpose we will provide the greatest customer satisfaction and enjoy commercial success if we make every experience of our services simple and complete.
Your companys broader responsibilities include the maintenance of a good reputation denitive standards of governance and a coherent corporate social responsibility programme all vital to encouraging investors to put their trust in us customers to buy from us and the best people to work for us.
This sense of responsibility runs through the whole of our organisation.
Pensions
BT takes its responsibilities to its pensioners existing and prospective very seriously.
The result of a recent valuation of the main BT pension scheme carried out by the independent actuary appointed by the Scheme trustees showed a funding decit of 2.1 billion.
This compares to 1 billion at the last formal valuation in 1999.
BT has agreed it will make good this decit with additional annual payments of 232 million compared to the 200 million additional annual payments that BT has been making.
Strength of the BT Pension Scheme The BT Pension Scheme which has been closed to new members since 31 March 2001 is backed by BT.
The
Scheme assets are controlled by trustees who must act in the best interests of its members.
Any decit has to be made good by the company and no changes can be made to the rules and benets that apply to Scheme members without the agreement of the trustees.
Chairmans message 4 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Sir Christopher Bland Chairman reports on a year in which BT further reduced debt grew its dividend signicantly and continued to invest in the future.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 5 Company Board Iam delighted to welcome Clay Brendish former deputy chairman of CMG plc and founder and former executive chairman of Admiral plc to the Board.
Clay brings with him a wealth of experience in the information technology industry.
His appointment with effect from 1 September 2002 on which shareholders will have the opportunity to vote at this years AGM means that independent nonexecutive directors constitute a majority on your Board.
People and prospects Finally we would like to thank our customers our shareholders and our people for their continued condence in and loyalty to the company.
We are recognising the efforts of our people in meeting BTs performance targets through awarding them 2% of the pretax prots 36 million in the form of BT shares.
We believe the company is well placed  nancially operationally and managerially  to meet new challenges and to seize new opportunities.
Sir Christopher Bland
21 May 2003 Key events and achievements June 2002 Launch of Openzone BTs public wireless LAN hotspot service September 2002 The UKs most intensive TV campaign stimulates demand for broadband November 2002 BT wins e1 billion contract to manage and develop Unilevers global communications infrastructure January 2003 Sale of stake in Cegetel for 2.6 billion April 2003 BT announces that it has connected more than 800000 broadband customers Chief Executives statement Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive explains that BT will create value for shareholders by its passion for customer service its focus on protable growth and its commitment to broadband.
6 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 A year ago I said that there were three main parts to BTs strategy.
This year Im saying the same thing.
First we have a passion for customers.
Second we have broadband at the heart of BT  and BT at the heart of broadband.
Third we have rigorous nancial discipline.
By concentrating on these three priorities we can continue to reward shareholders drive down debt and invest in the business  where it matters.
First and foremost we are passionate about customers.
Every time we deal with a customer our goal is to deliver an excellent experience  an experience which is simple but also complete.
We are working to meet the needs that customers have today.
And we are innovating to meet the needs they will have tomorrow.
This means getting ever closer to customers understanding their lifestyles and businesses establishing longterm relationships with them.
We are proud to serve individuals families small or mediumsized businesses and global corporations.
In the past year our passion for customers has delivered results.
For example and consumers and businesses are now more satised with the way we provide and repair their services as shown by our satisfaction surveys and packages such as BT Together which has ten million residential customers have been a major success story.
From June this year BT Together will be even simpler making minutebyminute charges for evening and weekend calling a thing of the past and we are the UKs leading internet service provider for small and medium businesses and the order book for our solutions business is very strong and orders worth 3.6 billion were taken during the 2003 nancial year including a major e1 billion contract to manage Unilevers worldwide communications network for seven years and we promised that our major European operations would break even at the EBITDA level and thanks to our market success and efciency programme we delivered and new business revenues among wholesale customers other telecoms operators and internet service providers grew by 85% year on year and and very importantly overall customer dissatisfaction was signicantly down by 37% for the company against the target we set of 25%.
Broadband is the biggest opportunity for growth in the communications market.
Its no exaggeration to say that it will be as important to our future as voice telephone calls were to our past.
Broadband is more than just another product.
It is a whole new way of communicating.
It sparks off tremendous demand and is growing at a rapid rate  connections having increased almost fourfold in the 2003 nancial year.
Our record over the past year shows how we are meeting this demand and at 31 March 2003 we had around 800000 ADSL asymmetric digital subscriber line connections and we are well on the way to reaching our target of one million this summer BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 7 and twothirds of the UK population is now connected to an ADSLenabled exchange and our development of new business models coupled with technological breakthroughs could put 90% of the UKs homes and small businesses within reach of broadband services within the next few years.
And as well as signing up customers we are moving quickly to offer them inspiring new services.
Our understanding of what customers want is growing every day and we are making sure that the company is able to provide it.
For example new broadband services were launched offering music  Dotmusic on Demand sport  Sportal on Demand and education the BT Learning Centre.
Our third key priority is nancial discipline.
We put our heart into customer service but also into a rigorous approach to nance.
As the broadband record shows we have to meet the demands of our customers in a way that also serves the interests of shareholders  in other words it has to be nancially responsible and sustainable.
Financial discipline is not the same thing as cost savings.
Its about doing things smarter raising the bar proving that it is possible to do more with less.
We did substantially reduce operating costs and in addition we very carefully targeted our capital expenditure which was 2.4 billion during the 2003 nancial year a 21% reduction on the previous year on a likeforlike basis.
We are investing to transform our network.
Equipment designed for 20th century services is making way for a true 21st century network delivering the broadband multimedia services that todays customers require.
It will also deliver these services in the way many of todays customers now demand them  for example enabling customers to congure and adjust their services themselves.
In this network we are creating a new engine for growth simultaneously offering lower operating costs and higher performance.
These then are the priorities that we have been focused on in the past year and that we will remain focused on in the year ahead.
Our success will depend not just on making our strategy work but on the way in which we make it work.
The new corporate identity that we unveiled at the beginning of April 2003 denes the kind of company we are now and need to be in the future.
Central to that new identity is a commitment to be simple and complete in all we do.
And that in turn means living our brand values.
Being trustworthy means consistently delivering on our promises.
Helpful means listening and responding.
Being straightforward means keeping things simple and clear and inspiring means constantly working to create new communications possibilities.
And we have to do everything with real heart  showing passion and conviction.
Those values of course can only be lived through people  and of course our strategy can only be delivered by the teams of motivated people throughout the business.
It simply couldnt happen without them.
They breathe life into it.
They make it work.
And Id like to thank them for their loyalty and their hard work.
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive 21 May 2003 Business review 8 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 The review is divided into the following sections 8 Introduction 8 Group strategy 9 Customer satisfaction 9 Broadband 9 Reporting on BT Openworld 9 Restructuring Demerger of mmO Acquisitions and disposals
Concert
10 Debt reduction programme 10 Dividend 10 Pension fund 10 Lines of business 11 BT Retail Core business Newwave business Internet access Enhanced customer access 13 BT Wholesale Core business Changing market conditions Strategic intent External new business revenues
21st century network
15 BT Global Services Meeting customers needs Solutions and valueadded services Customer wins Business realignment Global reach 16 Other businesses 16 Research and development and IT support 17 Our people 18 Regulation competition and prices Regulation in the UK
Pricing regulation NonUK regulation Other signicant changes and issues 23 Relationship with the UK Government 23 Legal proceedings Please see cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 142.
All customer numbers are given as at 31 March 2003 unless stated otherwise.
EBITDA  Earnings before interest taxation depreciation and amortisation.
The denition reconciliation and reasons for disclosing EBITDA are discussed in the Financial review.
Introduction
BT Group plc is the listed holding company for an integrated group of businesses that provide voice and data services in the UK and elsewhere in Europe.
British Telecommunications plc is a whollyowned subsidiary of BT Group plc and holds virtually all businesses and assets of the BT group.
Our collective aim is to create shareholder value through service excellence an effective brand our largescale networks and our existing customer base and also through developing and marketing new highervalue broadband and internet products and services.
BT consists principally of three lines of business BT Retail BT Wholesale and BT Global Services formerly BT Ignite.
In the year ended 31 March 2003 the 2003 nancial year 94% of our revenues were derived from operations within the UK where we are the largest full service telecommunications operator serving over 20 million customers.
BT Retail and BT Wholesale operate almost entirely within the UK addressing the consumer major business business and wholesale markets and offer a broad spectrum of communications products and services.
Our aim is to increase protable revenues from data and advanced broadband and internet services and to reduce further our dependence on revenues and prot generated by xedline voice services.
For a summary of turnover for our lines of business for the years ended 31 March 2001 2002 and 2003 see the table on page 10.
Corporate identity In early April 2003 we unveiled a new corporate identity to replace the piper logo and reect our strategy.
Because it represents BT as part of the multimedia age and communicates our global reach this change better reects the range of activities that we encompass.
The new mark is the companys rst visual identity change since 1991.
Governance
BTs policy is to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity in all our operations in line with our published statement of business practice  The Way We Work.
This includes a commitment to maintaining the highest standards of corporate governance throughout the group see pages 53 to 57.
Corporate social responsibility BT is committed to maximising its positive impact on society through leadership in CSR corporate social responsibility.
In our view a well managed CSR programme supports the delivery of strategy and is in the best interests of the business customers shareholders and the community see pages 24 to 25.
Group strategy In 2002 BT set out its threeyear strategy to create value for shareholders by being the best provider of communications services and solutions for everybody in Business review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 9 the UK and for multisite organisations with European operations achieving global reach through partnership.
We have seven strategic priorities and to deliver the highest levels of customer satisfaction performance and reduce the number of dissatised customers each year and to achieve organic protable revenue growth while carefully controlling capital expenditure and to put broadband at the heart of BT expand the market for broadband services and create a mediaenabled network and to provide solutions and other valueadded services for multisite organisations with European operations and to place all UK networks under a single management structure and to limit investment in legacy voice and data platforms while migrating operations to new platforms and to move into broadband and mobility services for consumers and also into advanced services such as communications solutions and outsourcing for major business customers and ICT information and communications technology for SME small and medium enterprises and all delivered by diverse skilled and motivated people.
Customer satisfaction Reducing customer dissatisfaction by 25% a year is a key target in our drive to deliver the highest levels of customer satisfaction.
BT has an extensive programme of quantitative customer research run by external agencies to assist us to focus on the level and causes of customer dissatisfaction.
This research shows we achieved a 37% reduction in customer dissatisfaction over the year beating the target of 25%.
All areas of the business improved satisfaction levels with particularly signicant improvement among our international and wholesale customers.
Although in most areas customer satisfaction is well ahead of our competitors we will strive to make further signicant improvements.
A programme has been put in place that focuses on key areas of customer dissatisfaction.
Broadband
Broadband is at the heart of our strategy and during the year we made progress in our drive to enhance the awareness availability and attractiveness of broadband.
As at 16 May 2003 we had 936000 ADSL asymmetric digital subscriber line connections and are on track to meet our target of one million connections by summer 2003.
The speed at which this is happening is generating economies of scale that will help us continue to reduce costs and progress beyond the one million gure.
A series of technological breakthroughs can for the rst time bring ADSL within potential reach of 90% of UK homes and small businesses within the next few years.
In November 2002 as further evidence of our commitment to broadband we announced the appointment of BTs rst Chief Broadband Ofcer whose role is to direct and align the people and processes involved in the endtoend delivery of broadband.
Reporting on BT Openworld With effect from 1 January 2003 the former BT Openworld results have been reported within BT Retail.
BT Openworlds internet access and portal services remain as a separately run business.
All other parts of the BT Openworld portfolio including GamesDomain and Dotmusic together with the customer service and network operations teams have been integrated into BT Retail.
This reorganisation has already delivered cost savings and efciency gains mostly arising from the avoidance of duplication in administrative and other support activities.
Restructuring
During the 2002 nancial year we substantially completed a radical restructuring programme the key elements of which were and the UKs largestever rights issue  1.98 billion new shares were issued to shareholders who took up their rights raising 5.9 billion net of expenses and the demerger of the majority of BTs mobile businesses to create two separate listed companies BT Group plc and mmO plc and the disposal of signicant noncore businesses and assets and the unwind of Concert BTs joint venture with ATandT and the creation of customerfocused lines of business and a major programme of debt reduction.
Demerger of mmO On 19 November 2001 we completed the demerger of mmO comprising what were BTs whollyowned mobile assets in Europe O UK formerly known as BT Cellnet O Communications Ireland formerly known as Esat Digifone Telfort Mobiel Viag Interkom Manx Telecom and Genie.
Shareholders received one share in mmO plc and one share in BT Group plc for each share they previously held in British Telecommunications plc.
Trading in BT Group plc and mmO plc shares began on 19 November 2001.
BT and mmO through arms length negotiations entered into a number of agreements to dene the continuing relationship between the groups including the agreement that until November 2004 we will exclusively promote the mobile products and services of O UK to the business market in the UK.
The agreements that we would not offer mobile products and services to the consumer market in the UK solely under the BT brand and that parts of mmO were able to use some of our trademarks and brands on a transitional basis both lapsed on 31 March 2003.
Acquisitions and disposals Between the 1999 and 2002 nancial years BT made a number of signicant acquisitions including taking stakes in Japan Telecom and JPhone Communications Business review 10 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 in Japan and control of Viag Interkom in Germany and Esat Telecom and Esat Digifone in the Republic of Ireland.
During the 2002 nancial year reecting the change in the groups strategy we disposed of a number of businesses and assets including Yell  our international directories and ecommerce business and our stakes in Japan Telecom JPhone Communications and Airtel the Spanish wireless operator.
The consideration received enabled us to focus on our core businesses and to reduce net debt.
In January 2003 we completed the sale of our 26% stake in Cegetel Groupe SA the leading alternative xedline operator in France to Vivendi Universal for 2.6 billion in cash.
After accounting for goodwill written back from reserves BT realised a prot of approximately 1.5 billion before an exceptional interest charge of 0.3 billion on closing out xed interest rate swaps.
In the 2003 nancial year we disposed of a number of noncore investments including stakes in BSkyB Mediaset Blu and SmarTone.
No material acquisitions were made in the 2003 nancial year.
Property
In December 2001 as part of our wider property outsourcing arrangement we completed the sale and leaseback of the majority of our UK property portfolio to Telereal a 5050 joint venture partnership between Land Securities Trillium and the William Pears Group for 2.4 billion in cash.
Approximately 6700 properties ofces telephone exchanges vehicle depots warehouses call centres and computer centres equating to approximately 5.5 million square metres were transferred.
Under these arrangements Telereal is responsible for providing accommodation and estate management services to BT.
We retained direct ownership of approximately 220 properties  including certain telephone exchanges computer centres and high radio towers totalling some 800000 square metres.
We also retained BT Centre our headquarters building Adastral Park our major research facility near Ipswich Madley and Goonhilly earth satellite stations and the BT Tower in Central London.
In the third quarter of the 2003 nancial year we provided 198 million against the costs of vacating and disposing of surplus London ofces as we rationalise from 14 buildings to ve.
Concert
On 1 April 2002 we completed the unwind of Concert our international joint venture with ATandT which involved the return of Concerts businesses customer accounts and networks to the two parent companies.
As a result of the unwind we have largely taken back into our ownership those parts of Concert originally contributed by us to the joint venture while ATandT has taken back into its ownership those parts it originally contributed.
We have acquired substantially all of Concerts managed services network infrastructure in Europe Africa the Middle East and the Americas and substantially all of the customer and supplier contracts that we originally contributed to Concert.
Concert assets that have been returned to us are now managed by BT Global Services while Concert customers that have been returned to us are now managed partly by BT Global Services and partly by BT Retail.
Simultaneously with the completion of the termination of the Concert joint venture ATandT acquired BTs share of our Canadian joint venture through which we held an indirect minority shareholding in ATandT Canada.
As a result BT no longer has any obligations in relation to ATandT Canada.
Debt reduction programme Net debt has been reduced from 27.9 billion as at 31 March 2001 to 9.6 billion as at 31 March 2003.
Key to the reduction in the 2003 nancial year was the disposal of our stake in Cegetel and operating cash ow improvements.
Dividend
In 2002 we returned to the dividend list with the payment of a nal dividend for the 2002 nancial year.
An interim dividend of 2.25 pence per share for the 2003 nancial year was paid in February 2003 and a nal dividend of 4.25 pence per share is proposed for payment in September 2003.
Pension fund The latest triennial funding valuation of the groups dened benet pension scheme the BT Pension Scheme was performed by the independent actuary as at 31 December 2002.
The valuation showed the assets of 22.8 billion to be sufcient to cover 92% of the liabilities with a resulting decit of 2.1 billion.
With effect from April 2003 the regular company contributions have increased to 12.2% of employees pensionable pay from 11.6% and the annual deciency payment has increased to 232 million from 200 million.
The group remains committed to making good the funding decit.
Lines of business The following table sets out the group turnover for each of our lines of business in the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years.
Group turnovertel Years ended 31 March m m m BT Retail 13301 12811 12541 BT Wholesale 11260 12256 11728 BT Global Services 5251 4472 3468 Other 41 70 138 Intragroup 11126 11162 10734 Total continuing activities 18727 18447 17141 Total discontinued activities  2112 3286 Totals 18727 20559 20427 Business review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 11 BT Retail Years ended or as at 31 Marchtel Group turnover 13301m 12811m 12541m
BT Retail is the UKs largest communications service provider by market share to the residential and business markets.
It trades under one of the UKs leading brands  BT  and is the prime channel to market in the UK for other businesses in the BT group.
It supplies a wide range of communication products and services including voice data internet and multimedia services and offers a comprehensive range of managed and packaged communications solutions.
Its strategy is to improve the customer experience control costs and increase cashow defend core revenues and build new revenue streams.
The core portfolio covers traditional telephony products such as calls analoguedigital lines and private circuits.
New revenue generation is focused on broadband mobility and ICT.
BT Retail has three main customer groups consumer residential customers major business corporate customers and the public sector and business usually companies of up to 500 employees.
It has approximately 19 million consumer customers and over one million business customers including major business customers.
Core business As at 31 March 2003 BT Retail had more than 29 million customer lines exchange line connections nine million of which were business lines and lines for other service providers and the remainder of which were for residential customers.
Fixednetwork call revenues including rental and connection charges accounted for approximately 29% of our revenues in the 2003 nancial year.
The number of business lines remained stable although highspeed ISDN services grew by over 6%.
In the residential xedvoice call market BT Retails share remained stable over the year at around 73% as it has been since June 2000.
The number of residential voice lines grew by 0.2%.
Our market share of the business xed voice sector for the 2003 nancial year was 45% compared with 49% for the 2002 nancial year.
Consumer
Our residential business saw revenue growth for the rst time for a number of years driven by stable market share stable customer numbers and growth in national calls. customers.
As at 31 March 2003 ten million customers had signed up for BT Together accounting for 70% of residential customer call minutes.
In April 2003 we announced that BT Together would be streamlined with effect from 1 June 2003 perminute charging for evening and weekend calls would be removed and the distinction between local and national calls abolished in favour of a single UK rate. suitable alternative.
We remain committed to retaining payphones in locations such as rural communities where there is no suitable alternative. on a single number  118 500.
In addition to the number servicesite the business nder directory service enables customers to access classied listings and other enhanced information services.
Major business and BT Retail helps its major business customers to manage their communications spend using a free PCbased tool to analyse customer bills  BT Billing
This assists in pinpointing areas of inefciency identifying unnecessary calls at premium or peak rates and combating fraud.
A consulting service is being introduced which uses this information to construct more efcient customer networks. centre customers.
Business
In the business market our strategy is to provide business customers with a simpler and tailored service thereby creating greater certainty and predictability in their business.
We continue to defend and acquire telephony contracts through our BT Business Plan and BT Commitment portfolio against the carrier preselect and wholesale line rental services.
Reward discount package doubled to over 60000. provided only that they last less than an hour.
At the end of March 2003 BT Business Plan had attracted over 20000 business customers.
Over the same period the awareness of the plan among business customers reached 33.5%.
Newwave business In total BT Retail grew newwave revenues from 582 million in the 2002 nancial year to 850 million in the 2003 nancial year a 46% increase.
Consumer and The launch during the year of BT Broadband is key to our approach to helping build the broadband market in the UK.
For 27 per month BT Broadband customers get instant connection to the internet unlimited access with no time restrictions the opportunity to use the phone and surf at the same Business review 12 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 time speeds up to ten times faster than a normal connection and access to a range of content and service providers including a range of email choices.
Free connection special offers and reduced modem prices for customers ordering online helped to drive demand and as at 31 March 2003 BT Broadband had 137000 customers. streams and to promote the uptake of broadband.
BT ClickandBuy is an online payment service particularly suited to small transactions.
BT Home Computing is a complete package covering choice of broadbandready PC installation by a BT engineer and ongoing support. the benets of broadband further into the home.
These include home networking products which enable multiple devices to share a single broadband connection home monitoring services which provide customer alerts via text voice or email and home entertainment services. epayphones from 500 to 20000 by 2007.
The new kiosks enable customers to surf the internet send web based and instant emails and send text messages to mobile phones as well as make payphone calls.
During the 2003 nancial year we installed 1200 new kiosks. package online.
In February 2003 BT and TMobile UK formed a partnership with the aim of delivering a consumerled mobile service in the summer of 2003.
InTheBox Media of Sportal on Demand the UKs rst broadband sports network in March 2003 the BT Learning Centre which aims to enable parents and children to learn more effectively online.
In addition BT Openworld introduced a number of new value added services during the year including antispam functionality and virus protection and was approved as an ADSL supplier for Microsofts Xbox Live and Sonys PlayStation 2 online games services.
Major business Our ICT objective is to grow our share of selected growth markets.
These are the markets in which communication and network skills are signicant migration is from our core markets our brand has value and in which partnerships protably supplement our capability.
Authority to upgrade the existing NHSnet infrastructure to a broadband platform linking more than 7000 NHS sites in England and a 136 million contract over ten years with Bradford and Bingley to install wide and local area networks to connect more than 550 sites across the UK.
In May 2003 BT was part of a consortium which was awarded a multimillion pound outsourcing agreement with Royal Mail to manage business and IT services. and 416% in broadband.
New businesses revenues grew signicantly during the 2003 nancial year e. revenues from mobility were 41 million.
There was also signicant revenue growth from BT Broadband managed desktop solutions and CRM customer relationship management activity. and Under the theme of Connecting your world.
Completely we launched a suite of mobile solutions during the nancial year to support corporate customers in meeting their business requirements not just in the ofce or the regular place of work but also on the move.
Mobile Ofce for example offers customers secure managed connections to their corporate infrastructure including internet and intranet email and back ofce systems. wireless LAN local area network.
BT Openzone offers the opportunity to conduct highspeed transactions while on the move.
The target is to install 400 hotspots by summer 2003 and 4000 by summer 2004. centre service.
Systems Inc on solutions for local government should now make it possible for citizens to deal with their local authority using a range of media  post email internet telephone or text message.
Business and BT Openworld remained the leading ISP internet service provider for SMEs and in an extremely competitive market increased market share to 31% in the 2003 nancial year source Oftel  share of ISP market for one to 250 employee businesses.
BT Openworld grew its broadband SME customer base by 215% to over 132000 by the end of March 2003.
More than 80000 business customers now use a BT Openworld valueadded service such as the Internet Business Pack which helps SMEs establish a professional online business presence.
BT Openworlds broadband portfolio continues to develop.
SMEs can choose from a wide range of different products and Business review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 13 valueadded services with access speeds varying from 512 Kbits to 2 Mbits and with functionality that enables up to ten PCs to share a single access link. minute based on a 40 hour working week. substantially.
30% of all the telephone systems now sold by BT Retail in the SME market are either pure IP or a hybrid of IP and conventional systems.
With the launch of the Versatility system in November 2002 BT Retail now offers convergent telephone systems suitable for all customers regardless of size.
Software a range of messaging and collaboration tools and Open Orchard a new venture offering software applications and consultancy to midmarket customers. was BT Retails rst offering as a service provider.
It connected 3500 handsets by the end of March 2003 and we also launched BT Business Mobile a bespoke tariff for business customers.
Internet access At 31 March 2003 BT Openworld had approximately 1.75 million UK consumer and business ISP customers making it one of the leading internet access providers in the UK.
During the year the rate of growth of internet penetration in the UK slowed and the narrowband dialup market showed signs of maturity.
Against this background BT Openworlds strategy is to create a protable business and drive the growing broadband market.
BT Openworlds narrowband business continued to prove itself to be sustainable and viable.
BT Openworlds strategy is to increase its prot from this area while simultaneously migrating narrowband customers onto broadband access services.
This strategy is designed to increase revenues and provide customers with a superior internet experience.
During the year BT Openworld grew its broadband customer base by 171% to over 290000 and it remains the leading ISP supplier for broadband ADSL services in the UK.
Enhanced customer access We continued to use new technology to develop more effective relationships with customers. upgrading of the traditional call centre.
Eight of the planned 31 centres in the UK all of which will be equipped with stateoftheart CRM systems were completed during the year.
Increased efciencies achieved cost reductions of 86 million  on track to reach the target of 150 million annual savings by the end of the 2004 nancial year.
The restructuring was achieved without compulsory redundancy.
Specialist broadband contact centres were set up in Newcastle and Exeter and in March 2003 BT Retail announced that we would be opening new contact centres in New Delhi and Bangalore. relationships with customers.
At 31 March 2003 we had a total of almost four million online relationships and over 300000 customers receiving ebills.
We continued to extend the range of online services particularly those made possible by broadband and mobile access.
This programme made a signicant contribution to our cost reduction achievements in the 2003 nancial year. major business customers.
The programme is focused on improving the customer experience and reducing the cost of sale through integrated web and deskbased access and on increasing market reach and adding value through our strategic partners.
Signicant cost savings were delivered by deploying online service support to 500 customers handling 3000 transactions per day by the end of March 2003.
The new telechannel opened 10500 new leads and closed contracts worth 84 million.
Our indirect channel partners made a signicant contribution.
BT Wholesale Years ended or as at 31 Marchtel Group turnover 11260m 12256m 11728m
Core business BT Wholesale provides network services and solutions within the UK including ADSL conveyance transit bulk delivery of private circuits frame relay and ISDN integrated services digital network connections.
It serves more than 500 communication companies xed and mobile network operators and service providers including BT Retail and BT Global Services.
It aims to build complete communications packages and works with its customers to help them succeed in their businesses.
BT Wholesale has 885 local and trunk processor units 119 million kilometres of copper wire and six million kilometres of optical bre.
Consistent with our strategy BTs UK networks are now managed by BT Wholesale  this includes the UK PSTN public switched telephone network ATM asynchronous transfer mode and IP networks.
Together they constitute the most extensive telecommunications network in the UK capable of touching virtually every home and business.
The fact that all UK network capital expenditure decisions are now made by one team has enabled BT Wholesale to reduce the capital expenditure it controls by realising synergies through more efcient network planning and responding quickly to worsening market conditions.
This is the capital expenditure of BT Wholesale and of BT Global Services on the UK IP network which together has been reduced from 2109 million in the 2002 nancial year to 1793 million in the 2003 nancial year.
Business review
14 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Changing market conditions In 2003 the UK telecommunications market continued to experience its most signicant slowdown in many years.
BT Wholesales external turnover declined by 11% and our internal turnover reduced by 7% in the 2003 nancial year reecting the downward pressure on prices a slowdown in volume growth and the unwind of Concert.
Strategic intent BT Wholesale intends to be number one in broadband and data services in the UK.
This intent is underpinned by six strategic imperatives to lead the market in customer satisfaction to grow protable revenues to achieve bestinclass costs to deliver commercially successful broadband to create a 21st century network and to create a high performing customer focused organisation.
External new business revenues BT Wholesale is moving into new markets.
The emphasis is changing from the regulated capital intensive products in our traditional portfolio to internet connectivity network facilities management mobility equipment and content and applications.
In total BT Wholesale grew its new business revenues from 102 million in the 2002 nancial year to 189 million in the 2003 nancial year  85% growth.
Key contract wins in the 2003 nancial year included a sixyear full network outsourcing contract with Redstone.
Over the next 12 months a series of key product and service launches are expected to continue this growth focusing on innovation and a exible route to market.
This focus on new business goes hand in hand with maintenance of the traditional interconnect business from which the majority of BT Wholesales external revenues 3283 million traditional interconnect business revenues in the 2003 nancial year were derived.
Broadband
As at 31 March 2003 BT Wholesales installed base of ADSL lines was around 800000 including lines for BT Broadbands 137000 customers and BT Openworlds 290000 customers representing growth of 380% over the previous year.
Since January we have been adding well over 20000 connections per week and at 16 May 2003 total connections were 936000.
We are on target to reach one million connections in summer 2003.
There were a number of notable BT Wholesale achievements in the broadband arena during the year.
All of these helped drive up demand for and access to broadband. was reduced on 1 April 2002 from 25 to 14.75.
This reduction was quickly reected in the retail prices charged by ISPs. exchange areas. registration scheme.
Under this scheme people in areas where the local exchange has not been upgraded for broadband ADSL can register their interest via a service provider.
Over 800 exchanges have been given a trigger level indicating the number of customers required to make enabling that exchange commercially viable  with trigger levels for a further 759 exchanges already planned for the next nancial year.
At 31 March 2003 more than 320000 people had registered an interest 44 exchanges had been broadband enabled as a result of the scheme with a further 247 having reached their trigger levels. to roll out broadband services to smaller communities.
For example we began trials of a new commercial model for broadband exchange activation using lowercost exchange technology and a sponsoring organisation  with a social development or commercial interest in bringing broadband to the area providing upfront funding.
The Exchange Activate trial was run in eight sites across the UK.
In April 2003 BT Wholesale announced that it would be proceeding with the full implementation of Exchange Activate from July 2003. symmetric highspeed digital subscriber line.
Products developed using SHDSL are capable of supporting a range of services for service providers and businesses including email webhosting video conferencing VPN virtual private networks and WAN wide area network.
The trial is planned to run until midsummer 2003 and in 100 exchanges within London Manchester BirminghamYorkshire Merseyside and parts of Scotland.
21st century network At the heart of BT Wholesales strategic intent to be the UKs number one in broadband and data is our commitment to create a worldleading commercially focused marketdriven UK network which fulls customer requirements today and anticipates their future needs.
Our commitment to the quality and reliability of the PSTN and narrowband remains undiminished.
Early choices will be made on appropriate next generation technology to replace the oldest narrowband switches but the plan is for a longterm migration.
BT Wholesale plans to build an advanced broadband network based on IP standards.
This is a major change from traditional telecommunications network standards.
It will consist of very highcapacity routers connected together by an optical network capable of meeting many years of future customer demand for voice video and data services.
This will be designed to make BT simpler and more efcient to deal with.
The objective is to build this network using stringent capital return criteria and taking an Business review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 15 increasingly rigorous approach to investment in the narrowband network.
The21stcenturynetworkaimstodeliverlongterm structural cost reduction as we progressively migrate ontoasimplerlowercostnetworkarchitecture. lower operational costs in the future.
Efciency
BT Wholesales cost base strategy includes improved processes better inventory control and a relentless focus on productivity.
This resulted in signicant savings.
A major contribution to efciency in the 2003 nancial year was a reduction in the pay bill for BT Wholesale as over 2000 employees left the business on leaver terms.
Savings have also been achieved as a result of improved automation and the adoption of new technology for example the development of selfinstall processes for our ADSL broadband product.
By concentrating on the efcient use of existing equipment the requirement for capital expenditure has also been controlled.
Tightening spare plant margins on ISDN line cards and more efcient deployment of transmission equipment for example have resulted in reduced costs while maintaining standards for provision of service.
BT Global Services Years ended or as at 31 Marchtel Group turnover 5251m 4472m 3468m
BT Global Services formerly BT Ignite and renamed in April 2003 is BTs managed services and solutions provider serving multisite organisations worldwide.
Its
Building on the existing relationships BT has with large multisite organisations in the UK and internationally BT Global Services provides global reach and a complete range of ICT solutions and services.
Meeting customers needs We have a highly experienced and skilled workforce serving our customers around the world.
Almost 50% of BT Global Services people are employed outside the UK ensuring a local understanding and approach.
We deliver global account and service management to our major corporate customers around the world.
BTs extensive global communications network and strong strategic partnerships enable us to serve customers in all key commercial centres of Europe North America and Asia Pacic.
In Europe this network links more than 250 towns and cities across 16 countries back into our ubiquitous UK network and beyond into the Americas and Asia Pacic.
BT Global Services is a supplier of leadingedge global communications services with a portfolio ranging from desktop and network equipment and software transport and connectivity managed LAN WAN and IPVPN internet protocol virtual private network services applications hosting storage and security services through to business transformation and change management for complex global requirements.
Our awardwinning agship MPLS multiprotocol label switching product was launched in 2000.
With 500 points of presence around the globe it can be accessed from over 60 countries and is recognised as a leading product in the marketplace.
MPLSbased IP virtual private networks are the next generation of data networks for corporate customers supporting voice data and video applications.
These networks offer more exibility and greater service performance.
During the 2003 nancial year quarteronquarter order growth for MPLS services averaged around 50%.
Solutions and valueadded services BT Global Services larger and more complex customer contracts are delivered through or managed by BT Global Solutions and Syntegra.
BT Global Solutions portfolio covers a number of key ICTrelated areas including IP infrastructure CRM applications and hosting and outsourcing.
BT Global Solutions has over 5000 employees and delivers services for customers in 136 countries.
Its sales order value was 3.6 billion in the 2003 nancial year up 33% on 2002.
Syntegra BTs experts in business transformation and change management employs around 5000 people worldwide with particular strengths in nancial services and government.
Syntegra is a key player in the global trading systems market.
In the 2003 nancial year Syntegra signed UK Government business worth more than 500 million.
Customer wins In addition to contracts signed in conjunction with BT Retail and described on page 12 BT Global Services entered into a number of other signicant customer contracts in 2003.
Examples include and In November 2002 working closely with BT Retail we signed a sevenyear contract worth arounde1 billion with Unilever to manage and develop the companys global communications infrastructure.
This is one of the largest outsourcing contracts in UK corporate history and the majority of revenues will come from operations outside the UK.
BT Global Services will supply Unilever with a range of voice data and mobile services as well as developing new technologies on its behalf.
Bavarian state in Germany.
The sevenyear contract is the largest government contract BT has signed outside the UK and involves the fundamental restructuring and harmonisation of the Bavarian states entire communications platform.
16 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 over e20 million to provide xedvoice data and internet services.
The ministry which has more than 400 sites throughout Spain provides administrative support to government at the central regional and local levels. data services.
800 million including a tenyear strategic partnership with Essex County Council  one of the biggest partnerships of its kind ever established by a county council.
Business realignment On 1 April 2002 the management of BTs contracts with former Concert customers was transferred to BT Global Services and BT Retail.
During 2003 the Concert MPLS virtual private network platform with its global presence in Europe USA and Asia was integrated with the BT Global Services European platform to enhance reach and coverage on schedule and within budget.
BT Global Services also achieved greater integration of its European businesses through continued product harmonisation network and customer service centre consolidation and people realignment.
Global reach In Europe BT Global Services owns operations in Belgium France Germany Ireland Netherlands Spain the Nordics and Central and Eastern Europe.
We deliver services to customers in Italy through our joint venture Albacom and I. hosting company.
In the Americas and Asia Pacic we deliver service to our customers through a combination of direct sales and services operations and strategic partners.
BT Global Services networkbased services Frame Relay ATM IPVPN extend to and across North and South America and the Asia Pacic region.
This means that BT Global Services products are delivered seamlessly within and from Europe to our own locations in the Americas and delivered locally through interconnect and supply agreements with regional carriers.
In the Asia Pacic region we deliver services locally to customers via a network of partners in the key commercial centres of Japan Hong Kong Singapore and Australia and provide reach across the region through other regional operators.
Global customer service is provided via service and network management centres around the world 24 hours a day seven days a week.
As part of BT Global Services programme to deliver a standard operating environment across our operations all network operations are in the process of being consolidated into a single network control centre in
This centre will manage BTs networks across 16 European countries and through functions such as shared incident management and fault resolution performance monitoring and seamless customer service help customers maximise the use of their infrastructure.
Other businesses As at 31 March 2003 BT held stakes in a number of other businesses including and stakes in four satellite entities  Eutelsat Inmarsat Intelsat and New Skies. telephone operator in the Republic of Korea. stake was previously 18% in StarHub alone. operator in Italy.
Research and development and IT support BT Exact is BTs centre of excellence in IT and networking technologies providing the specialist technical skills that BT needs to extend the reach of our broadband services operate our networks efciently and deliver worldclass customer service.
BT Exact also works with BT Retail BT Wholesale and BT Global Services to address the more complex needs of our customers extend our portfolio of products and services and ensure that our customers gain full advantage from the opportunities created by new technologies.
Specialist technical services are also offered directly to telecommunications equipment manufacturers and suppliers of the software applications used in the core of the worlds public communication networks.
For example BT Exact works with companies such as Alcatel Juniper Networks Lucent Technologies and Marconi to provide independent assessments of their products performance and suitability for use in public communications networks.
All these aspects of BT Exacts business are based on expertise and insight created through our research programmes which focus on the nextgeneration internet advanced data services information and network security software systems to support the management and integrity of networks worldwide and the future impact of advanced communications on lifestyles education and healthcare.
The work undertaken by BT Exact is part of an investment of 380 million in research and development that BT made in the 2003 nancial year.
This compares with 362 million and 364 million invested in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years respectively.
The intellectual property created from this work is valuable and BT Exact is responsible for the exploitation management and defence of the patents that result from our research and development work and has a policy of commercial exploitation of our technology through patent licensing including a contract with ipValue to secure revenues from US and Canadian companies and the incubation of new technology companies.
Business review
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 17 In February 2003 BT Exact announced a partnership with Coller Capital and New Venture Partners NVP to create an independent corporate venturing partnership NVP Brightstar  in which BT has a minority stake.
NVP Brightstar which began operations in April 2003 has the exclusive rights to create new startup businesses with BT Exact using our extensive and developing intellectual property portfolio.
NVP
Brightstar purchased the majority of the existing portfolio of technology ventures developed by BT Exacts corporate incubator Brightstar.
Our people Number of employees in the group As at 31 March NonUK 8.4 8.5 10.4 Total continuing activities 104.7 108.6 116.8 Total discontinued activities   20.2 Total employees 104.7 108.6 137.0 At 31 March 2003 BT employed 104700 people throughout the world with 96300 in the UK.
During the 2003 nancial year as part of the continuing programme of reshaping the group 4300 people left BT under our voluntary paid leaver package Newstart.
Well managed motivated people are fundamental to our success.
Our reputation as a progressive and innovative employer not only helps us recruit and retain an excellent workforce it also enhances our ability to serve our customers and generate revenues.
Training and development During the year we spent around 70 million excluding staff and other direct costs on the training and development of our employees.
We provide a range of training opportunities for employees including customer service and technical training management development and professional training as appropriate.
We aim to deliver this as costeffectively as possible by using the capabilities of broadband and progressively increasing the emphasis on elearning and selfteach opportunities.
Because a passion for our customers is fundamental to the way we do business a number of training and development initiatives have focused on aspects of customer satisfaction.
One example of this is the My Customer programme targeted at 50000 people in BT Retail to reinforce their engagement skills with customers.
In January 2003 BT was accredited as an Investor in People for the fourth time.
Communications
We maintain and develop the awareness of our employees in relation to nancial and economic factors that affect the performance of the company in a number of ways.
Employees are kept informed through a monthly internal newspaper and regular email bulletins as well as having access to the intranet.
Health and safety We have undertaken a comprehensive review of our health and safety strategy and are committed to eradicating avoidable workrelated illness and injury.
We have specically targeted those business activities that carry the greatest risks and we are enhancing the information instruction and training provided for our people to help improve performance.
Good progress is being made against the stringent targets we set ourselves in 2001 with a 21% reduction in workplace injuries and a 23% fall in cases of occupational ill health over two years.
A stake in the company We encourage our employees to acquire shares in BT Group to enable them to share in our success and offer a range of taxbenecial employee share plans to help them make such acquisitions.
For the 2003 nancial year 36 million was allocated to provide free shares to UK employees under the BT Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP.
Under the terms of the scheme the amount of prot set aside to buy free shares is linked to corporate performance measures determined by the Board.
These shares are held in trust for a minimum of three years and for ve years in order to obtain the benecial tax treatment employees outside the UK receive a cash payment equivalent to the value of the shares.
The partnership shares section of the ESIP gives employees an opportunity to purchase shares in the company through monthly deductions from their pretax salaries.
In addition employees have the opportunity to buy shares at a discount under the BT Group Employee Sharesave schemes.
Share options are normally exercisable on completion of a three or veyear save asyouearn contract.
Pensions
Most of our employees are members of the BT Pension Scheme or the BT Retirement Plan both of which are controlled by independent trustees.
The BT Pension Scheme was closed to new members on 31 March 2001.
The majority of employees who joined the company after that date are eligible to join the BT Retirement Plan.
Listening to our people We run an annual employee attitude survey and encourage managers and their teams to put in place action plans to address the issues that it highlights.
The most recent phase of the survey was conducted at the end of 2002 and showed extremely high levels of support for and commitment to the companys strategy.
Worklife balance We want our people to give of their best for customers and BT and we provide the scope within operational requirements for them to optimise their worklife balance.
At 31 March 2003 we had more than 6000 people working part time almost 600 job sharers and around 6600 people working from home.
Business review
18 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Other options include alternative attendance patterns maternity paternity adoptive and parental leave career breaks and an increasingly exible approach to assist individuals to prepare for their retirement age.
Industrial relations An estimated 75% of our UK employees belong to one of two main trade unions recognised by the company.
We have a good record of industrial relations and constructive occasionally robust relationships based on partnership and mutual respect with both unions in the UK and works councils elsewhere across Europe.
Equal opportunities We are an equal opportunities employer and are committed to developing a working culture that enables all employees to make their own distinctive contribution.
We are an active member of many equal opportunity and diversity organisations and during the year were awarded the platinum standard by Opportunity Now for our work on gender equality and the gold standard by Race for Opportunity RfO for our work on race equality.
We were also recognised by the Employers Forum on Disability for our leadership in the employment of people with disabilities.
Our Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen is chairman of the National Employment Panels Steering Group on Lone Parents which aims to create more opportunities for lone parents to work.
Regulation competition and prices The commercial environment in the UK and in the countries in which BT operates or wishes to operate is increasingly competitive and dynamic.
However we remain subject to extensive regulation particularly in the UK which can materially affect the way in which we carry out our business.
We also use inputs from other regulated operators largely outside the UK and the availability and price of these inputs may change from time to time impacting on our business.
Regulation in the UK The regulatory structure for UK telecommunications is set out principally in the Telecommunications Act 1984 which gives regulatory authority to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and the Director General of Telecommunications who heads the Ofce of Telecommunications Oftel.
The Secretary of State and the Director General are each required to exercise their functions under the Act in the way which they consider is best calculated to ensure as far as reasonably practical that all reasonable demand for telecommunication services including certain community services is met and to secure the ability of licensed telecommunications operators to nance the provision of the services which they are licensed to provide.
In addition they are required among other things to promote the interests of consumers purchasers and other users in the prices variety and quality of telecommunication services and equipment and to promote and maintain efciency and effective competition among UK telecommunications operators.
With limited exceptions a licence under the Telecommunications Act is required to run a telecommunication system in the UK.
The Secretary of State is responsible for issuing licences after consulting the Director General.
The regulatory regime will change during 2003 and a new regulator Ofcom will take over  see sections The BT Licence New European Union Directives and Communications Bill and Ofcom for further information.
The BT Licence BT currently operates in the UK under a number of licences the most important of which is our licence to operate our xedline public telecommunications network the Licence.
Subject to the implementation of the new European Union Directives see below the Licence remains in force indenitely but the Secretary of State may revoke the Licence on ten years notice.
The Licence can also be revoked at any time on various grounds including noncompliance with an enforcement order from the Director General.
In September 1999 the Licence was modied to meet the harmonisation requirements of the European Union Licensing Directive.
The Licence contains terms and conditions designed principally to ensure the widespread provision of telecommunication services in the UK to protect the interests of consumers and to encourage the development of effective competition in telecommunication services and network provision within the UK.
Under the Licence we have to full reasonable requests for voice telephony lowspeed data and fax transmission services and provide public call boxes in accordance with published guidelines throughout nearly all the UK including rural areas these being the principal elements of the Universal Service Obligation.
Under the Licence we must allow other licensed operators to interconnect with our telecommunications systems on costoriented transparent and non discriminatory terms.
We must comply with a variety of fair trading obligations such as and a prohibition on showing undue discrimination between customers or unfairly favouring any part of our own business as against competitors in relation to matters such as the price terms and conditions or quality of our main services and and a prohibition on the unfair crosssubsidy of certain of our activities.
We must publish audited nancial statements for the regulated businesses and activities in order to support the linkage of costs with interconnect prices and with a view to providing demonstrable evidence that we are neither behaving in a discriminatory fashion nor unfairly subsidising our activities.
If it appears to the Director General that an unfair crosssubsidy exists between specied parts of our own business we must take such steps as the Director General may direct to remedy the situation.
The regulatory businesses for which separated accounts are currently produced are retail narrowband access apparatus supply network retail systems mobile supplemental services and Business review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 19 residual services.
The Licence also contains provisions enabling the Director General to monitor our activities including requirements for BT to supply him with information requested.
The Licence contains price control formulae the overall effect of which requires us to reduce or restricts the extent to which we can increase the prices of many of our telephony services to the bulk of the residential market and also the prices for our interconnection services wholesale line rental services and number portability services.
In addition the Licence contains certain specic restrictions on the terms on which we can trade.
In particular we are required to publish and adhere to standard prices and other terms for providing certain services and in general to apply uniformly a published scale of charges for installing residential exchangelinesonpremises tobeservedbyasingle line.
As a result of our international interests a Licence condition prohibits us from doing anything by act or omission that would detract materially from our ability to meet our Licence obligations to provide UK telecommunication services and to do so to any specied standards.
BTs directors are required to submit an annual compliance certicate to the Director General.
The Director General may make modications to a licence if the licensee does not object or the modication is deregulatory.
Alternatively proposed changes to the Licence may be referred by the Director General to the Competition Commission.
In either case the Telecommunications Act requires public consultation before a licence can be modied.
Licences may also be modied in order to implement European Union directives into UK law.
New European Union Directives The provision of telecommunications networks and services throughout the European Union was liberalised through the implementation of a number of Directives which came into force in January 1998.
Following a review initiated by the European Commission in 1999 a new package of Directives for the regulation of electronic communications continuing the EUs policies of liberalisation and harmonisation was adopted by the EU in April 2002.
These Directives must be implemented in all Member States by 25 July 2003.
The new framework aims to be technologically neutral.
Individual licences will be replaced by a general authorisation applying automatically to all providers of electronic communications networks and services.
Member States will no longer be permitted to require undertakings to obtain licences before operating in the sector though providers of electronic communications networks and services may be required to comply with a limited range of general conditions.
Additional obligations legally separate from the general conditions will be imposed on individual providers designated by their National Regulatory Authority as having Universal Service Obligations or signicant market power in specied market sectors.
The signicant market power trigger will be aligned with the competition law concept of dominance and any obligations imposed on signicant market power grounds must be the minimum required to address identied competition problems.
The new framework requires the availability of full rights of appeal including appeal on the merits against regulatory decisions to a body with appropriate expertise.
The new Directives also incorporate mechanisms designed to ensure consistency of regulation across the European Union.
Oftel is currently consulting on the proposed general conditions and Universal Service designations and obligations.
Both these aspects of the new framework need to be in place when all existing licences are due to cease to apply on 25 July 2003 the implementation date for the new Directives.
Oftel
However as existing signicant market power obligations can be carried forward until the analyses are completed this aspect of the framework does not have to be in place by 25 July.
Signicant market power obligations under the new framework may not therefore be implemented until later in 2003 and Oftel has indicated that because the process cannot be completed before 25 July certain existing licence conditions relating to market areas subject to the analyses will need to be carried over until at least the end of August.
BT can in any event expect to continue to be regulated in the majority of the markets in which it is currently regulated.
The new general conditions and Universal Service Obligations are not expected to have a major impact on BT although some benecial rationalisation of these aspects of the framework is anticipated to result.
The introduction of the new denition of signicant market power and the requirement for market analyses should lead to the eventual withdrawal of competition related regulation relying instead on competition law in specied market sectors which are competitive or which become competitive in the future.
In its current market analysis consultation documents Oftel is proposing the removal or relaxation of such regulation in a number of markets.
Similar regulatory reviews are underway in all EU member states which will have an impact on the level of regulation BT and its suppliers are subject to in those countries.
The Communications Data Protection Directive which is not part of the main Electronic Communication Directives was adopted in June 2002 and must come into force in Member States by 30 October 2003.
This Directive may have cost implications for industry.
Communications Bill and Ofcom The UK Government has completed a review of telecommunicationsandbroadcastingregulation.
General of Telecommunications the Independent Television Commission the Broadcasting Standards Commission the Radio Authority and the Radiocommunications Agency.
Ofcom is headed by a chairman Lord Currie and chief executive Stephen Business review 20 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Carter and supported by executive and nonexecutive board members.
The reforms are in two parts.
The rst comprises the Ofce of Communications Act passed in March 2002 which enables the board ofce and budgets of Ofcom to be established but does not enable Ofcom to exercise any regulatory functions.
The second comprises a Communications Bill.
The draft Bill was published in May 2002 and the nal Bill is expected to be passed by Parliament by 17 July 2003.
It will confer regulatory functions on Ofcom which will be able to take up those functions when the Bill is brought into force.
However Ofcom is not expected to take up its regulatory functions until later in the year and the Bill provides for a transitional period between the Bill coming into force and the date when Ofcom takes up its formal powers.
In this period the existing regulators will carry out Ofcoms functions relating to networks and services and spectrum.
The main changes for providers of electronic communications networks and services will be the possibility of nes being imposed for breach of regulatory obligations appeals on the merits against regulatory decisions and the creation of a new regulatory regime which will among other things implement the requirements of the new EU Directives for general authorisations instead of individual licences and basing regulation of dominant players on analyses of relevant markets.
Statutory instruments have been made to enable preliminary work to be undertaken to implement the Directives and in the event that the Bill is not passed before 25 July 2003 the deadline for implementation the Government will ensure implementation by means of further statutory instruments which will for a limited period duplicate provisions in the Bill.
Competition
The competitive environment The UK telecommunications market is fully open to entry and highly competitive.
As a result the UK Government and Oftel have indicated their expectation that it will be appropriate to move away from sector specic including licencebased regulation to greater reliance on the Competition Act as individual markets become sufciently competitive.
Furthermore the new EU Directives  see New European Union Directives prohibit the imposition of competition based sector specic economic regulation in any market which is found to be effectively competitive.
In January 2000 Oftel published a strategy statement based on the principle that regulation should go no further than the minimum necessary to protect consumers.
The strategy is underpinned by a programme of competition reviews which are intended to ensure that the regulatory framework responds to changed competitive conditions where it is found that competition is delivering benets to consumers in the sectors reviewed regulation will be reduced or withdrawn as appropriate.
These reviews will need to be incorporated into the market reviews mandated by the new EU Directives which will come into force by 25 July 2003 see New European Union Directives.
Although it is some years since the Telecommunications Act abolished the monopoly of the former statutory corporation British Telecommunications in the running of telecommunication systems obligations placed on BT including pricing regulation and the requirement to provide universal service discussed below are generally more onerous than for other licensees.
Competition Act In addition to telecommunications industry regulation BT is subject to general competition law.
By virtue of provisions in the Competition Act 1998 UK competition law is in line with European Community law in prohibiting anticompetitive agreements and concerted practices and the abuse of a dominant market position.
In the case of telecommunications the Director General of Telecommunications has concurrent investigatory and enforcement powers with the Ofce of Fair Trading.
They also have signicant investigative powers.
Breach of the relevant prohibitions could lead to nes of up to 10% of relevant turnover in the UK for each year of infringement up to a maximum of three years andor result in claims for damages in the civil courts.
There are also powers to order a company to cease an infringing activity.
There is an independent mechanism for appeals to the Competition Appeals Tribunal against decisions under the Competition Act.
Oftel is continuing to investigate the terms and conditions of BTs telephone rental business under the Competition Act.
Also following the decision of the Competition Appeals Tribunal in the Freeserve case in April 2003 Oftel has undertaken to reissue a decision on BT Openworlds broadband activities.
Enterprise Act The Enterprise Act 2002 which received Royal Assent on 7 November 2002 aims to give more independence to the competition authorities to reform insolvency and bankruptcy laws and to tackle trading practices that harm consumers.
TheprovisionsoftheActarelargelycomplementary tothose ofthe CompetitionAct 1998 which willremain in force with some minor amendments  but it also contains new provisions criminalising cartels and allowing for the disqualication in appropriate cases of company directors where companies commit breaches of competition law.
Pricing regulation Fixed network We are subject to price controls on our xed network services in the UK at two levels retail and network.
Fixed network competitors are generally not subject to direct price controls although there are some controls on mobile network operators.
Retail price controls We are subject to two sets of UK retail price controls one on certain publicswitched telephony call charges and exchange line rentals and one on certain private circuits.
Each price control is based on a formula Business review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 21 calculated by reference to the UK Retail Prices Index RPI and a factor X.
For services covered by the controls the weighted average of base prices cannot increase in each year beginning 1 August by more than the annual change in RPI minus X.
The current retail price control for public switched telephony applying from August 2002 to July 2006 is RPI minus RPI i. prices cannot increase.
It is measured on services used by the lowest 80% of our residential customers classied by bill size.
From August 2002 the services covered by the control were extended to include BTs share of the revenue for calls to all four mobile networks replacing the previous separate control on BT for calls to Vodafone and O The price control formula and our performance against the formula are set out in the table below.
Under the new controls we have also given an assurance that increases in line rental for business customers will be no more than the annual change in
Under the price controls for private circuits that applied from August 1997 to July 2001 prices for domestic analogue and lowspeed digital private circuits could not increase by more than the change in the RPI in any year.
The application of the analogue price cap has been extended until July 2005 and the lowspeed digital private circuits cap was removed in July 2001.
Review of retail price controls In July 2002 BT accepted Oftels proposals for changes to its licence to introduce new retail price controls of RPI minus RPI i.
1 August 2002 until 31 July 2006.
Under the changes and BT is required to provide a costbased wholesale line rental product to other service providers at a regulated price and in a way that does not discriminate between BTs retail business and service providers.
This product Wholesale Access has been available from BT since 1 September 2002.
Oftel has since issued a further consultation regarding enhancements to this product and BT Oftel and industry are discussing the proposed requirements.
BTs prices to the lowest spending 80% of its customers would be pegged at their current level and not allowed to rise with ination using an RPI minus RPI price control.
The services covered by the control have been extended to include BTs share of the revenue for calls to all four mobile networks replacing the previous separate control RPI minus 7% on BT for calls to Vodafone and O rate of ination. standard exchange line rental rises signicantly.
Network charge control We operate under interconnection agreements with most other licensed operators.
A new network charge control period began on 1 October 2001 and will last for four years from that date.
It requires us to set reasonable charges based on longrun incremental costs for our standard interconnection services.
Depending on the degree of competition for these services charges are cap controlled each year by RPI minus X where X ranges from 7.5% to 13% for services Oftel considers unlikely to become competitive in the near future safeguard cap controlled i. competitive are not subject to direct charge controls.
The network charge controls that ended on 30 September 2001 capped charges for services unlikely to become competitive in the near future at RPI minus 8%.
On 12 July 2002 a new condition was included in the Licence.
The effect was to set charges for and bring under regulatory control BTs xed portability services.
Number portability allows customers to change the company providing their telephony services without changing their telephone number.
Fourteen nonconveyance Portability Standard Services were identied.
The charge control runs from 1 August 2002 until 31 July 2006.
The charges are controlled by a RPI minus X formula with X set at 5%.
BT must publish a notication to the Director General and other licensed operators if it intends to amend existing charges or to offer new services.
Wholesale Access Charge Control The charges for the Wholesale Access services agreed by BT in July 2002 are subject to price control.
The charges for the line rental residential and business Price control formula RPIX Years commencing 1 Augustteltel % RPI movement for the relevant period Xin price control formula % required reduction in base prices cd % increase reduction in base prices overall 1.56 0.73 3.24 1.20 2.50 0.14 ef Annual increase in RPI to previous June From 1 August 1997 the RPI formula covers the main switched telephone services provided to the lowest 80% of BTs residential customers by bill size After permitted carry forward of any unused allowance or shortfall from previous years From 1 August 2002 the RPI formula covers the change in average prices including residential discount packages Base and package price changes implemented up to 31 January 2003 Regulation allows any unused allowance or excess reduction remaining at the end of the price control year 31 July to be carried forward Business review 22 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 products line transfer and new line installations have been determined and are subject to a price control of RPI minus 2% effective from 1 September 2002 for four years.
The control applies to the aggregate of all charges rental transfer and installation as well as to line transfers separately.
BT is also under an obligation to notify the Director General and service providers if it intends to amend existing charges the notication is 90 days for determined charges and 28 days for all others.
NonUK regulation BT must comply with the regulatory regimes in the countries in which it operates or wishes to operate.
The obligations placed on BT and its suppliers continue to be relevant to its business models and have cost implications for its end user services.
These rules are generally applied by national regulatory authorities operating under a governmental mandate.
The impact of decisions of these bodies can have a material impact on our business models from time to time.
European Union See New European Union Directives.
Rest of the world The vast majority of the markets in which BT operates around the world are regulated and in the majority of these it has to obtain licences or other authorisations and comply with the conditions of these.
The degree to which these markets are liberalised varies widely while many are fully open to competition others place restrictions on market entrants such as the extent to which foreign ownership is permitted or on the services which may be provided.
The extent to which the national incumbent operator is effectively regulated also varies considerably.
BTs ability to compete fully in some countries is therefore constrained.
Other signicant changes and issues Broadband regulation There has been considerable dialogue with Oftel and the Department of Trade and Industry over the past nancial year regarding the introduction of broadband services and how best to deal with the issues arising from rapid rollout.
Much of this activity has centred around the creation of approaches designed to foster increased demand to reduce the costs of providing broadband facilities and to encourage creative partnerships with others both in the public and private sectors and to bring the benets of broadband to areas that might not be reached on a purely commercial basis.
In addition to the standard licence and competition law obligations BT ensures that the particular obligations for wholesale service provider products are met.
These include the need to treat BTs retail businesses and service providers equally and the provision of various interconnection points to BTs broadband network.
Deregulation of inbound services Inbound services were deregulated in July 2002 as the market for these services is now fully competitive.
BT no longer has a regulatory obligation to supply voice inbound services e.
0800 0845 0870 09XX to notify and publish prices or adhere to them.
We can therefore choose to offer different prices and service levels to different customers.
BT must of course still comply with competition law.
The result of deregulation has been that prices have been reduced in this market.
Local loop unbundling The Licence requires the provision of unbundled local loops to other operators to enable them to provide telecommunications services including broadband ADSL services to end customers.
Local loop unbundling line sharing and subloop unbundling are also required by an EU Regulation.
Local loop unbundling services have been phased in over the past few years.
In March 2003 BT launched a line sharing service.
Carrier preselection Carrier preselection CPS required by a condition in the Licence allows customers to opt for certain classes of call to be carried by an alternative operator selected in advance without having to dial additional access codes.
Leased lines Oftel published a Direction in respect of Partial Private Circuits PPCs in December 2002.
PPCs are a wholesale variant of certain private circuits at cost based prices which interconnecting operators can use to form local tailparts of endtoend circuits offered to their retail customers.
The Direction resulted from an investigation into the cost base of this relatively new wholesale product group PPCs were initially launched in August 2001.
The Direction resulted in reductions averaging 15% to 20% in PPC charges compared with the initial 2001 PPC charge levels along with a range of relatively minor amendments to the product specications.
A proportion of the price reductions has been made on a retrospective basis as the majority of private circuits leased by other operators had already switched to PPC prices and conditions following initial launch.
Now that the Oftel investigation has concluded BT is looking forward to a period of stability as the use of the new product portfolio becomes established.
Universal Service Obligation USO The Communications Bill will implement the Universal Service Directive one element of the new European Union Directives package see New European Union
Oftel consulted in March 2003 on conditions to apply to BT.
Some additional obligations are proposed such as guidelines that refer to a minimum data rate of 28.8 kbits which will have adverse cost implications for BT if implemented.
Oftel
Oftel is expected to carry out a formal review of the USO next year looking at the scope and funding of the USO and is currently Business review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 23 consulting on the controls applying to removal and resiting of payphones.
Flatrate internet interconnection FRIACO Initially launched in 2000 this group of products is the normal means of providing interconnecting operators with a service to support atrate internet access packages via internet service providers to end users.
Most FRIACO use involves interconnection at local exchange level and the period of rapid growth in demand following the initial FRIACO launch has now developed into a more stable environment.
The charges for both FRIACO services are subject to RPI minus X controls under the Network Charge Control regime and hence have been falling gradually.
Oftel
Relationship with the UK Government The UK Government collectively is BTs largest customer but the provision of services to any one department or agency of the UK Government does not comprise a material proportion of its revenues.
Except as described below the commercial relationship between BT as a supplier and the UK Government as customer has been on a normal customer and supplier basis.
We can be required by law to do certain things and to provide certain services for the UK Government.
The Licence obliges BT and other licensees after consultation with central and local government to make and if necessary implement plans for the provision or restoration of services in emergencies.
In addition the Secretary of State has statutory powers to require us to take certain actions in the interests of national security and international relations.
Legal proceedings The company does not believe there are any pending legal proceedings which would have a material adverse effect on the nancial position or operations of the group.
Proceedings have been initiated in Italy against 21 defendants including a former BT employee in connection with the Italian UMTS auction.
Blu in which BT held a minority interest participated in that auction process.
The rst hearing has been scheduled for 11 July 2003 in Rome.
If the proceedings are successful BT could be held liable with others for any damages.
The company has concluded that it is not appropriate to make a provision in respect of any such potential claim.
24 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Investors are paying increasing attention to the ways in which social environmental and ethical issues are managed to both preserve and grow shareholder value.
For example the Dow Jones sustainability indexes rank companies for their success in managing those factors for competitive advantage.
During the 2003 nancial year BT was ranked as the top telecommunications company in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index for the second year running.
We also won the Queens Award for Enterprise in recognition of our contribution to sustainable development.
A further manifestation of investor interest is the Association of British Insurers disclosure guidelines covering social environmental and ethical risks and opportunities.
BTs toplevel response to those guidelines is provided in the section on Corporate governance with further information provided here.
Other parts of this report cover business integrity corporate governance and employee issues such as diversity and health and safety.
This section concentrates on CSR corporate social responsibility governance CSR risks digital inclusion environment community and business opportunities.
More detailed disclosures on BTs implementation of social ethical and environmental policies and procedures are available online in our independently veried social and environmental report.
Corporate social responsibility governance A Board committee  the Community Support Committee  oversees social investment expenditure and establishes the strategy for maximising our contribution to society.
The committee chaired by Sir Christopher Bland consists of representatives from BT businesses two nonexecutive directors and two external independent members who have a reputation for excellence in this eld.
An internal committee known as the Corporate Social Responsibility Steering Group oversees the implementation of our CSR programme.
This includes risk assessment performance management public accountability ISO14001 certication  the international standard for environmental management systems  and objective setting and control.
The steering group which makes regular reports to the Board is chaired by a member of the Operating Committee.
During 2003 the steering group agreed an action plan to ensure that BTs CSR activities help deliver the BT strategy and established a set of nonnancial key performance indicators to provide an overview of BTs social and environmental performance.
The steering group also approved an accompanying set of targets for the 2004 nancial year.
BT takes quality very seriously and is fully accredited to ISO9001.
To ensure that CSR is embedded into BTs commercial operations we have commenced a series of CSR health checks of our main commercial initiatives.
These health checks identify specic social economic and environmental impacts both positive and negative and particular CSR risks and opportunities.
A report is then compiled including recommended actions.
In addition social ethical and environmental matters have been incorporated into the directors induction programme.
We have important relationships with a wide range of different stakeholders including employees customers and suppliers.
We engage with these stakeholders in a number of ways including consumer liaison panels an annual employee survey and a supplier relationship management programme.
We also employ a number of CSR experts who investigate longterm societal trends identify potential issues that might affect the business and support BTs commercial activities.
Finally our social and environmental report has been brought into accordance with the 2002 Global Reporting Initiative guidelines and received a commendation in the 2002 Association of Chartered Certied Accountants ACCA Sustainability Reporting Awards.
Social environmental and ethical risks Currently we identify no social environmental or ethical risks that would have a material impact on our business.
However we have identied the issue of supply chain working conditions as posing a potential risk to our reputation.
In order to address this potential risk we have introduced our Sourcing with Human Dignity programme  a collaborative undertaking seeking the active support of all our relevant suppliers.
By 31 March 2003 16 key suppliers 79% of those targeted had signed an agreement with BT giving their written support concerning ethical trading.
Over the past two years 16 initial onsite assessments and seven revisits have been undertaken in industry sectors where we believe the risk of falling short of our Sourcing with Human Dignity standard is at its highest.
BTs certication to ISO14001 includes an environmental risk assessment process and the bulk storage of diesel fuel for use in backup generators at telephone exchanges has been identied as our only signicant environmental risk.
Although there are a small number of BT sites where ground remediation is taking place the cost is not material and so we declare no material contingent environmental liability in our nancial statements.
In order to minimise any future liability in this area we are undertaking an 18 million programme to cover tank testing enhanced maintenance scheduling and remedial works.
Digital inclusion The digital divide is a key public policy issue and we are working together with the UK Government and the voluntary sector to nd effective ways to use communications technology to tackle social exclusion.
Our commitment to society Our commitment to society In particular we launched a digital inclusion campaign to support the Governments aim to give all citizens online access within the next few years and demonstrate how communications can help improve society.
A key element of the campaign is the Everybodyonline programme which has been established in partnership with charity campaign group Citizens Online and is initially focused in ve deprived communities.
The campaign aims to increase access to communications technology in underprivileged areas and to deepen the understanding of the causes and effects of the digital divide and how they may be addressed nationally.
Through our age and disability action team we are committed to providing older and disabled customers with access to a full range of products and services.
For people with hearing or speech impairments our textphone offers easy access to BT TextDirect the service that enables textphone users to dial direct to other text or voice users.
In addition our mm215 Videophone has improved communications for people who rely on nonverbal communication such as British Sign Language.
Building on the success of our Big Button phone the range has been extended to include an analogue cordless version with a digital DECT version being planned.
We continue to offer services to protect the telephone lines of people who are vulnerable free directory enquiries for those unable to use the printed directory as well as billing service and product information in a variety of formats such as Braille and large print.
We are committed to increasing the accessibility of our internet pages and currently offer an alternative text version of the site homepage.
Our age and disability website siteagedisability highlights features of products and services that may be benecial to older and disabled people and is continually updated to ensure that it can be accessed by all customers regardless of ability.
Environment
In the 2003 nancial year we continued to focus on reducing our environmental impacts.
We invested 845000 in our energy conservation programme which despite the rollout of broadband enabled us to restrict our electricity consumption to a 4% increase.
A combined heat and power supply contract provided 76% of our electricity needs saving 274000 tonnes of global warming CO emissions.
Also in the 2003 nancial year we recycled 24% of our total 89878 tonnes of waste.
We received 4.26 million income from our recycling activities offset against the 8.29 million we spent managing our waste contracts recycling our waste and sending waste to landll.
The cost of sending our waste to landll sites was 1.17 million.
However during the year we succeeded in reducing the amount of waste sent to landll by 1.1%.
In the 2003 nancial year we reduced our operational eet by 9.4% to 33979 vehicles  still one of the largest in the UK  and reduced our fuel consumption by 11%.
Community
We commit a minimum of 0.5% of our UK pretax prots to direct activities in support of society.
This has ranged from 10 million in 1987 peaking at 16 million in 2001 and was 8.2 million including 1.2 million to charities in the 2003 nancial year.
BT operations also provided a further 17.9 million in funding and support in kind over the past nancial year.
The focus of our community programmes is on big issues where better communication can make a real difference to society.
For example more than 8300 schools and around two million young people engagements with the BT Education Programme  a dramabased campaign helping children to improve their communication skills have taken place.
This activity is supported by our volunteering programme which at 31 March 2003 had 4000 registered volunteers working with schools.
BTs contribution to charitable causes uses a range of communications tools including our telephone network for disaster appeals and for telethons such as Comic Relief Children in Need and GMTVs Get Up and Give.
Through our support we enable the appeals to raise tens of millions of pounds each year.
We are working with ChildLine on a major new campaign to help ensure that all young people can be heard.
At the heart of this campaign is our commitment to raise funds to help ChildLine answer every one of the 4000 children who call them every day.
During the second year of the BT Community Connections scheme ending in July 2003 BT will award 1700 internetready PCs to individuals and community groups.
In addition BT people gave 2 million directly to charities during the 2003 nancial year through Give as you Earn to which BT added a direct contribution of 1 million.
Business opportunities Following a detailed statistical analysis of customer opinion data going back up to 80 months and based on tens of thousands of interviews we have been able to show that a 1% improvement in the publics perception of our CSR activities results in a 0.1% increase in our retail customer satisfaction gures.
This is a critical correlation and shows how important it is not only to protect our reputation through appropriate risk management activities but also to enhance it through our community activities.
Longterm sustainability trends are creating market opportunities for us such as the use of teleconferencing and exible working to reduce the need to travel and provide more exible lifestyles.
Increasingly BT has to address social and environmental matters when bidding for business.
In the 2003 nancial year contracts to the value of more than 300 million required us to demonstrate expertise in managing these issues.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 25 Prot and loss account Years ended 31 March Total turnover Continuing activities 16186 18228 21068 21815 20182 Discontinued activities 2037 3675 8598 2827 18223 21903 29666 24642 20182 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 1270 3364 9937 4764 1455 Trading between group and principal joint venture  176 698 681 Group turnover Continuing activities 15197 16125 17141 18447 18727 Discontinued activities 1756 2590 3286 2112 16953 18715 20427 20559 18727 Other operating income 15tel215 Operating costs ab 13305 15359 20759 21400 16370 Group operating prot loss Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 3874 3772 3257 2580 2790 Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 69 200 3230 3059 218 3805 3572 27 479 2572 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures Total operating prot loss Continuing activities 3230 3143 2456 1489 2901 Discontinued activities 233 29 2826 371 3463 3172 370 1860 2901 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 1107 126 619 4389 1691 Prot on sale of property xed assets 11 26 34 1089 11 Amounts written off investments    535 7 Net interest payable 286 382 1314 1622 1439 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 3274 3100 2072 1113 1829 Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 1021 158 3103 348 1328 4295 2942 1031 1461 3157 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 1323 957 712 443 459 Prot loss on ordinary activities after taxation 2972 1985 1743 1018 2698 Minority interests 19 10 127 23 12 Prot loss for the nancial year 2953 1995 1870 995 2686 Average number of shares used in basic earnings per share millions 7183 7235 7276 8307 8616 Basic earnings loss per share 41.1p 27.6p 25.7p 12.0p 31.2p Diluted earnings loss per share 40.2p 26.9p 25.7p 11.9p 31.0p Basic earnings loss per share from continuing activities 40.5p 29.2p 20.7p 34.8p 31.2p Diluted earnings loss per share from continuing activities 39.5p 28.5p 20.4p 34.8p 31.0p Dividends per share 18.3p 19.6p 7.8p 2.0p 6.5p Dividends per share cents Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 30.7p 29.8p 17.5p 6.1p 14.2p Diluted earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 30.0p 29.1p 17.3p 6.0p 14.1p Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items on continuing activities 30.3p 29.5p 19.3p 8.8p 14.2p Operating costs include net exceptional costs 69 111 2857 2707 198 Includes redundancy and early leaver costs 124 5telc Groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures includes exceptional costs release   332 1294 150 Including gain on MCI shares sold in 1999 1133 Net interest payable includes exceptional costs credits   25 162 293 Based on actual dividend paid andor year end exchange rate on proposed dividends Fiveyear financial summary 26 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Cash ow statement Years ended 31 March Net cash ow from operating activities 6035 5849 5887 5257 6023 Dividends from associates and joint ventures Returns on investments and servicing of nance 328 163 727 1695 1506 Taxation paid 630 1311 669 562 434 Capital expenditure and nancial investment 1046 3752 8442 1354 2381 Acquisitions and disposals 1967 6405 13754 5785 2842 Equity dividends paid 1186 1364 1432  367 Cash inow outow before management of liquid resources and nancing 2972 7141 19127 7433 4183 Management of liquid resources 2447 1236 480 1864 1729 Financing 458 5959 19735 5479 2473 Increase decrease in cash in the year 19 Decrease increase in net debt in the year 3146 6582 18942 13930 4225 Balance sheet At 31 March Intangible xed assets 742 5777 18380 252 218 Tangible xed assets 17854 18163 21625 16078 15888 Fixed asset investments 1832 5878 5204 1221 555 Net current assets liabilities 495 7115 11143 732 1876 Total assets less current liabilities 19933 22703 34066 18283 18537 Loans and other borrowings falling due after one year 3386 5354 18775 16245 13456 Provisions for liabilities and charges 3286 3011 2738 2324 2376 Minority interests 216 498 499 72 63 Total assets less liabilities 13045 13840 12054 358 2642 Called up share capital 7438 7485 7573 434 434 Share premium account    2 2 Other reserves 3841 3345 2848 1025 998 Prot and loss account 9448 9700 7329 1819 1208 Total equity shareholders funds deciency 13045 13840 12054 358 2642 Total assets 27962 37588 54799 27673 28217 US GAAP Years ended 31 March Group operating prot loss 3356 2990 633 337 2693 Income loss before taxes 3745 2096 1959 1025 3653 Net income loss Continuing activities 2562 1559 809 1680 4134 Discontinued activities 27 166 3166 948 2589 1393 2357 732 4134 Average number of ADSs used in basic earnings per ADS millions 71tel862 Basic earnings loss per ordinary share 36.0p 19.3p 32.4p 8.8p 48.0p Diluted earnings loss per ordinary share 35.2p 18.8p 32.4p 8.8p 47.7p Basic earnings loss per ordinary share from continuing activities 35.7p 21.5p 11.1p 20.2p 48.0p Diluted earnings loss per ordinary share from continuing activities 34.9p 21.1p 11.0p 20.2p 47.7p Basic earnings loss per ordinary share from discontinued activities 0.3p 2.2p 43.5p 11.4p Diluted earnings loss per ordinary share from discontinued activities 0.3p 2.3p 43.5p 11.3p Basic earnings loss per ADS 3.60 1.93 3.24 0.88 4.80 Diluted earnings loss per ADS 3.52 1.88 3.24 0.88 4.77 Total assets as at 31 March 29323 38481 55361 30428 31131 Ordinary shareholders equity deciency as at 31 March 13674 13634 10231 4247 2258 Fiveyear financial summary BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 27 Financial review 28 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 The review is divided into the following sections 28 Introduction 30 Group results 30 Line of business results 31 BT Retail 33 BT Wholesale 34 BT Global Services 35 Other operating income 35 Operating costs 37 Group operating prot loss 37 Associates and joint ventures 38 Total operating prot loss 38 Prot on sale of group undertakings and xed asset investments 39 Prot on sale of property xed assets 40 Interest charge 40 Prot loss before taxation 41 Taxation 41 Earnings loss per share 41 Dividends 41 Financing 43 Treasury policy 43 Capital resources 43 Foreign currency and interest rate exposure 44 Capital expenditure 44 Acquisitions 44 Demerger and capital reduction 45 Balance sheet 45 Return on capital employed 45 Pensions 46 Regulation and prices 46 Competition and the UK economy 46 Environment 46 Geographical information 47 Regulatory nancial information 47 Critical accounting policies 47 New UK accounting standards 48 Economic and Monetary Union EMU 48 US GAAP Please see cautionary statement regarding forward looking statements on page 142.
Introduction
The 2003 nancial year was characterised by a focus on implementing and delivering the threeyear strategy announced in April 2002 and further corporate transactions in the continued restructuring of the group and reduction of net debt.
The corporate transactions included the unwind of the Concert joint venture on 1 April 2002 and the disposal of our interest in Cegetel for 2.6 billion.
The 2002 nancial year was dominated by a series of corporate transactions designed to focus and transform the group and reduce its net debt position.
Those corporate transactions included raising 5.9 billion through the rights issue in June 2001 selling our Japanese telecom and Spanish mobile investments for 4.8 billion selling the Yell directories business for approximately 2 billion the demerger of mmO and the sale and leaseback of properties for 2.4 billion.
During the 2001 nancial year the group underwent an organisational restructuring that resulted in the formation of the lines of business with activities being grouped by market sector rather than geography.
Signicant acquisitions were also made for a total consideration of 11.9 billion including Viag Interkom and Telfort.
As a result of the major restructuring of the group and the signicant level of corporate transactions completed during the period under review we believe it is difcult for investors to meaningfully compare the nancial performance of the group between the nancial years under review.
In this Financial review the commentary is therefore focused principally on the trading results of the continuing activities of BT Group before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
In comparing the continuing activities of the group the results of our discontinued activities namely our Japanese telecom and Spanish mobile investments Yell and mmO are excluded.
Goodwill amortisation is excluded because the annual charge has varied signicantly during the period under review as a result of the corporate transactions noted above and the exceptional impairment charges.
The exceptional items are excluded because they predominantly relate to the corporate transactions rather than the trading activities of the group.
This is also consistent with the way that nancial performance is measured by management and we believe allows a meaningful comparison to be made of the trading results of the group during the period under review.
The goodwill amortisation and exceptional items are therefore analysed and discussed separately from the line of business results in this Financial review because they are considered to be a reection of the corporate activity rather than the trading activity of the lines of business.
The following table shows the summarised prot and loss account which includes a reconciliation of the key performance measures before and after goodwill amortisation and exceptional items and is discussed further in this Financial review.
The operating results by line of business are discussed in addition to the overall group results as we believe the activities and markets they serve are distinct and this analysis provides a greater degree of insight to investors.
Summarised prot and loss accounttel
Continuing activities
Continuing activities
Total turnover 20182 21815 24642 21068 29666 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 1455 4049 4764 4625 9937 Trading between group and principal joint venture  68telGroup turnover 18727 18447 20559 17141 20427 Other operating income 21tel359 Operating costs 16370 18854 21400 14500 20759 Group operating prot loss Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2790 2771 2580 3082 3257 Goodwill amortisation 20 121 352 88 373 Exceptional items 198 2696 2707 7 2857 2572 46 479 2987 27 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures 329 1443 1381 531 397 Total operating prot loss Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2971 2663 2546 2925 3377 Goodwill amortisation 22 162 405 166 558 Exceptional items 48 3990 4001 303 3189 2901 1489 1860 2456 370 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 1691 21 4389 618 619 Prot on sale of property xed assets 11 1089 1089 34 34 Amounts written off investments 7 535 535 Net interest payable 1439 1579 1622 1171 1314 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 1829 1273 1113 1763 2072 Goodwill amortisation 22 162 405 166 558 Exceptional items 1350 3604 753 340 2545 3157 2493 1461 1937 1031 Prot loss after taxation 2698 2878 1018 1505 1743 Minority interests 12 10 23 2 127 Prot loss for the nancial year 2686 2888 995 1507 1870 Basic earnings loss per share Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 14.2p 8.8p 6.1p 19.3p 17.5p Goodwill amortisation 0.3p 2.0p 5.0p 2.4p 7.7p Exceptional items 17.3p 41.6p 10.9p 3.8p 35.5p Including discontinued activities
Financial review
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 29 Group results All references in this section to the prior year results or performance against the prior year are in relation to the results from continuing activities.
Group turnover increased by 2% to 18727 million in the 2003 nancial year.
The strength in the groups new wave businesses and a strong defence of the groups market share in its existing businesses was offset by price deation.
This compared to growth of 8% in the 2002 nancial year and reected the difcult market conditions.
Group operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items at 2790 million for the 2003 nancial year was 19 million higher than the prior year.
The cost efciencies achieved during the year were offset by a 90 million increase in leaver costs the negative group operating prot effects of unwinding the Concert global venture and the Telereal property sale and leaseback transaction.
In total these effects reduced group operating prots by over 400 million although this was compensated for at the prot before tax level by a corresponding improvement in our share of the operating prots of associates and joint ventures and net interest payable.
In the 2002 nancial year the group operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items declined by 10% to 2771 million.
BTs share of associates and joint ventures operating prots before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was 181 million in the 2003 nancial year compared to a 108 million loss and a 157 million loss in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years respectively.
The improvement in the 2003 nancial year mainly reected the benet of the unwind of the Concert global venture.
Net interest payable before exceptional items was 1146 million for the 2003 nancial year an improvement of 271 million against the 2002 nancial year as a result of the reduction in the level of net debt.
In the 2002 nancial year net interest payable was 221 million higher than the 2001 nancial year effecting the increased net debt.
The above factors resulted in the group achieving a prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 1829 million in the 2003 nancial year an increase of 44% reecting the underlying operating performance of the group and lower net interest costs.
In the 2002 nancial year the prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 1273 million was 490 million lower than the 2001 nancial year.
The taxation charge for the 2003 nancial year was 598 million on the prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items an effective rate of 32.7% compared to 41.5% and 21.8% in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years.
The high effective rate in the 2002 nancial year was mainly due to the impact of loss making subsidiaries outside the UK for which tax relief was not available.
The low effective rate in the 2001 nancial year reected tax relief on losses surrendered by discontinued activities.
Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items were 14.2 pence for the 2003 nancial year an increase of 61% from 8.8 pence in the 2002 nancial year and 19.3 pence in the 2001 nancial year.
The 2002 nancial year reected the higher operating costs and net interest payable.
Line of business results In the following commentary we discuss the operating results of the group for the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years in terms of the lines of business established during the 2001 nancial year.
During the 2003 nancial year BT Openworld was transferred under the management control of BT Retail and the results have been adjusted to reect this change for all periods under review.
There is extensive trading between the lines of business and their protability is dependent on the transfer price levels.
The intragroup trading arrangements are subject to review and have changed in certain circumstances.
Where that is the case the comparative gures have been restated to reect these changes.
The line of business results are presented and discussed before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items for the reasons set out above to provide a meaningful comparison of the trading results between the nancial years under review.
Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items are discussed separately in a group context in the Financial review.
In addition to measuring nancial performance of the lines of business based on the operating prot
Financial review
30 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Line of business summary Group turnover Group operating prot loss Goodwill amortisation Exceptional charges credits Group operating prot loss before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items BT Retail 13301 12811 12541 1  111  1425 984 655 BT Wholesale 11260 12256 11728 1924 2163 2538    79  1924 2242 2538 BT Global Services 5251 4472 3468 446 2684 596 19 120 87  2211 200 427 353 309 Intragroup 11734 Total continuing activities 18727 18447 17141 2572 46 2 2696 7 2790 2771 3082
Group totals 18727 20559 20427 2572 479 27 2tel2707 2857 2790 2580 3257 before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items management also measure the operating nancial performance of the lines of business based upon the EBITDA before exceptional items.
EBITDA is dened as the group operating prot loss before depreciation and amortisation.
This may not be directly comparable to the EBITDA of other companies as they may dene it differently.
EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortisation both being non cash items from group operating prot and is a common measure particularly in the telecommunications sector used by investors and analysts in evaluating the operating nancial performance of companies.
EBITDA before exceptional items is considered to be a good measure of the operating performance because it reects the underlying operating cash costs by eliminating depreciation and amortisation and excludes nonrecurring exceptional items that are predominantly related to corporate transactions.
EBITDA is not a direct measure of the groups liquidity which is shown by the groups cash ow statement and needs to be considered in the context of the groups nancial commitments.
A reconciliation of EBITDA before exceptional items to group operating prot by line of business is provided in the table across the page above.
Trends in EBITDA are discussed for each line of business in the following commentary.
The following commentary on the line of business results also discusses their operating free cash ow before exceptional items which is dened as EBITDA before exceptional items less capital expenditure.
This cash ow measure is used to monitor the contribution to the group free cash ow of the line of business management teams who are set targets against this measure.
It is not possible to directly reconcile this measure to the cash ow from operating activities by line of business because of the groups centralised treasury and cash operations.
We believe investors are interested in understanding the cash ow performance of the individual lines of business and therefore operating free cash ow is the liquidity measure that we use at a line of business level.
Operating free cash ow is not used as a liquidity measure at a consolidated group level where cash generation can be directly measured by reference to the consolidated cash ow statement.
Trends in operating free cash ow are discussed for each line of business in the following commentary.
The table across the page above shows the reconciliation of the group operating prots to EBITDA before exceptional items and operating free cash ow before exceptional items.
The following table shows the reconciliation of operating free cash ow before exceptional items to the groups cash inow from operating activities.
Operating free cash ow before exceptional items 3360 2074 1329 Capital expenditure 2445 3908 4986 Changes in working capital non cash movements and other items 416 265 571 Exceptional items 198 2707 2857 Impairment charges  2247 3000 Cash inow from operating activities 6023 5257 5887 BT Retail 2003 Group turnover 13301 12811 12541 Gross margin 3874 3460 3476 Sales general and administration costs 2240 2260 2602 Group operating prot 1425 984 655 EBITDA 1634 1200 874 Capital expenditure 115 153 167 Operating free cash ow 1519 1047 707 Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items In the 2003 and 2002 nancial years BT Retails results have shown the benets of the strategic focus on defending core revenues and gross margins cost reductions through a series of cost transformation programmes and growing top line revenue through new wave initiatives in the information communications and technology ICT broadband and mobility markets.
In the 2003 nancial year the results include those of the reintegrated Concert business relating to UK multinational customer accounts
Financial review
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 31
Amortisation of intangible assets EBITDA before exceptional items Capital expenditure Operating free cash ow before exceptional items 209 216 219   1634 120tel167 1519 1047 707 BT Retail 1923 1914 1738   3847 4156 4276 1652 1974 2273 2195 2182 2003 BT Wholesale 178 146 5tel261 463 885 BT Global Services
3011 2974 2689 4 33 5805 5748 5774 2445 3100 3857 3360 2648 1917 Total continuing activities
3011 3388 3805 5982 6315 2445 3908 4986 3360 2074 1329 Group totals including the associated sales force and account management functions.
Within the residential voice market BT Retail maintained market share as it has done since June 2000 with share internally estimated at around 73%.
In the business voice market internal estimates put BT Retails market share at 45% compared to 49% and 53% in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years.
BT Retails turnover increased by 4% in the 2003 nancial year to 13301 million after rising by 2% in the 2002 nancial year.
The increase in the 2003 nancial year included revenues from the UK multinational customers reintegrated into BT Retail from the Concert global venture.
As well as the benet of the returning Concert business BT Retail continued to defend core revenues and grew new wave revenues.
Turnover for the three years is summarised as follows BT Retail turnover 2003 Voice services 9578 9561 9711 Intermediate products 2873 2668 2413 Total core 12451 12229 12124 New wave 850 582 417 Total 13301 12811 12541 Sales to other BT businesses included above 1968 2087 1820 Voice services comprise calls made by customers on the BT xed line network in the UK analogue lines equipment sales and rentals and other business voice products.
Overall turnover from voice services was maintained in the 2003 nancial year after declining by 2% in the 2002 nancial year.
Call revenues comprise all calls made by customers on the BT xed line network in the UK including outbound international calls calls to mobile phones and calls to the internet.
These were 2% lower in the 2003 nancial year and 5% lower in the 2002 nancial year as a result of price and volume reductions.
BT Retails total call volumes declined by 5% in the 2003 nancial year 2002  6% growth 2001  8% growth with geographic local national and international calls declining by 4% 2002  6% 2001 10%.
This decline in geographic call volumes has been offset by growth in xed to mobile call volumes of 6% 2002  10% 2001  32%.
The rate of decline in geographic call volumes has been stemmed due to initiatives in the residential market such as BT Together Chataway weekends and the 1571 service.
In the business voice market volumes have declined in both the 2003 and 2002 nancial years driven by a combination of customers switching out of traditional telephony and pressure from the implementation of Carrier PreSelection CPS.
Building on the success of the BT Together residential packages BT Business Plan was launched in January 2003 to combat the effect of CPS a competitive package which places a ceiling of 10 pence on national and local business calls rewards loyalty and provides a single BT customer contact.
Non geographic call volumes switched from growth of 23% in the 2002 nancial year to a decline of 6% in the 2003 nancial year mainly reecting the switch of internet calls from measured call minute products to a mixture of at rate based products and broadband products.
This continued trend will dilute the correlation between revenues and call minutes.
Turnover from analogue exchange lines and other voice services which includes operator services directory enquiries payphones and chargecards of 4896 million 2002  4778 million 2001 4654 million increased by 3% in both the 2003 and 2002 nancial years.
Turnover from intermediate products in the 2003 nancial year of 2873 million 2002  2668 million 2001  2413 million increased by 8% in the 2003 nancial year and 11% in the 2002 nancial year.
This is despite the migration of customers from retail private circuits to partial private circuits.
As a result of changes required by Oftel partial private circuits used by UK xed network operators are no longer provided by BT Retail but are provided as a BT Wholesale product.
This reduced revenue by approximately 100 million in the 2003 nancial year.
The total number of BT Retail lines have increased by 1% to 29.3 million at 31 March 2003 following an increase in the 2002 nancial year with high speed ISDN lines being the main driver behind the growth.
New wave revenues grew by 46% to 850 million in the 2003 nancial year compared to a growth of 40% to 582 million in the 2002 nancial year.
This growth reects the continued focus on the ICT broadband and mobility products.
The key contract wins in the 2003 nancial year were Unilever Bradford and Bingley National Australia Group Abbey National and Honeywell.
Under the terms of the trading model with BT Global Services these ICT revenues are recognised as an internal sale by BT Retail.
BT Broadband and BT Openworld broadband products performed strongly.
BT Broadband launched in September 2002 had 137000 connections at 31 March 2003 and the BT Openworld broadband product launched in March 2002 had 292000 connections at 31 March 2003 giving total BT Retail broadband connections of 429000 54% of BT Wholesales 800000 ADSL connections.
Gross margin increased by 12% to 3874 million in the 2003 nancial year and was at in the 2002 nancial year.
The improvements are driven by the success of BT Together packages improved product mix and lower wholesale prices which more than offset the impact of the decline in call volumes.
Gross margin is turnover less costs directly attributable to the provision of the products and services reected in turnover in the period.
Selling general and administration costs are those costs that are ancillary to the business processes of providing products and services and are the general business operating costs.
BT Retail analyse their costs in this manner for management purposes in common with
Financial review
32 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 other retail organisations and they have set target savings for selling general and administration costs.
Cost transformation programmes in the 2003 nancial year generated savings in sales general and administration costs which were offset by the additional costs associated with the Concert business.
Excluding these Concert related costs there was a reduction of 7% to 2240 million.
These savings were driven by a reduction in people related expenses such as travel accommodation and communications lower service costs resulting from improvements in service quality billing initiatives and similar cost reduction programmes.
These cost savings were net of the costs of the investment in new wave activities.
BT Retail comfortably exceeded its target of 200 million sales general and administration cost savings in the core business in the 2003 nancial year.
In the 2002 nancial year the cost transformation programmes produced savings of 167 million 7% in selling general and administration costs excluding goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
The number of employees in BT Retail at 31 March 2003 and 31 March 2002 was 50400 and 51200 respectively.
800 employees joined BT Retail from the Concert global venture.
The cost savings and improved gross margins contributed towards BT Retails strong EBITDA growth before exceptional items in the 2003 nancial year of 434 million 36% to 1634 million and by 326 million 37% to 1200 million in the 2002 nancial year.
These improvements have enabled BT Retail to contribute an operating free cash ow EBITDA less capital expenditure before exceptional items of 1519 million in the 2003 nancial year and 1047 million in the 2002 nancial year representing improvements of 45% and 48% respectively.
This improvement also reects the reduction in capital expenditure to 115 million in the 2003 nancial year 2002  153 million 2001  167 million.
In the 2002 nancial year BT Retail launched the next generation multifunctional contact centre programme which rationalises the number of call centres from 104 sites to 30 over a two year period.
The programme remains on track.
The associated exceptional costs of 68 million and the other exceptional costs of 43 million relating to the impairment of payphone assets and investments are discussed on pages 36 and 37.
BT Wholesale 2003 Group turnover 11260 12256 11728 Group operating prot 1924 2242 2538 EBITDA 3847 4156 4276 Capital expenditure 1652 1974 2273 Operating free cash ow 2195 2182 2003 Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items The majority of BT Wholesales revenues are for supplying network services to other BT lines of business 2003  69% 2002  68% 2001  72% mainly to BT Retail.
External turnover is derived from providing wholesale products and solutions to other operators interconnecting with BTs UK xed network including mmO since the demerger.
Internal turnover and costs with mmO for prior years have been reclassied as external in this section to enable a meaningful year on year comparison.
In the 2003 nancial year turnover totalled 11260 million a decline of 8% following an increase of 5% to 12256 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The results for the 2002 nancial year included total turnover of 770 million relating to the former Concert global venture which was reintegrated from 1 April 2002.
Excluding this Concert turnover in the 2002 nancial year the underlying turnover declined by 2% in the 2003 nancial year.
This reduction in the 2003 nancial year is primarily due to a 7% decrease in network unit prices and mix and a 5% increase in network volumes.
In the 2002 nancial year network volume growth of 8% was partly offset by the effect of price and product mix.
External turnover declined by 11% in the 2003 nancial year to 3472 million although excluding sales to Concert in the 2002 nancial year the underlying external turnover increased by 3%.
In the 2002 nancial year external turnover grew by 19% to 3911 million.
Within traditional products the impact of price reductions  due to at rate price packages Network Charge Control NCC and Oftel price determinations coupled with unfavourable market conditions have stemmed the rate of growth in external turnover in the 2003 nancial year.
Turnover from retail private circuits at 309 million reduced by 14% in the 2003 nancial year and in the 2002 nancial year at 358 million increased by 3% when compared to the respective prior year.
The decline in the 2003 nancial year is due to the migration of customers from retail private circuits to lower priced partial private circuits introduced in August 2001 which showed an increase in turnover of 89% to 106 million in the 2003 nancial year.
FRIACO generated turnover of 84 million in the 2003 nancial year 2002 68 million 2001  nil and follows the move to at rate packages by internet service providers.
Conveyance and low margin transit revenues of 2064 million have remained virtually at in the 2003 nancial year reecting the ongoing slow down in the mobile market and TMT sector that began in the nal quarter of the 2002 nancial year.
This followed an increase of 17% in the 2002 nancial year.
New business external turnover including broadband and solutions products and services at 189 million in the 2003 nancial year showed strong growth of 85%.
This continued the trend from the 2002 nancial year when new business turnover at 102 million was 240% higher.
The increase in the 2003 nancial year principally reects the gains being made in network facilities management and internet connectivity products including ADSL lines.
Wholesale
ADSL lines had an installed base of 800000 at 31 March 2003 representing growth of 380% over the previous year.
At 16 May 2003 the installed base was 936000 and with additions since January 2003 running at a rate of well over 20000 connections per
Financial review
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 33 week are on target to reach one million connections in the summer of 2003.
In the 2003 nancial year internal turnover decreased by 7% to 7788 million after a decrease of 1% to 8345 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The unwind of the Concert global venture has resulted in a reduction of internal revenues in the 2003 nancial year.
Excluding the Concert related revenues in the 2002 nancial year the reduction in internal turnover in the 2003 nancial year was 4%.
This reduction was primarily due to a reduction in prices on sales to BT Retail partly offset by the increased sales to other BT lines of business.
Despite network volume increases in the 2003 nancial year BT Wholesales operating costs excluding depreciation and exceptional items decreased by 10% to 7538 million mainly due to the 905 million of Concert related costs in the 2002 nancial year offset by an increase in leaver costs of 108 million.
In the 2002 nancial year operating costs excluding depreciation and exceptional items rose by 9% to 8355 million.
The principal reasons for these changes are discussed below.
Interconnect payments to other network operators decreased by 18% in the 2003 nancial year to 3143 million.
The unwind of the Concert global venture accounted for the majority of this reduction as interconnect payments to Concert were no longer made.
In the 2002 nancial year these costs increased by 11% to 3849 million compared to the prior year.
These costs are mainly recharged to BT Retail with no margin or reect external transit revenues with a minimal margin.
Net staff costs in the 2003 nancial year at 815 million increased by 19% after increasing by 15% to 686 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The increase in the 2003 nancial year reects an increase in leaver costs compared to the prior year of 108 million.
The increase in both years also reects a change in the mix of capital and current work.
Payments to other BT lines of business declined by 12% in the 2003 nancial year to 3010 million after increasing by 6% to 3429 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The reduction in the 2003 nancial year was principally due to the unwind of the Concert global venture which reduced the cost of sales of BT Retail products and a reduction in service costs.
The increase in the 2002 nancial year was mainly due to an increase in payments to BT Retail for cost of sales of BT Retail products and services and an increase in payments to BT Global Services for broadband services offset by reductions in other group charges.
Depreciation costs were broadly at in the 2003 nancial year at 1923 million after an increase of 10% to 1914 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The increase in the 2002 nancial year was due to a reduction in assumed asset lives as BT continues its programme of network investment offset by the effect of reduced capital expenditure.
In the 2002 nancial year an exceptional bad debt charge of 79 million was recognised as a result of the severe liquidity problems in the TMT sector during the latter part of the year.
EBITDA at 3847 million in the 2003 nancial year was 7% lower than in the 2002 nancial year following a reduction of 3% to 4156 million before exceptional items in the 2002 nancial year.
Operating prot at 1924 million in the 2003 nancial year was 14% lower after a reduction of 12% to 2242 million before exceptional items in the 2002 nancial year.
The operating prot margins before exceptional items achieved in each of the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years have been reducing at 17% 18% and 22% respectively.
Capital expenditure on plant and equipment at 1652 million in the 2003 nancial year was 16% lower than the 2002 nancial year following a decline in the 2002 nancial year of 13% to 1974 million.
This reects continued cost control tight governance and the alignment of capital spend with the development of the future network strategy.
During the 2003 nancial year BT Wholesale focused its cost reduction programme on managed cash costs operating costs excluding payments to other network operators and depreciation plus capital expenditure.
After adjusting for the unwind of Concert managed cash costs at 6047 million decreased by 1% despite the 5% increase in network volumes and extra leaver payments of 108 million in the 2003 nancial year.
After allowing for price changes and volume effects the managed cash cost savings were 237 million in the 2003 nancial year exceeding the full year target of 200 million.
Managed cash costs are used to measure the controllable operating and capital cash costs of the BT Wholesale business.
Accordingly it excludes payments to other network operators and depreciation.
Targets have been set for achieving managed cash cost savings and accordingly performance against those targets is reported.
BT Wholesale maintained its strong cash generation performance with operating free cash ow EBITDA less capital expenditure of 2195 million in the 2003 nancial year.
This follows an increase of 9% to 2182 million before exceptional items in the 2002 nancial year.
BT Global Services 2003 Group turnover 5251 4472 3468 Group operating loss 427 353 309 EBITDA 178 146 50 Capital expenditure 439 609 935 Operating free cash ow 261 463 885 Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items BT Global Services formerly known as BT Ignite is BTs business services and solutions business serving customers worldwide.
It is an ICT service provider offering integrated data and valueadded services to meet the European needs of global multisite corporates and the global needs of European corporates.
BT Global Services now includes the former Concert managed services network infrastructure in Europe Africa the Middle East and the Americas within its business supporting the frame relay ATM IP and other data services.
The Global Products and Global
Financial review
34 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Carrier divisions within BT Global Services reect the majority of the results of the returning Concert businesses in the 2003 nancial year.
In the 2003 nancial year BT Global Services turnover was 5251 million representing an increase of 17% compared to the prior year.
The Global Carrier division reected an increase of 744 million in the 2003 nancial year to 1007 million principally due to the reintegration of the international carrier business of the former Concert global venture.
Global
Products turnover grew by 22% in the 2003 nancial year to 1883 million mainly due to the reintegration of Concert and the growth in IP VPN Internet Protocol Virtual Private Network products.
Syntegra performed strongly in the difcult systems integration market with turnover of 623 million in the 2003 nancial year an increase of 2%.
Solutions turnover grew by 11% in the 2003 nancial year to 2042 million and order intake in the second half of the year has been very strong with total orders for the year of 3.6 billion after a slow rst half year.
In the 2002 nancial year BT Global Services turnover was 4472 million representing an increase of 29% driven mainly by Solutions European operations and UK IP revenues.
Continued cost reductions both in network costs as well as selling general and administration costs helped generate improvements in EBITDA before exceptional items in the 2003 nancial year of 22% to 178 million following an improvement of 96 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The reintegration of the former Concert business has had an adverse impact on the growth in EBITDA before exceptional items.
The
2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years include leaver costs of 65 million 55 million and 8 million respectively.
Headcount increased by 3% to 17200 in the 2003 nancial year as a result of the reintegration of 1900 employees from the former Concert business offset by leavers and reduced by 2100 to 16700 in the 2002 nancial year.
All major European operations achieved their target of becoming EBITDA positive during the 2003 nancial year.
In the 2002 nancial year an exceptional charge of 2211 million was recognised principally relating to the impairment of the goodwill and tangible xed assets of the European activities.
This followed the announcement that activities were being streamlined to focus on multisite corporate customers.
The group operating loss before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items increased by 74 million in the 2003 nancial year to a loss of 427 million after increasing by 44 million to a loss of 353 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The loss in the 2003 nancial year includes the adverse impact of the former Concert business.
Capital expenditure for the 2003 nancial year was 439 million a reduction of 28% and 609 million in the 2002 nancial year a reduction of 35%.
This demonstrates the focus on cash control and is reected in the 202 million improvement in operating free cash outow EBITDA less capital expenditure before exceptional items to 261 million in the 2003 nancial year.
This represents a turnaround of 624 million since the 2001 nancial year.
Other operating income As part of the arrangements for the establishment of Concert BT had been seconding staff and providing administrative and other services from its launch in early January 2000.
The income from these services totalled nil in the 2003 nancial year 135 million in the 2002 nancial year and 168 million in the 2001 nancial year.
Operating costs Total operating costs from continuing activities were reduced by 13% in the 2003 nancial year to 16370 million after increasing by 30% in the 2002 nancial year.
As a percentage of group turnover from continuing activities operating costs from continuing activities excluding goodwill amortisation and exceptional items increased from 84% in the 2001 nancial year to 87% in the 2002 nancial year and reduced to 86% in the 2003 nancial year.
Operating
Because these activities have been fully integrated into the lines of business it is not possible to separately identify those specic costs associated with the activities of the former Concert global venture.
In all three nancial years net exceptional costs from continuing activities were incurred.
These amounted to 198 million 2696 million and 7 million in the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years respectively.
These exceptional costs are considered separately in the discussion which follows.
Operating costs 2003 Continuing activities Staff costs 4254 4260 4069 Own work capitalised 583 623 642 Depreciation 3011 2974 2689 Goodwill and other intangibles amortisation 24 124 91 Payments to telecommunications operators 3846 4289 3736 Other operating costs 5620 5134 4550 Total operating costs from continuing activities before exceptional costs 16172 16158 14493 Exceptional costs 198 2696 7 Total operating costs from continuing activities 16370 18854 14500 Total operating costs from discontinued activities  2546 6259 Total operating costs 16370 21400 20759 Staff costs from continuing activities were broadly at in the 2003 nancial year at 4254 million after increasing by 5% in the 2002 nancial year.
In the 2003 nancial year the numbers employed in the
Financial review
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 35 continuing activities decreased by 3900 to 104700 at 31 March 2003 after decreasing by 8200 in the 2002 nancial year.
The increased leaver costs and salary increases offset the impact of the lower head count in the 2003 nancial year.
Higher pension costs for enhanced benets provided to leavers and the annual pay awards were the main reasons for the increase in staff costs in the 2002 nancial year.
The allocation for the employee share ownership scheme included within staff costs was 36 million in the 2003 nancial year.
The allocation for the 2002 and 2001 nancial years was 25 million and 32 million respectively.
Early leaver costs from continuing activities before exceptional items of 276 million were incurred in the 2003 nancial year compared with 186 million in the 2002 nancial year and 111 million in the 2001 nancial year.
This reects BTs continued focus on reducing headcount and improving operational efciencies.
This includes the cost of enhanced pension benets provided to leavers which amounted to 60 million 46 million and nil in the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years.
In the 2002 and 2001 nancial years this did not reect the full cash cost because there was a pension fund accounting surplus which for accounting purposes includes any provision for pensions on the groups balance sheet and in accordance with BTs accounting policies the accounting surplus was utilised before making a charge to the prot and loss account.
The cost of enhanced pension benets charged against the accounting surplus in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years amounted to 140 million and 429 million respectively.
In the 2002 nancial year the excess over the available accounting surplus amounting to 46 million was charged to the prot and loss account.
Under the NewStart programme launched in the fourth quarter of 2001 BT employees who leave in advance of normal retirement age receive a leaving payment rather than a redundancy payment and the incremental pension benets have been scaled down which has reduced the level of the cash cost associated with early leavers.
The depreciation charge from continuing activities increased by 1% in the 2003 nancial year to 3011 million after increasing by 11% in the 2002 nancial year.
The increase in the 2003 nancial year is despite the reduction in property depreciation as a result of the property sale and leaseback in December 2001.
The increase in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years reects a reduction in the estimated asset lives reecting BTs continuing investment in its networks and broadband investment.
Goodwill amortisation in respect of subsidiaries and businesses acquired since 1 April 1998 when BT adopted Financial Reporting Standard No.
10 and amortisation of other intangibles totalled 24 million in the 2003 nancial year compared with 124 million in the 2002 nancial year and 91 million in the 2001 nancial year.
The low charge in the 2003 nancial year reects the impact of the demerger of mmO and the impairment of goodwill in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years which signicantly reduced the carrying value of goodwill.
Goodwill on acquisitions before 1 April 1998 was written off directly to reserves.
Payments to other telecommunication operators from continuing activities reduced by 10% in the 2003 nancial year to 3846 million after increasing by 15% in the 2002 nancial year.
The payments in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years include those made to the Concert global venture for the delivery of BTs outgoing international calls which accounts for most of the reduction in the 2003 nancial year.
Other operating costs which rose by 9% in the 2003 nancial year to 5620 million after increasing by 13% in the 2002 nancial year include the maintenance and support of the networks accommodation and marketing costs the cost of sales of customer premises equipment and non pay related leaver costs.
The increase in the 2003 nancial year includes the property rental costs of around 190 million following the sale and leaseback transaction in December 2001.
The exceptional items within operating costs for the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years are shown in the table below.
Exceptional operating costs 2003 Property rationalisation costs 198 Impairment of goodwill and tangible xed assets  2202 200 Concert unwind costs  172 BT Retail call centre rationalisation  68 BT Wholesale bad debt expense  79 mmO demerger costs  98 Other  77 193 Total attributable to continuing activities 198 2696 7 Total attributable to discontinued activities  11 2850 Total exceptional operating costs 198 2707 2857 In the 2003 nancial year a property rationalisation charge of 198 million was recognised in relation to the rationalisation of the groups London ofce portfolio.
The rationalisation involves the exit from a number of ofce properties.
The most signicant item in the 2002 nancial year was the impairment of goodwill and tangible xed assets in the European activities of BT Global Services.
In the light of our announcement that BT Global Services was streamlining its activities to focus on multisite corporate customers with European activities and the assimilation of BTs share of Concerts activities an impairment review of the investment in its European activities was performed.
As a result a goodwill impairment charge of 1939 million and a tangible xed asset impairment charge of 263 million was recognised.
The goodwill in the European activities was fully written down as a result of the charge.
Financial review
36 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Other exceptional items in the 2002 nancial year included and costs of 172 million associated with the unwind of the Concert global venture discussed further on page 38 and charges of 68 million in relation to the BT Retail call centre rationalisation programme reducing the number of call centres from 104 to 30 over two years and bad debt charges of 79 million in BT Wholesale as a result of severe liquidity problems in the TMT sector during the latter part of the year and costs of 98 million associated with the demerger of mmO and other charges of 77 million including impairment of payphone assets The most signicant item in the 2001 nancial year was the impairment of goodwill in Viag Interkom.
The acquisition of the 55% interest in the company was completed for 8770 million in February 2001 and goodwill of 4992 million arose on this transaction.
The impairment review resulted in an impairment in goodwill of 3000 million of which 200 million related to BTs continuing activities.
Other exceptional items within operating costs in the 2001 nancial year included a credit of 193 million for the refund of rates on BTs infrastructure following a successful legal action taken by BT in 2000 to challenge the rateable valuations on which it was charged for its network assets.
Group operating prot loss In the 2003 nancial year group operating prot from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and the exceptional items described above of 2790 million was 1% higher than in the 2002 nancial year which in turn was 10% lower than in the 2001 nancial year.
Total group operating prot for the 2003 nancial year was 2572 million compared to a loss of 479 million in the 2002 nancial year and a prot of 27 million in the 2001 nancial year reecting the losses generated by the discontinued activities and the exceptional costs of 2707 million in the 2002 nancial year.
Associates and joint ventures The results of associates and joint ventures split between continuing and discontinued activities are shown below Share of turnover Continuing activities 1455 4049 4625 Discontinued activities  715 5312 Total 1455 4764 9937 Share of operating prot loss before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items Continuing activities 181 108 157 Discontinued activities  74 277 During the period under review there has been a signicant rationalisation of the groups investments in associates and joint ventures.
On 1 April 2002 the unwind of the Concert global venture was completed and on 22 January 2003 the sale of the groups stake in Cegetel was completed.
As a result BTs share of its ventures turnover fell to 1455 million in the 2003 nancial year from 4764 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The disposals made in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years resulted in BTs share of its ventures turnover falling to 4764 million in the 2002 nancial year from 9937 million in the 2001 nancial year.
In the 2003 nancial year 1447 million of the total arose from ventures located outside the UK compared with 4618 million in the 2002 nancial year and 9677 million in the 2001 nancial year.
The principal contributors to turnover in the 2003 nancial year were Cegetel in France 956 million up to the date of disposal and LG Telecom in Korea 198 million.
The principal contributors to turnover from continuing activities in the 2002 nancial year were Concert 2158 million Cegetel 1068 million and LG Telecom 240 million and in the 2001 nancial year were Concert 2576 million Cegetel 860 million and LG Telecom 281 million.
The principal contributors to turnover from discontinued activities in the 2002 nancial year were Japan Telecom and JPhone 559 million to June 2001 and Airtel 76 million to June 2001.
The principal contributors to turnover from discontinued activities in the 2001 nancial year were Japan Telecom and JPhone 4542 million and Airtel 286 million.
The groups share of its ventures operating prots from continuing activities totalled 181 million in the 2003 nancial year before goodwill amortisation and exceptional prots.
The comparable losses amounted to 108 million and 157 million in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years respectively.
The principal contributor to the groups share of operating prots from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items in the 2003 nancial year was Cegetel 198 million.
In the 2002 nancial year the principal contributor to the loss was Concert 225 million offset by prots from Cegetel 168 million.
In the 2001 nancial year Concert reported prots of 19 million and Cegetel prots of 90 million offset by losses in other ventures.
Financial review
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 37 Exceptional items within the operating prots from joint ventures and associates are as follows Impairment of Concert  806 Concert unwind costs  81 Impairment of investments and charge release of related exit costs 150 234 Goodwill impairment  173 200 Subscriber acquisition costs  96 Total attributable to continuing activities 150 1294 296 Total attributable to discontinued activities  36 Total exceptional operating costs credits 150 1294 332 In the 2003 nancial year BT completed the exit from its investment in Blu on more favourable terms than anticipated and accordingly exit cost provisions of 150 million were released.
Concerts performance was a cause of concern in 2001 and in October 2001 BT and ATandT announced the unwind of Concert which was subsequently completed on 1 April 2002.
On completion the businesses customer accounts and networks returned to the two parent companies with BT and ATandT each taking ownership of substantially those parts of Concert originally contributed by them.
As part of the settlement with ATandT for the unwind of the Concert global venture BT received net cash of 72 million 56 million.
This net settlement includes the receipt of 350 million reecting the allocation of the businesses and the payment of 278 million to achieve the equal division of specied working capital and other liability balances.
BT and ATandT also terminated their Canadian joint venture agreement under which BT was committed to participate in ATandTs future obligation to acquire all of the publicly traded shares of ATandT Canada.
ATandT has taken full ownership of BTs interest in the Canadian joint venture and in ATandT Canada and has now assumed full responsibility for all future obligations of the joint venture.
BT has now ceased to have any interest in ATandT Canada and has been released from its future expenditure commitment associated with ATandT Canada.
In the 2002 nancial year BT wrote down the carrying value of its investments in both Concert and ATandT Canada.
The exceptional impairment charge of 1153 million against these investments comprises Concert goodwill impairment of 260 million Concert tangible xed asset writedowns of 546 million and the write off of BTs 347 million interest in ATandT Canada included within amounts written off investments.
BT also recognised exceptional restructuring charges of 81 million for its share of redundancy and other unwind costs in Concert and BTs own unwind costs of 172 million have been charged against group operating costs in the 2002 nancial year.
In the 2002 nancial year exceptional impairment charges and related exit costs totalling 407 million principally relating to goodwill and asset impairments in Blu and SmarTone were recognised in the light of the rapidly changing global telecoms market conditions.
In the 2001 nancial year there was an exceptional write off of previously capitalised costs in certain nonUK operations related to deferred subscriber acquisition costs in the ventures.
In addition goodwill in Asian ventures became impaired and an exceptional impairment charge of 200 million was recognised.
Goodwill amortisation in the 2003 nancial year amounted to 2 million compared to 53 million in the 2002 nancial year and 185 million in the 2001 nancial year.
This reduction reects the disposals and the goodwill impairment charges referred to above.
Total operating prot loss Total operating prot from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items for the 2003 nancial year of 2971 million was 12% higher than in the 2002 nancial year which in turn was 9% lower than the previous nancial year.
The increase in the underlying total operating prot was due to the factors explained above.
Total operating prot for the 2003 nancial year was 2901 million including BTs share of the operating results of its ventures.
This compared to a loss for the 2002 nancial year of 1860 million and the 2001 nancial year of 370 million.
This improved performance reects the groups exit from certain loss making activities and the lower level of goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
Prot on sale of group undertakings and xed asset investments In the 2003 nancial year a number of remaining non core investments were sold.
The consideration for the disposals totalled 3028 million and the prot before taxation from disposals totalled 1691 million.
This was principally in relation to the disposal of our 26% interest in Cegetel a French telecommunications operator on 22 January 2003.
The total proceeds were 2603 million received in cash and the prot was 1509 million before the recognition of an exceptional interest charge of 293 million on closing out xed interest rate swaps following receipt of the sale proceeds.
Financial review
38 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 A major feature of the 2002 nancial year was the successful disposal of many noncore businesses.
The consideration for these disposals totalled 8.0 billion as shown in the table below.
Disposals
Year ended 31 March 2002
Prot loss before tax Japan Telecom and JPhone Communications 3709 2358 Yell 1960 1128 Airtel 1084 844 Maxis Communications Berhard 350 4 Rogers Wireless Communications 267 23 Clear Communications 119 126 epeopleserve 70 61 Other 173 31 Total 7973 4389 BT completed the sale to Vodafone of its 20% economic interest in Japan Telecom and its 20% interest in JPhone Communications on 1 June 2001 and subsequently its interest in JPhone group companies.
The total proceeds of sale were 3709 million received in cash and the prot was 2358 million.
The sale of Yell BTs classied advertising directory businesses in the UK and the USA was completed on 22 June 2001 for a consideration of 1960 million giving a prot of 1128 million.
In
May 2001 the UK Ofce of Fair Trading announced that the price controls over the UK Yellow Pages advertising rates were to be tightened signicantly.
The price we achieved for the sale of Yell which was announced on 26 May 2001 reected the impact of these controls on Yells prospects.
BT completed the sale of its 18% interest in Airtel a major Spanish wireless operator to Vodafone for 1084 million on 29 June 2001.
The prot of 844 million on the sale compares with BTs investment in the company of 223 million built up during the 1990s.
In November 2001 BT completed the sale of its 33% interest in Maxis Communications of Malaysia for 350 million which broadly equated with its carrying value.
We completed the sale of our interest in Rogers Wireless to ATandT for 267 million on 29 June 2001 and recognised a loss of 23 million.
BTs interest in BiB was diluted in July 2000 when BSkyB gained control and in May 2001 we agreed to exchange our residual interest in BiB for tranches of shares in BSkyB.
We received the rst tranche of 19 million BSkyB shares with an initial value of 128 million on 28 June 2001.
We were required to hold 50% of this tranche until May 2002 and recognised a prot on these shares when they were sold in May 2002.
We also received the second tranche of BSkyB shares with a similar value in November 2002 and they were sold at that time.
The prot of 120 million recognised in the 2002 nancial year relates to the BSkyB shares which we were permitted to sell on receipt.
In the 2003 nancial year a prot on disposal of BSkyB shares of 131 million was recognised.
In December 2001 BT completed the sale of its wholly owned subsidiary company Clear Communications Limited which operates a communications network in New Zealand for consideration of 119 million.
A loss of 126 million has been recognised on this sale of which 45 million relates to goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
In February 2002 we completed the sale of our 50% interest in epeopleserve a major human resource outsourcing activity to our jointventure partner Accenture for initial consideration of 50 million.
BT is entitled to receive additional payments from an earn out arrangement based on epeopleserves revenues from customers other than BT and Accenture over the ve years to 2007.
These additional earnout payments will total between 27 million and approximately 167 million.
A prot of 61 million on this transaction has been recognised in the 2002 nancial year based on the initial consideration and the discounted value of the additional minimum payments of 20 million.
In addition in the 2002 nancial year we recognised an impairment charge of 347 million in relation to the xed asset investment in ATandT Canada as noted above and 157 million in relation to Impsat.
In the 2001 nancial year we sold our 34% interest in sunrise communications of Switzerland to another joint venture partner in November 2000 for 464 million realising a prot of 454 million.
This was the main element in the total prot from disposals of group undertakings and xed asset investments of 619 million in that year.
Other prots during the year were principally derived from the disposal of certain of our aeronautical and maritime interests the sale of an interest in I. and the sale of minor equity investments.
Prot on sale of property xed assets In December 2001 as part of a wider property outsourcing arrangement BT completed the sale and leaseback of the majority of its UK properties to Telereal a joint venture partnership formed by Land Securities Trillium and The William Pears Group.
Around 6700 properties were transferred totalling some 5.5 million square metres.
The consideration received amounted to 2380 million.
BT has leased the properties back at a total annual rental commencing at 190 million and subject to a 3% annual increase.
In addition BT has transferred the economic risk on a large portion of its leased properties to Telereal in return for an annual rental commencing at approximately 90 million per annum.
This is broadly equivalent to the current level of rentals.
In February 2002 BT outsourced its property management unit to Telereal.
BT has the option to purchase the reversionary interest from Telereal i when BT vacates a property at open market value ii at the end of 30 years for the specialised estate buildings of an operational nature such as telephone exchanges at open market value
Financial review
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 39 or iii if BT wishes to terminate all arrangements with Telereal at any time in which circumstances BT would pay open market values for the property and compensation to Telereal covering funding costs and equity return.
BT can also reacquire the reversion of the general estate nonoperational buildings such as ofces and warehousing at the end of the headlease term of 999 years.
BT has the right to renew the lease of the specialised estate for successive periods which in total amount to 130 years.
After 130 years the freehold specialised properties revert to BT.
The leases include normal commercial restrictions and covenants.
BTs divestment of its property estate provides a exible approach to BTs ofce arrangements and building requirements.
BT expects to reduce its property needs over time and the transaction allows BT to vacate properties covering approximately 35% by rental value of the estate including existing lease ends over the contract term without penalty.
The prot on the sale of the properties amounted to 1019 million and was determined after allowing 129 million for BTs actual and future obligations under the terms of the legal agreement with Telereal and for the cost of advisors fees.
The obligations include expenditure of 34 million to be incurred on completing nearly nished new properties and remedial work to be undertaken on several properties.
Part of the proceeds of sale were used in novating xed interest rate obligations to support Telereals nancing.
An exceptional cost of 162 million was incurred in unwinding this position and was included in the interest charge for the year.
In summary the property transaction beneted the results for the 2002 nancial year by 857 million as shown below Prot on sale and leaseback of properties m Sales proceeds 2380 Net book value of assets disposed 1232 Estimated cost of BTs future obligations 129 Prot on properties sold 1019 Interest rate swap novation costs 162 Net prot on sale and leaseback of properties 857 The rentals payable under the lease have an adverse impact on other operating costs in future years which is initially around 190 million for the 2003 nancial year which is wholly offset by reduced depreciation and interest charges.
In advance of the property transaction being completed with Telereal BT also completed the sale of one of its major properties in London at a prot of 43 million.
Interest charge In the 2003 nancial year the total net interest charge including BTs share of its ventures charges at 1439 million was 183 million lower than in the preceding year which in turn was 308 million higher than in the 2001 nancial year.
Of the total net charge 1420 million arises in the BT group for the 2003 nancial year compared with 1540 million and 1044 million in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years respectively.
The reduction in the net interest charge in the 2003 nancial year reects the reduction in the level of net debt and is partly offset by the 293 million exceptional cost of terminating xed interest rate swaps as a consequence of the receipt of the Cegetel sale proceeds.
The substantially higher charge in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years is mainly due to the cost of funding the acquisition of mmO s thirdgeneration mobile licences principally in the UK and Germany and the cost of acquisitions in the 2001 and 2000 nancial years.
In the 2002 nancial year the groups net interest charge was further increased by the 162 million exceptional cost of novating interest swaps as a consequence of the property sale and leaseback transaction.
In the 2001 nancial year there was also a oneoff 194 million increase in BTs share of its ventures interest charges principally through the Japanese investments and Viag Interkom which was partly offset by an exceptional interest receipt of 25 million relating to the rates refund from the UK Government noted above.
Interest cover for continuing activities in the 2003 nancial year represented 2.6 times total operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items and compares with interest cover of 1.9 in the 2002 nancial year and 2.4 in the 2001 nancial year.
The improvement in cover in the 2003 nancial year is due to the reduction in the interest charge and improvement in the operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
We expect the net interest charge to decrease and interest cover to continue to improve in the 2004 nancial year following the continued reduction in net debt during the 2003 nancial year.
Prot loss before taxation The groups prot before taxation for the 2003 nancial year was 3157 million compared with a prot of 1461 million in the 2002 nancial year and a loss of 1031 million in the 2001 nancial year.
The prot in the 2003 nancial year included the exceptional prots from the sale of investments and businesses totalling 1691 million.
The prot in the 2002 nancial year included net exceptional gains of 753 million.
The loss in the 2001 nancial year was principally due to the 3200 million exceptional goodwill impairment charges.
The groups prot before taxation from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items for the 2003 nancial year was 1829 million compared with 1273 million in the 2002 nancial year and 1763 million in the 2001 nancial year.
The signicantly higher underlying prot in the 2003 nancial year was principally due to the exit from loss making businesses improved operating prots and lower interest charges explained above.
The prot before taxation from discontinued activities in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years amounted to 3954 million and a loss of 2968 million respectively.
The 2002 nancial year included
Financial review
40 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 gains on disposals from discontinued activities of 4368 million.
Taxation
The tax charge for the 2003 nancial year was 459 million and comprises 598 million on the prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items offset by tax relief of 139 million on certain exceptional charges.
The tax charge on the prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items is at an effective rate of 32.7%.
The tax charge for the 2002 nancial year was 443 million.
The effective rate was 41.5% of the prot from continuing activities before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
This was in excess of the standard UK tax rate of 30% due to the impact of loss making subsidiaries outside the UK for which tax relief is not immediately available and associate company taxation.
The tax charge for the 2001 nancial year was 712 million.
The effective rate was 21.8% of prot from continuing activities before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
This was lower than the standard UK corporation tax rate of 30% due to tax relief on losses surrendered by discontinued activities.
Earnings loss per share The basic earnings per share of 31.2 pence per share for the 2003 nancial year compares with 12.0 pence for the 2002 nancial year and loss of 25.7 pence for the 2001 nancial year.
These results include those of the groups discontinued activities up to the date of demerger or sale as well as signicant exceptional items and goodwill amortisation.
The following table illustrates the impact of these factors on the basic earnings per share for the past three nancial years pence pence pence Earnings per share from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 14.2 8.8 19.3 Exceptional items and goodwill amortisation from continuing activities 17.0 43.6 1.4 Earnings loss per share from continuing activities 31.2 34.8 20.7 Earnings loss per share from discontinued activities  46.8 46.4 Total earnings loss per share 31.2 12.0 25.7 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items from BTs continuing activities of 14.2 pence for the 2003 nancial year compares with an equivalent of 8.8 pence and 19.3 pence for the 2002 and 2001 nancial years respectively.
Diluted earnings per share are not materially different in all three years.
Dividends
The board recommends a nal dividend of 4.25 pence per share to shareholders amounting to 366 million.
This will be paid subject to shareholder approval on 8 September 2003 to shareholders on the register on 8 August 2003.
This takes the dividend for the full year to 6.5 pence per share compared to 2.0 pence in the 2002 nancial year.
This years dividend is covered 2.2 times by the prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
BT remains committed to a progressive dividend policy reecting growth in earnings per share and an improving balance sheet.
In view of our strong cash generation and success in reducing net debt in the 2004 nancial year we expect dividend cover to reduce further towards the 2 times target that we set out last year.
The nal and full dividend for the 2002 nancial year was 2.0 pence per share which absorbed 173 million.
As part of BTs debt reduction and restructuring plans the Board decided in May 2001 that there was to be no interim dividend for the 2002 nancial year nor any nal dividend in respect of the 2001 nancial year.
The dividend for the 2001 nancial year of 7.8 pence per share therefore solely comprised the interim dividend paid in February 2001 which absorbed 571 million.
Financing
Net cash inow from operating activities of 6023 million in the 2003 nancial year compares with 5257 million in the 2002 nancial year and 5887 million in the 2001 nancial year.
Net cash inow from continuing operating activities amounted to 6023 million 5023 million and 5410 million in the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years respectively.
Special and deciency contributions to the main pension fund described below of 329 million in the 2003 nancial year 600 million in the 2002 nancial year and 300 million in the 2001 nancial year were paid consequently reducing the net cash inow by these amounts.
The strong cash generation in the 2003 nancial year reects the improved operating performance of the group.
Tax paid in the 2003 nancial year totalled 434 million compared with 562 million in the 2002 nancial year and 669 million paid in the 2001 nancial year.
The lower tax paid in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years reects the lower current tax charge.
The net cash outow of 2381 million for capital expenditure and nancial investment in the 2003 nancial year included 2580 million of capital expenditure on plant and equipment offset by 200 million received on the sale of xed assets.
In the 2002 nancial year the net cash outow of 1354 million for capital expenditure and nancial investment included 4069 million of capital expenditure on plant and equipment offset by 2752 million received on the sale of xed assets.
These proceeds included 2380 million from the property sale and leaseback transaction completed in December 2001 described above.
Net cash outow of 8442 million for capital expenditure and nancial investment in the 2001 nancial year was principally for capital expenditure on plant and equipment of 4756 million and 4208 million invested in mmO thirdgeneration mobile licences.
Financial review
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 41 The net cash inow from disposals less acquisitions in the 2003 nancial year totalled 2842 million.
Cash proceeds from disposals amounted to 2919 million and principally comprised 2603 million from the sale of the investment in Cegetel.
In the 2002 nancial year the net cash inow from disposals less acquisitions totalled 5785 million.
Cash proceeds from disposals amounted to 6916 million and principally comprised 3075 million from the sale of the investment in Japan Telecom and JPhone 1838 million from the sale of the Yell directories business and 1084 million from the sale of our investment in Airtel.
The principal cash outow for acquisitions was the completion of the purchase of a minority interest in Esat Digifone in April 2001 for 869 million.
In the 2001 nancial year the group made signicant acquisitions and the net cash outow on these totalled 13754 million in that year.
This included 11438 million invested in Viag Interkom including acquisition of its licences 1233 million in Telfort 1176 million in completing the Esat Telecom Group acquisitions offset by 464 million received principally on the disposal of sunrise communications.
Equity dividends paid in the 2003 nancial year totalled 367 million whilst there were no equity dividends paid in the 2002 nancial year as explained above.
Equity dividends paid in the 2001 nancial year totalled 1432 million.
The resulting cash inow for the 2003 nancial year before management of liquid resources and nancing of 4183 million was mainly applied in repaying shortterm borrowings and investing in shortterm investments with total borrowings of 2535 million being repaid.
The cash inow for the 2002 nancial year of 7433 million was also applied in repaying shortterm borrowings and investing in shortterm investments.
In the 2001 nancial year the signicant cash outow of 19127 million was funded by issuing substantial amounts of longterm debt instruments and drawing on mediumterm notes programmes.
In December 2000 6909 million was raised through the issue of four series of US dollar notes totalling 10 billion with maturities between three and thirty years.
In February 2001 6038 million was received through the issue of six series of euro and sterling notes totalling e9.7 billion with maturities between two and sixteen years.
In April 2000 a twentyve year 250 million indexlinked Eurobond was issued.
The cash inow for the 2003 nancial year resulted in net debt reducing by a further 4128 million to 9573 million having reduced by 14241 million to 13701 million in the 2002 nancial year.
In the 2001 nancial year the cash outow resulted in net debt increasing to 27942 million at 31 March 2001.
In the 2003 nancial year the group repaid borrowings totalling 2535 million and no new long term debt was raised having repaid borrowings totalling 12006 million in the 2002 nancial year.
This was in part due to the success of the companys rights issue which closed in June 2001.
1976 million new shares were issued for a total consideration of 5876 million net of expenses.
As part of the demerger arrangements 440 million was received from mmO additionally mmO assumed 60 million of the groups external net debt.
In the 2001 nancial year the group borrowed 14552 million in longterm loans and repaid 225 million in longterm debt.
This was in accordance with our intention expressed at the end of the 2000 nancial year to renance a signicant part of our commercial paper borrowings with medium or longer term debt when market conditions allowed and also to raise further signicant nance in the 2001 nancial year to meet the nancing needs of the UK third generation mobile licence won in April 2000 increased capital expenditure and acquisitions of interests in subsidiaries joint ventures and associates and their additional funding requirements.
We expect to see a continued improvement in the nancial position of BT and are seeking to obtain a single A rating from all the major rating agencies.
Financial review
42 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Summarised cash ow statement Net cash inow from operating activities Continuing activities 6023 5023 5410 Discontinued activities  234 477 Total net cash inow from operating activities 6023 5257 5887 Dividends from associates and joint ventures 6 210 Net cash outow for returns on investments and servicing of nance 1506 1695 727 Taxation paid 434 562 669 Net cash outow for capital expenditure and nancial investment 2381 1354 8442 Net cash inow outow for acquisitions and disposals 2842 5785 13754 Equity dividends paid 367  1432 Cash inow outow before management of liquid resources and nancing 4183 7433 19127 Management of liquid resources 1729 1864 480 Net cash outow inow from nancing 2473 5479 19735 Decrease increase in cash in the year 19 90 128 Decrease increase in net debt in the year resulting from cash ows 4225 13930 18942 Treasury policy The group has a centralised treasury operation whose primary role is to manage liquidity funding investment and the groups nancial risk including risk from volatility in currency and interest rates and counterparty credit risk.
The treasury operation is not a prot centre and the objective is to manage risk at optimum cost.
The Board sets the treasury departments policy and its activities are subject to a set of controls commensurate with the magnitude of the borrowings and investments under its management.
Counterparty credit risk is closely monitored and managed within controls set by the Board.
Derivative instruments including forward foreign exchange contracts are entered into for hedging purposes only.
We have set out further details on this topic and on our capital resources and foreign currency exposure in note 36 to the nancial statements in compliance with FRS 13.
Capital resources During the 2003 and 2002 nancial years the group has reduced its level of borrowings so that its net debt was 9.6 billion at 31 March 2003 compared with 13.7 billion at 31 March 2002 and 27.9 billion at 31 March 2001.
The debt reduction in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years was achieved by the disposal of our stake in Cegetel a successful rights issue in June 2001 the mmO demerger sales of investments and the Yell business and the property sale and leaseback transaction.
The directors have a reasonable expectation that the group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and therefore they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the nancial statements.
There has been no signicant change in the nancial or trading position of the group since 31 March 2003.
At 31 March 2003 the group had cash and short term investments of 6431 million.
At that date 2548 million of debt falls due for repayment in the 2004 nancial year.
The group had unused shortterm bank facilities amounting to approximately 575 million at 31 March 2003.
At 31 March 2002 the group had cash and short term investments of 4739 million.
In addition the group had unused committed shortterm bank facilities amounting to approximately 2100 million at 31 March 2002 in support of a commercial paper programme or other borrowings.
The group also had 461 million of uncommitted shortterm bank facilities.
Foreign currency and interest rate exposure Most of the groups current turnover is invoiced in pounds sterling and most of its operations and costs arise within the UK.
The groups foreign currency borrowings which totalled 12.3 billion at 31 March 2003 are used to nance its operations.
These borrowings have been predominantly swapped into sterling.
Cross currency swaps and forward foreign exchange contracts have been entered into to reduce the foreign currency exposure on the groups operations and the groups net assets.
The group also enters into forward foreign exchange contracts to hedge investment interest expense and purchase and sale commitments.
The commitments hedged are principally US dollar and euro denominated.
As a result of these policies the groups exposure to foreign currency arises mainly on the residual currency exposure on its nonUK investments in its subsidiaries and ventures and on any imbalances between the value of outgoing and incoming international calls.
To date these imbalances have not been material.
As a result the groups prot has not been materially affected by movements in exchange rates in the three years under review.
The groups exposure to changes in currency movements decreased signicantly following the demerger of the mmO business and its European operations in November 2001.
A 10% strengthening in sterling against major currencies would cause the groups net assets at 31 March 2003 to fall by less than 100 million with insignicant effect on the groups prot.
This compares with a fall of less than 150 million and 1200 million in the years ended 31 March 2002 and 2001 respectively.
Foreign exchange contracts are entered into as a hedge of sales and purchases accordingly a change in the fair value of the hedge is offset by a corresponding change in the value of the underlying sale or purchase.
The majority of the groups longterm borrowings have been and are subject to xed interest rates.
The group has entered into interest rate swap agreements with commercial banks and other institutions to vary the amounts and period for which interest rates are xed.
At 31 March 2003 the group had outstanding interest rate swap agreements with notional principal amounts totalling 5170 million compared to 7870 million at 31 March 2002.
The longterm debt instruments which BT issued in December 2000 and February 2001 both contained covenants that if the BT group credit rating were downgraded below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of Standard and Poors SandP additional interest would accrue from the next interest coupon period at the rate of 0.25 percentage points for each ratings category adjustment by each ratings agency.
In May 2001 Moodys downgraded BTs credit rating to Baa1 which increased BTs annual interest charge by approximately 32 million.
BTs credit rating from SandP is A minus.
Based upon the total amount of debt of 12 billion outstanding on these instruments at 31 March 2003 BTs annual interest charge would increase by approximately 60 million if BTs credit rating were to be downgraded by one credit rating category by both agencies below a longterm debt rating of Baa1A minus.
If BTs credit rating with Moodys was to be upgraded by one credit rating category the annual interest charge would be reduced by approximately 30 million.
Based upon the composition of net debt at 31 March 2003 a one percentage point increase in interest rates would increase the groups annual net interest expense by less than 10 million.
This
Financial review
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 43 compares with an increase of less than 20 million and less than 90 million in the years ended 31 March 2002 and 2001 respectively.
The groups exposure to interest rate uctuations has reduced in line with the decrease in net debt and the increased percentage of the groups net debt being at xed rates.
Capital expenditure Capital expenditure on plant equipment and property excluding the movement on capital accruals totalled 2445 million in the 2003 nancial year compared with 3908 million and 4986 million in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years respectively.
Of the total capital expenditure 3100 million and 3857 million were in relation to the groups continuing activities in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years respectively.
The reduction in the level of capital expenditure reects continued management focus and tight control.
Work continues on enhancing the intelligence of the network to enable customers to benet from advanced services and improving the networks capacity to carry highspeed data.
Capital expenditure is expected to rise in the 2004 nancial year as the group invests in its 21st century network programme.
Capital expenditure in relation to the groups discontinued activities amounted to 808 million and 1129 million in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years respectively.
Prior to the demerger mmO continued improving the quality and capacity of its digital GSM network.
In April 2000 we purchased one of the ve 3G licences in the UK Governments auction for 4.03 billion which we paid in May 2000.
A third generation mobile licence in the Netherlands was awarded to Telfort in July 2000 for 267 million.
Of the capital expenditure 138 million was in Europe outside the UK in the 2003 nancial year and 634 million was spent there in the 2002 nancial year.
Contracts placed for ongoing capital expenditure totalled 616 million at 31 March 2003.
We plan to develop the 21st century network using stringent capital return criteria and a rigorous approach to any investment in the narrowband network.
The 21st century network aims to deliver long term structural cost reduction as we progressively migrate onto a simpler lower cost network architecture.
BT expects that future capital expenditure will be funded from net cash inows from operating activities and if required by external nancing.
Acquisitions
The total amount invested in the 2003 nancial year including further funding of existing ventures was 77 million signicantly lower than the 1131 million invested in the 2002 nancial year.
In the 2002 nancial year only one signicant acquisition was made being the purchase in April 2001 of the 49.5% interest in Esat Digifone that we did not already own from Telenor for 869 million under an agreement made in early 2000.
During the 2001 nancial year BT completed a number of acquisitions of businesses mainly located outside the UK.
The total amount invested including further funding of existing ventures was 14501 million.
In April 2000 we took an equity interest jointly with Japan Telecom in a number of regional Japanese mobile phone companies JPhone Communications.
Instead of investing directly in JPhone Communications we guaranteed bank loans to that group totalling 782 million at 31 March 2001 that no longer apply following the disposal.
As noted above we have now sold our interests to Vodafone for 3.7 billion.
In June 2000 we acquired for 1207 million our partners 50% interest in Telfort the communications joint venture which we established in the Netherlands in 1997.
The wireless business of Telfort was demerged with mmO in November 2001.
In the 2002 nancial year the remaining goodwill was written off.
In the nal quarter of the 2001 nancial year we acquired the 55% interest in Viag Interkom that we did not already own.
In January 2001 we acquired a 10% interest in Viag Interkom including its share of the German third generation licence from Telenor for 1611 million and in February 2001 we acquired the remaining 45% interest from E.
N for 7148 million including its share of the cost of the licence.
Goodwill of 4992 million arose on these transactions.
In the light of falling equity valuations for wireless companies in the 2001 nancial year we carried out impairment reviews of the carrying values of Viag Interkom and other major wireless interests at that time.
As discussed above we recognised a 3000 million goodwill impairment in Viag Interkom of which 200 million related to the xed network business remaining in the BT Group after the mmO demerger.
In the 2002 nancial year the remaining goodwill was written off.
Demerger and capital reduction The demerger of mmO the groups former mobile phone business was completed in November 2001.
The demerger scheme of arrangement and associated reduction in capital were approved by shareholders in October 2001 and the High Court in November 2001.
The demerger of mmO created two new listed companies and dealings in BT Group and mmO shares commenced on 19 November 2001.
BT shareholders on record on 16 November 2001 received one BT Group plc share and one mmO plc share for each existing British Telecommunications plc share held.
Based on the rst days dealings on the London Stock Exchange BT Group represented approximately 78% of the equity value of the former BT group and mmO represented approximately 22%.
On the demerger net assets of 19490 million attributable to mmO were distributed to shareholders in the form of a demerger distribution.
Group.
The reduction of capital had the effect of increasing distributable reserves in BT Group plc by 9537 million.
Financial review
44 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Balance sheet Net assets at 31 March 2003 amounted to 2642 million compared to a decit of 358 million at 31 March 2002 with the increase principally due to the retained prots of 2126 million.
BT Group plc the parent company has maintained reserves at 9537 million at both 31 March 2003 and 31 March 2002.
BTs xed assets totalled 16661 million at 31 March 2003 of which 15888 million were tangible assets principally forming the UK xed network.
At
31 March 2002 xed assets were 17551 million and tangible assets were 16078 million.
The reduction in xed assets is principally due to the groups exit from non core investments as a result of which investments have reduced by 666 million to 555 million at 31 March 2003.
Return on capital employed The return before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items on the average capital employed total assets excluding goodwill less current liabilities excluding corporate taxes and dividends payable and provisions other than those for deferred taxation was 15.7% for the 2003 nancial year.
In the 2002 nancial year the group made a return from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 15.7% on the average capital employed in its business excluding mmO and goodwill.
In the 2001 nancial year the group made a return on all activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 14.9%.
Pensions
The most recently completed triennial actuarial valuation of the BT Pension Scheme BTPS BTs main pension fund performed by the schemes independent actuary for the trustees of the scheme was carried out as at 31 December 2002.
This valuation showed the fund to be in decit to an amount of 2.1 billion.
Assets of the fund of 22.8 billion at that date covered 92% of the funds liabilities.
The previous valuation was carried out as at 31 December 1999.
The result of this valuation was that the fund was in decit by 1.0 billion.
Assets of the fund of 29.7 billion at that date covered 97% of the funds liabilities.
The deterioration in the funding position was principally the result of lower equity returns over the last three years and improved life expectancy of scheme members and is in spite of the additional deciency funding payments totalling 600 million that have been paid over the last three years.
The valuation under the prescribed Minimum Funding Requirement approach showed the assets to cover 101% of the liabilities at 31 December 2002.
The groups ordinary contribution rate will increase to 12.2% of employees pensionable pay with effect from April 2003.
The contribution rate was 11.6% for the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years.
In addition the company will make annual deciency contributions to the scheme of 232 million with effect for the 2004 nancial year.
This compares to the 200 million annual deciency payments made in the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years.
The group is also required to pay special contributions to cover costs arising from enhanced pension benets provided to leavers.
The special contributions paid in the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years amounted to 129 million 400 million and 100 million respectively in respect of early leavers.
The payment expected to be made in December 2003 is 100 million in relation to leavers in the calendar year ended 31 December 2002.
The group continues to account for pension costs in accordance with UK Statement of Standard Accounting Practice No.
24 SSAP 24.
The groups total annual pension charges including discontinued activities for the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years were 322 million 382 million and 326 million respectively.
This includes 314 million 373 million and 315 million respectively in relation to the BTPS.
The reduction in the pension charge in the 2003 nancial year reects the lower membership of the BTPS and the interest credit on the balance sheet prepayment.
The increase in the pension charge in the 2002 nancial year was due principally to the 46 million charge for enhanced pension benets provided to leavers.
Under the UK accounting standard SSAP 24 and BTs accounting policy if the costs of providing incremental pension benets for leavers are less than the total accounting surplus based on the latest actuarial valuation of the scheme and the amount of the provision for pension liabilities on the balance sheet the costs are not charged to the prot and loss account.
In the 2001 nancial year the cost of the incremental benets was charged against the accounting surplus and was not charged against the prot in the period in which people agreed to leave.
In the 2003 and 2002 nancial years the total cost of the incremental pension benets exceeded the total accounting surplus and accordingly the excess was charged to the prot and loss account.
This amounted to 60 million and 46 million in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
The pension charge for the 2004 nancial year will be based upon the SSAP 24 valuation as at 31 March 2003.
This valuation is based on the December 2002 funding valuation rolled forward to 31 March 2003 and uses a slightly higher investment return assumption than was used for the trustees funding valuation a lower ination rate and lower salary increase assumptions.
The resulting SSAP 24 decit amounts to 1.4 billion.
The regular pension cost will be charged at 11.3% of pensionable salaries compared to the 11.6% rate applied in the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years.
In addition the pension charge will include the amortisation of the combined pension fund position of 1.4 billion and pension prepayment of 630 million held on the BT group balance sheet over the average remaining service lives of members which amounts to 13 years and enhanced pension benets provided to leavers.
The number of retired members and other current beneciaries in the pension fund has been increasing in recent years and at 31 December 2002 was approximately 94% higher than the number of active
Financial review
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 45 members.
Consequently BTs future pension costs and contributions will depend on the investment returns of the pension fund and could uctuate in the medium term.
We changed the arrangements for people leaving BT in advance of the normal retirement age.
Under our NewStart programme launched during the fourth quarter of the 2001 nancial year BT employees will be expected to leave with a leaving payment in place of a redundancy payment and incremental pension benets have been scaled down.
This should reduce the level of early leaver costs which have been signicant in recent years.
The BTPS was closed to new entrants on 31 March 2001 and we launched a new dened contribution pension scheme for people joining BT after that date which is to provide benets based on the employees and the employing companys contributions.
This change is in line with the practice increasingly adopted by major UK groups and is designed to be more exible for employees and enable the group to determine its pension costs more precisely than is the case for dened benet schemes.
The nancial impact of this change was not signicant in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years and is not expected to be signicant in the next few years but it should reduce pension costs in the longer term.
Regulation and prices BT has been operating under a revised retail price control from 1 August 2002 under which a cap of RPI minus RPI therefore price cannot increase applies to the services used by the lowest 80% of BTs residential customers by bill size.
This retail price control is estimated to have covered services representing about 13% of the groups turnover from continuing activities for the 2003 nancial year.
The requirement is to keep prices unchanged for the price control year to 31 July 2003.
Regulation allows any unused allowance or excess deduction remaining at the end of the price control year 31 July to be carried forward.
The equivalent reduction in the previous control year was 2.50% against the required reduction of 2.45%.
Most of BTs interconnect network charges to other UK operators are based on longrun incremental costs.
Until 30 September 2001 there were annual reductions in these charges based on a RPI minus 8 price cap.
Since that date the broad structure of the interconnect network services has been retained but the X within the RPI minus X pricecap formula now varies between 7.5 and 13 this new price control runs until 2005.
The regulatory environment in the UK has had and is expected to continue to have a signicant adverse impact on the groups turnover and operating prot.
As the group has extended its activities to other countries BT is required to comply with the regulatory regimes in those countries.
Competition and the UK economy BT has a signicant market share in its main UK markets for xed network calls and provision of exchange lines although competition has eroded BTs market share signicantly in key market sectors in particular areas of the UK and for certain products and services.
This trend shows signs of slowing in the residential market and we estimate that BT had 73% of the market for residential xed voice calls in the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years.
Additionally we estimate that BT had 45% of the market for business xed voice calls in the 2003 nancial year compared with 49% and 53% in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years respectively.
We also estimate that BT supplied 81% of the exchange lines in the UK at 31 March 2003 compared with 83% and 84% at 31 March 2002 and 2001 respectively.
The growth in cable operators networks in the UK has historically had an adverse effect on BTs share of the residential market as a result of increasing competition from these cable operators.
However in the 2003 nancial year BT has grown its residential customer base by 100000.
The cable operators have been concentrating on nancial restructuring and increasing penetration in current markets.
Current and future wholesale line rental arrangements will allow BTs xed line customers to move PSTN lines to other operators which are expected to be the source of more competition in future.
The group has seen some diversion of demand from its xed network as a result of the growth in mobile voice calls and other licensed operators activities.
This diversion may intensify now that BTs xed line customers are able to preselect their carrier.
Additionally BTs Licence was amended in April 2000 to require BT to provide other operators with use of the lines connecting BTs local exchanges to its customers and allow operators to install equipment in BTs exchanges local loop unbundling.
This amendment took effect as a result of an EU Regulation which came into force on 1 January 2001.
For its operations as a whole BT expects the competitive pressure to persist and it will continue to defend its market share vigorously and fairly.
The strength of the UK economy is an important determinant of BTs business volumes and the gross domestic product grew by 2.3% in the 2003 nancial year compared with 1.2% and 2.6% in the 2002 and 2001 nancial years respectively.
Environment
When removing old analogue exchange equipment from buildings BT recycles the metal content and takes special care to properly dispose of any hazardous materials.
Although BT receives proceeds from the sale of recovered materials this is more than offset by the cost of dealing with hazardous materials contracting and planning their removal and preparing the released site for further development.
BT believes that the total cost of dealing with these hazardous materials will not be signicant.
Geographical information In the 2003 nancial year approximately 94% of the groups turnover was generated by operations in the UK compared with 89% in the 2002 and 91% in the
Financial review
46 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 2001 nancial years.
Of its continuing activities approximately 92% of the groups turnover was generated by operations in the UK in the 2002 nancial year compared with 95% in the 2001 nancial year.
BTs operating prots have been derived from its UK operations with losses being incurred outside the UK in each of the last three nancial years.
Regulatory nancial information BT is required under its main licence to publish disaggregated nancial information for various activities of the group which have been used as the basis of charges paid by other telecommunication operators in the UK for the use of BTs network.
The activities presented separately in the regulatory nancial statements do not necessarily correspond with any businesses separately managed funded or operated within the group.
The results set out in regulatory nancial statements for the 2002 and 2001 nancial years showed that the groups operating prot is derived predominantly from xednetwork calls.
Critical accounting policies The groups principal accounting policies are set out on pages 76 to 78 of the consolidated nancial statements and conform with UK Generally Accepted Accounting Principles UK GAAP.
In accordance with the requirements of Financial Reporting Standard No.
18 these policies and applicable estimation techniques have been reviewed by the directors who have conrmed them to be the most appropriate for the preparation of the 2003 nancial statements.
We in common with virtually all other companies need to use estimates in the preparation of our nancial statements.
The most sensitive estimates affecting our nancial statements are in the areas of assessing the level of interconnect income with and payments to other telecommunications operators providing for doubtful debts establishing xed asset lives for depreciation purposes making appropriate longterm assumptions in calculating pension liabilities and costs making appropriate mediumterm assumptions on asset impairment reviews and calculating current tax liabilities on our prots.
We are required to interconnect our networks with other telecommunications operators.
In certain instances we rely on other operators to measure the trafc ows interconnecting with our networks.
We use estimates in these cases to determine the amount of income receivable from or payments we need to make to these other operators.
The prices at which these services are charged are often regulated and are subject to retrospective adjustment.
We use estimates in assessing the likely effect of these adjustments.
We provide services to over 20 million individuals and businesses mainly on credit terms.
We know that certain debts due to us will not be paid through the default of a small number of our customers.
We use estimates based on our historical experience in determining the level of debts that we believe will not be collected.
These estimates include such factors as the current state of the UK economy and particular industry issues.
The plant and equipment used in our networks is longlived with cables and switching equipment operating for over ten years and underground ducts being used for decades.
The annual depreciation charge is sensitive to the estimated service lives we allocate to each type of asset.
We regularly review these asset lives and change them when necessary to reect current thinking on their remaining lives in light of technological change prospective economic utilisation and physical condition of the assets concerned.
As part of the property rationalisation programme we have identied a number of properties that are surplus to requirements.
Although efforts are being made to sublet this space it is recognised by management that this may not be possible immediately in the current economic environment.
Estimates have been made of the cost of vacant possession and any shortfall arising from the sub lease rental income being lower than the lease costs being borne by BT.
We have a commitment mainly through the BT Pension Scheme to pay pension benets to approximately 366000 people over more than 60 years.
The cost of these benets and the present value of our pension liabilities depend on such factors as the life expectancy of the members the salary progression of our current employees the return that the pension fund assets will generate in the time before they are used to fund the pension payments and the discount rate at which the future pension payments are discounted.
We use estimates for all these factors in determining the pension costs and liabilities incorporated in our nancial statements.
In the 2002 and 2001 nancial years we made charges for the impairment of the carrying value of goodwill investments and tangible xed assets in our balance sheet.
The amount of the charges are in most cases based on the discounted present value of the future cash ows that we expected to be derived from these assets.
We use estimates in determining these future cash ows and the discount rate.
The actual tax we pay on our prots is determined according to complex tax laws and regulations.
Where the effect of these laws and regulations is unclear we use estimates in determining the liability for the tax to be paid on our past prots which we recognise in our nancial statements.
New UK accounting standards Under a new UK accounting standard FRS 17 Retirement benets the method of accounting for dened benet pensions will be substantially changed.
The Accounting Standards Board has delayed the full adoption of this new standard until our 2006 nancial year.
The pension cost charged to the prot and loss account would have been lower under FRS 17 than SSAP 24 in the 2003 nancial year.
Net nancing costs will be volatile reecting movements in the value of the scheme assets and interest rates.
Pension fund actuarial gains and losses including investment returns varying from the assumed returns will be recorded in full in the statement of total recognised gains and
Financial review
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 47 losses annually.
Pension fund decits calculated in accordance with prescribed rules in the standard will be shown on the balance sheet as will any surpluses to the extent we expect to obtain value from them in the foreseeable future.
In accordance with the transitional rules of the standard the pension fund decit and prot and loss charge calculated under FRS 17 is disclosed in note 31.
It should be noted that the decit is largely dependent on the strength of equity markets at the balance sheet date and is expected to be volatile.
Economic and Monetary Union The euro is now established as a single currency spanning the 12 EU member countries participating in Economic and Monetary Union EMU.
Most of the groups business in Europe is conducted in the UK which is not one of the 12 participants.
Government policy on UK membership was set out by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in his statement to the House of Commons in October 1997 and restated by the Prime Minister in February 1999.
The Chancellor has set ve economic tests to dene whether or not a clear and unambiguous case can be made in support of the UK joining the EMU.
Based on the outcome of the economic assessment the Government will take a decision on whether the ve tests have been met and an announcement on whether the UK should join will be made in the House of Commons on 9 June 2003.
If the Government decides to recommend UK entry it will be put to a vote in Parliament and then to a referendum.
In the interim BT has maintained a steering group with representatives from across each of the lines of business and supporting group functions to review the impact of the euro.
A project team acts as coordination point to ensure consistency of approach across the group and that plans are in place to meet agreed business strategy for the possibility of euro changeover in the UK.
US GAAP The groups net income loss and earnings loss per share for the three nancial years ended 31 March 2003 and shareholders equity at 31 March 2003 and 2002 under US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles US GAAP are shown further in the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles Section see Consolidated nancial statements.
Differences between UK GAAP and US GAAP include results of the differing accounting treatment of leasing transactions pension costs redundancy costs intangible assets goodwill deferred taxation capitalisation of interest nancial instruments contributing assets to joint ventures stock compensation and dividends.
Cash ow information under the US GAAP presentation is also shown further in this document.
In July 2001 the Financial Accounting Standards Board FASB issued SFAS No.
143 Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations which is applicable to nancial years commencing after 15 June 2002.
SFAS
No.
143 requires that the fair value of a liability for an asset retirement obligation be recognised in the period in which it is incurred if it is possible to make a reasonable estimate of the fair value.
The associated asset retirement costs are required to be capitalised as part of the carrying value of the long lived asset.
The adoption of SFAS No.
143 is not expected to have a material impact on the consolidated nancial statements.
In July 2002 the FASB issued SFAS No.
Accounting for Costs Associated with Exit or Disposal Activities which is applicable to disposals initialised after 31 December 2002.
The Statement requires costs associated with exit or disposal activities to be recognised when the costs are incurred rather than at the date of the commitment to an exit or disposal plan.
Accordingly we have reected the impact of SFAS No.
146 in the 2003 nancial year.
SFAS No. the future impact of SFAS No.
146 on any such activities at this time.
In December 2002 the FASB issued SFAS No.
148 Accounting for Stock Based Compensation Transition and Disclosure  an amendment of FASB Statement No.
123 which is applicable to nancial years beginning after 15 December 2002.
The
Statement permits two additional transition methods for an entity voluntarily adopting fair value based accounting for stock based compensation.
It also amends the disclosure requirements to require prominent disclosure about the effects on reported net income of an entitys accounting policy decisions with respect to stock based employee compensation.
This
Statement does not have a signicant impact on the consolidated nancial statements as SFAS No. continues to be satised for disclosure purposes only.
In April 2003 the FASB issued SFAS No.
Amendment of Statement 133 on Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities.
This Statement amends and claries nancial accounting and reporting for derivative instruments including certain derivative instruments embedded in other contracts collectively referred to as derivatives and for hedging activities under SFAS No.
133 Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities.
BT is currently evaluating the impact of this change.
In November 2002 the FASB issued FASB Interpretation No.
FIN 45 Guarantors Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others.
FIN 45 requires that certain guarantees must be recognised at fair value.
FIN 45 also requires disclosure of detailed information about each guarantee or group of guarantees.
The disclosure requirements are effective for nancial statements ending after 15 December 2002.
The recognition and measurement provisions of FIN 45 are applicable to guarantees issued or modied after 31 December 2002.
FIN 45 could have an impact on the future results of BT depending on guarantees issued however at this time the adoption of this statement did not have a material impact on BTs consolidated nancial statements.
In January 2003 the FASB issued FIN 46 Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities  an
Financial review
48 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Interpretation of Accounting Research Bulletin ARB
FIN 46 requires the primary beneciary to consolidate a variable interest entity VIE if it has a variable interest that will absorb a majority of the entitys expected losses if they occur receive a majority of the entitys expected residual returns if they occur or both.
FIN 46 applies immediately to VIEs created after 31 January 2003 and to VIEs in which the entity obtains an interest after that date.
This statement is not expected to have a material impact on BTs consolidated nancial statements.
In November 2002 the Emerging Issues Task Force EITF reached a consensus on EITF 0021 Revenue Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables.
The consensus addresses how to account for arrangements that may involve multiple revenue generating activities for example the delivery or performance of multiple products services andor rights to use assets.
In applying this guidance separate contracts with the same party entered into at or near the same time will be presumed to be a package and the consideration will be measured and allocated to the separate units based on their relative fair values.
This consensus guidance will be applicable to agreements entered into after 15 June 2003.
BT is currently evaluating the impact of this new pronouncement.
In January 2003 the EITF reached a consensus on EITF 0218 Accounting for Subsequent Investments in an Investee after Suspension of Equity Method Loss
This consensus states that if the additional investment in whole or in part represents the funding of prior losses the investor should recognise previously suspended losses.
When appropriate to recognise prior losses the amount recognised would be limited to the amount of the additional investment determined to represent the funding of prior losses.
The consensus is effective for additional investments made after 5 February 2003.
This consensus is not expected to have a material impact on BTs consolidated nancial statements.
Financial review
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 49 Board of directors and Operating Committee Board of directors Sir Christopher Bland Chairman def Sir Christopher Bland was appointed to the Board as Chairman on 1 May 2001.
He chairs the Nominating and Community Support committees.
He was chairman of the BBC Board of Governors from 1 April 1996 until 30 September 2001.
From
1972 to 1979 Sir Christopher was deputy chairman of the Independent Broadcasting Authority and chairman of its Complaints Review Board.
In 1982 he became a nonexecutive director of LWT Holdings and was chairman from 1983 to 1994 when LWT was acquired by Granada Group.
From December 1994 to May 2000 he was chairman of NFC.
From 1977 to 1985 he was chairman of Sir Joseph Causton and Sons.
Sir Christopher who was chairman of the Hammersmith and Queen Charlottes Hospitals Special Health Authority from 1982 to 1994 and of Hammersmith Hospitals NHS Trust from 1994 to February 1997 was knighted for his work in the NHS in 1993.
He was chairman of the Private Finance Panel from 1995 to 1996 and a member of the Prime Ministers Advisory Panel on the Citizens Charter.
He is senior adviser at Warburg Pincus.
Aged 64.
Executive directors Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002 and became Chief Executive on 1 February 2002.
He chairs the Operating Committee.
Ben Verwaayen was formerly vice chairman of the management board of Lucent Technologies in the USA from October 1999.
He joined Lucent in September 1997 as executive vice president international and became chief operating ofcer the following month.
Prior to joining Lucent Ben Verwaayen worked for KPN in the Netherlands for nine years as president and managing director of its telecoms subsidiary PTT Telecom.
From 1975 to 1988 he worked for ITT in Europe.
He is a member of the advisory council of ING.
A Dutch national he is aged 51.
Ian Livingston Group Finance Director af Ian Livingston was appointed Group Finance Director in April 2002.
He was formerly group nance director of Dixons Group from 1997.
He joined Dixons in 1991 after working for 3i Group and Bank of America
His experience at Dixons spanned a number of operational and nancial roles both in the UK and overseas.
He was also a director of Freeserve from its inception.
He is a Chartered
He becomes a nonexecutive director of Hilton Group from 1 June 2003.
Aged 38.
Pierre Danon Chief Executive BT Retail Pierre Danon was appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
He joined BT as Chief Executive of BT Retail in October 2000 and was a member of the former Executive Committee.
From 1981 to 2000 he worked for Rank Xerox which became Xerox in 1997 latterly as president of Xerox Europe.
He was a senior vice president of Xerox Corporation since 1997.
He is a nonexecutive director of Hays plc.
A French national he is aged 47.
Andy Green Chief Executive BT Global Services Andy Green was appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
He was appointed as Chief Executive of BT Global Services in October 2001.
Since joining BT in 1986 he has held a number of positions including Chief Executive of BT Openworld and Group Director of Strategy and Development.
Andy Green was a member of the former Executive Committee from February 1995.
Aged 47.
Dr Paul Reynolds Chief Executive BT Wholesale Paul Reynolds was appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
In April 2000 he was appointed to the former Executive Committee as Chief Executive of BT Wholesale.
He joined BT from the companys predecessor corporation which he joined in 1983 and has held a number of roles including Director of the Ofce of the Chairman Director of Multimedia and from 1999 Managing Director of Networks and Information Services.
Aged 46.
NonExecutive directors Clayton Brendish be Clayton Brendish was appointed to the Board on 1 September 2002.
He is nonexecutive chairman of Beacon Investment Fund and a nonexecutive director of Elexon and Herald Investment Trust.
He is also a trustee of Economist Newspapers and the Foundation for Liver Research and a council member of City University of London.
Prior to his retirement in May 2001 Clayton Brendish was executive Deputy Chairman of CMG having joined the Board when it acquired Admiral.
Clayton Brendish was cofounder and executive chairman of Admiral incorporated in 1979.
He also acted as an advisor to the Government on the efciency of the Civil Service working as an advisor to the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and the Ofce of Public Services on their respective Next Steps Agencies.
Aged 56.
Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman bcd Sir Anthony Greener was appointed to the Board on 1 October 2000.
He was appointed Joint Deputy Chairman and chairman of the Audit Committee on 1 January 2001.
He became Deputy Chairman and chairman of the Remuneration Committee on 18 July 2001.
Sir Anthony is chairman of University for Industry learndirect and the Qualications and Curriculum Authority and a nonexecutive director of Robert Mondavi Corporation.
He was formerly chairman of
Prior to the merger of Guinness and Grand Metropolitan he was chairman and chief executive of Guinness having been chief executive of Guinness since 1992.
Aged 62.
Louis R Hughes bc Louis Hughes joined the Board on 1 January 2000.
He is nonexecutive chairman of Maxager Technology Inc.
USA.
He was formerly president and chief operating 50 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Board of directors and Operating Committee ofcer of Lockheed Martin Corporation and previously executive vice president of General Motors.
Louis Hughes is a nonexecutive director of AB Electrolux Sweden and Sulzer AG and ABB Limited both Switzerland.
From 1993 to 2000 he was a member of the supervisory board of Deutsche Bank.
AUS national he is aged 54.
The Rt Hon Baroness Jay of Paddington PC ce Baroness Margaret Jay was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
She was formerly Lord Privy Seal Leader of the House of Lords and Minister for Women.
Previously she was Minister of State at the Department of Health.
Baroness Jay is a nonexecutive director of Independent News and Media UK and has held non executive positions with Scottish Power Carlton Television and LBC.
Currently chairman of the Overseas Development Institute she has been a member of the Central Research and Development Committee for the NHS was a founding director of the National AIDS trust a governor of South Bank University and a member of the Meteorological Ofce Council.
Aged 63.
John Nelson bdf John Nelson was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
A Chartered Accountant he retired as chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston Europe CSFB on 31 January 2002.
He was a member of the executive board and chairman of the European executive committee of CSFB.
Prior to joining CSFB in January 1999 John Nelson spent 13 years with Lazard Brothers.
He was appointed vice chairman of Lazard Brothers in 1990.
He was also a chairman of Lazard S. director of Lazard Freres New York.
He was a nonexecutive director of Woolwich until it was taken over by Barclays Bank in 2000.
In January 2002 he was appointed deputy chairman of Kingsher.
Aged 55.
Carl G Symon bc Carl Symon was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
He is managing director global business development DiamondCluster International Inc.
USA.
He retired from IBM in May 2001 after a 32year career during which he held senior executive positions in the USA Canada Latin America Asia and Europe including chairman and chief executive ofcer of IBM UK.
Carl Symon is chairman of a number of private companies a nonexecutive director of RollsRoyce and vicechairman of Cross Atlantic Capital Partners.
AUS national he is aged 57.
Maarten van den Bergh bcdf Maarten van den Bergh was appointed to the Board on 1 September 2000.
He chairs the Pension Scheme Performance Review Group.
TSB Group and a nonexecutive director of Royal Dutch Petroleum Company and British Airways.
Prior to his retirement in July 2000 Maarten van den Bergh was president of the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company and vice chairman of its committee of managing directors from July 1998 having been appointed a managing director of the Royal Dutch Shell Group of companies in July 1992.
A Dutch national he is aged 61.
Key to membership of principal Board committees
Audit
Remuneration
Nominating
Community Support Pension Scheme Performance Review Group All the nonexecutive directors are considered independent of the management of the company.
Operating Committee Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ian Livingston Group Finance Director Pierre Danon Chief Executive BT Retail Andy Green Chief Executive BT Global Services Dr Paul Reynolds Chief Executive BT Wholesale See page 50 for biographical details.
Alison Ritchie Chief Broadband Ofcer Alison Ritchie joined BT from the companys predecessor corporation which she joined in 1981.
She was appointed a member of the former Executive Committee in December 2000.
Alison Ritchie was appointed Chief Broadband Ofcer in November 2002 and she directs BTs policy on broadband developments across the whole of BT ensuring a coordinated approach to the delivery of high quality broadband services to residential and business customers.
Alison Ritchie was formerly Chief Executive BT Openworld.
Before joining BT Openworld she was BTs Restructuring Project Director coordinating the project teams working on the nancial organisational and managerial restructuring of BT.
She is a member of the board of the British Quality Foundation.
Aged 42.
Company Secretary Larry Stone Larry Stone formerly Corporate Governance Director from 1 June 2000 was appointed Company Secretary on 27 March 2002.
He previously held external relations and regulatory roles with BT in Tokyo and Brussels and with BT Cellnet now O
He is a trustee of the BT Pension Scheme and a member of the executive committee of the British Quality Foundation.
Aged 45.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 51 Report of the directors The directors submit their report and the audited nancial statements of the company BT Group plc and the group which includes its subsidiary undertakings for the 2003 nancial year.
Introduction
BT Group plc is the listed holding company for the BT group of companies and was formed when the mmO business comprising what had been British Telecommunications plcs mobile activities in the UK the Netherlands Germany and the Republic of Ireland was demerged on 19 November 2001.
The Business review on pages 8 to 23 Our commitment to society on pages 24 and 25 the Financial review on pages 28 to 49 the discussion on Corporate governance on pages 53 to 57 the Report on directors remuneration on pages 58 to 72 and Risk Factors on page 140 form part of this report.
The audited nancial statements are presented on pages 75 to 135.
Principal activity The groups principal activity is the supply of communications services and equipment.
In the 2003 nancial year approximately 94% of group turnover arose from operations in the UK.
Directors
The names and biographical details of the directors of the company are given on pages 50 and 51.
All served throughout the nancial year with the exception of Ian Livingston and Clayton Brendish who joined the Board on 8 April and 1 September 2002 respectively.
In addition Philip Hampton served as a director until his retirement on 30 April 2002.
Following his retirement from the Board on 1 May 2001 the former Chairman Sir Iain Vallance remained with BT as President Emeritus until 31 July 2002.
In accordance with the articles of association Clayton Brendish having been appointed as a director by the Board retires at the forthcoming annual general meeting AGM and will be proposed for election.
Sir Anthony Greener Louis Hughes and Maarten van den Bergh retire by rotation and will be proposed for reelection.
Details of these directors contracts of appointment are included in the Report on directors remuneration on pages 62 and 63 and the discussion on Corporate governance on page 53.
Substantial shareholdings At 21 May 2003 the company had received notications from Legal and General Investment Management Limited and Barclays PLC under Part VI of the Companies Act 1985 in respect of holdings of 261519674 shares and 261518424 shares respectively each representing holdings of 3.02% of the companys issued ordinary share capital.
Interest of management in certain transactions During and at the end of the 2003 nancial year none of the companys directors was materially interested in any material transaction in relation to the groups business and none is materially interested in any presently proposed material transactions.
Policy on the payment of suppliers BTs policy is to use its purchasing power fairly and to pay promptly and as agreed.
BT has a variety of payment terms with its suppliers.
The terms for payments for purchases under major contracts are settled when agreeing the other terms negotiated with the individual suppliers.
It is BTs policy to make payments for other purchases within 30 working days of the invoice date provided that the relevant invoice is presented to the company in a timely fashion and is complete.
BTs payment terms are printed on the companys standard purchase order forms or where appropriate specied in individual contracts agreed with the supplier.
The ratio expressed in days between the amounts invoiced to the company by its suppliers in the 2003 nancial year and the amounts owed to its trade creditors at the end of the year was 23 days.
Auditors
Following the conversion of PricewaterhouseCoopers the companys auditors to a limited liability partnership from 1 January 2003 PricewaterhouseCoopers resigned and the directors appointed the new rm PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as auditors.
A resolution to reappoint PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as auditors of the company and authorise the directors to settle their remuneration will be proposed at the AGM.
Authority to purchase shares The authority given at last years AGM of the company held on 17 July 2002 for the company to purchase in the market 867 million of its shares representing 10% of the issued share capital expires on 16 October 2003.
This authority was not used during the year and shareholders will be asked to give a similar authority at the AGM.
AGM resolutions The resolutions to be proposed at the AGM to be held on 16 July 2003 together with explanatory notes appear in the separate Notice of Annual General Meeting sent to all shareholders.
By order of the Board Larry Stone
21 May 2003 Registered ofce 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ Registered in England and Wales No.
52 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Corporate governance BTs policy is to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity for all our operations.
This includes a commitment to maintaining the highest standards of corporate governance throughout the group.
During the year there have been recommendations on UK corporate governance by Derek Higgs and Sir Robert Smith and hence proposed changes to the UKs Combined Code on Corporate Governance.
This section of the annual report describes how BT has applied the Code and where it stands on some of the key proposed changes resulting from the above recommendations.
The directors consider that BT has throughout the year complied with the provisions of the current Code.
The Board The Board meets every month except in August.
Additionally it meets on an ad hoc basis to consider matters which are time critical.
The Board met 14 times during the 2003 nancial year.
The Boards principal focus is the overall strategic direction development and control of the group.
In support of this focus the Board approves the groups strategic plans annual budget capital expenditure and investments budgets larger capital expenditure proposals and the groups overall system of internal controls governance and compliance authorities and it has oversight and control of the groups operating and nancial performance.
These responsibilities are set out in a formal statement of the Boards role which together with the powers of the Operating Committee and Management Council and the authorities delegated to individual members of the Operating Committee are made available to everyone in the group on the groups intranet site.
The Board which operates as a single team is currently made up of the parttime Chairman ve executive directors and seven independent non executive directors.
It is BTs policy that the board will comprise a majority of independent nonexecutive directors.
The desired combination of experience skills and other attributes that the nonexecutive directors as a whole are to bring to the Board is agreed and regularly reviewed by the Nominating Committee.
This prole is used by the Committee to assess the suitability as nonexecutive directors of candidates put forward by the directors and outside consultants before the Committee meets shortlisted candidates.
Between them the current nonexecutive directors bring experience and independent judgement gained at the most senior levels of international business operations and strategy marketing technology communications and political and international affairs.
The nonexecutive directors provide a strong independent element on the Board.
Sir Anthony Greener the Deputy Chairman is the senior independent director.
In his capacity as the chairman of the Remuneration Committeehe meets with BTs major institutional shareholders.
The Deputy Chairman will also continue to be available to discuss matters with institutional shareholders where it would be inappropriate for those discussions to take place with either the Chairman or the Chief Executive.
He will also attend at his discretion and in consultation with the Chairman and the Chief Executive other meetings with shareholders during the year.
The Chairman and the nonexecutive directors hold regular dinners at which they discuss matters without the presence of the executive directors.
Sir Anthony Greener chairs the Audit and Remuneration Committees. of the Nominating Committee.
Maarten van den Bergh sits on all three committees.
Both directors bring great breadth of relevant experience to these committees whose total memberships are six ve and four directors respectively.
Nonexecutive directors are appointed initially for three years.
At the end of that period the appointment may be continued by mutual agreement subject normally to three months termination notice from either BT or the director.
The longest serving non executive director has been in ofce for nearly three and a half years.
All directors are required by the companys articles of association to be elected by shareholders at the rst AGM after their appointment if appointed by the Board.
A director must subsequently retire by rotation at an AGM if he or she was elected or last reelected at or before the AGM in the third year before the year in question.
The director may seek reelection.
The Chairman and executive directors have service agreements which are approved by the Remuneration
Information about the periods of these contracts is in the Report on directors remuneration on page 63.
The Board has a procedure for directors in furtherance of their duties to take independent professional advice if necessary at the companys expense.
In addition all directors have access to the advice and services of the Secretary the appointment and removal of whom is a matter for the whole Board.
He advises the Board on appropriate procedures for the management of its meetings and duties and the meetings of the companys principal committees as well as the implementation of corporate governance and compliance within the group.
On appointment the directors take part in an induction programme when they receive information about BT the role of the Board and the matters reserved for its decision the terms of reference and membership of the principal Board and management committees and the powers delegated to those committees the companys corporate governance practices and procedures including the powers reserved to the groups most senior executives and the latest nancial information about the group.
This is supplemented by visits to key BT locations and meetings with members of the Operating Committee and other key senior executives.
Throughout their period in ofce the directors are continually updated on BTs business the competitive and regulatory environments in which it operates corporate social responsibility matters and other changes affecting BT and the communications industry as a whole by BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 53 Corporate governance written briengs and meetings with senior BT executives.
Directors are also advised on appointment of their legal and other duties and obligations as a director of a listed company both in writing and in facetoface meetings with the Secretary.
They are reminded of these duties each year and they are also updated on changes to the legal and governance requirements of the company and upon themselves as directors.
During the 2003 nancial year for example they have received briengs on the recommended changes to UK corporate governance put forward by Derek Higgs and Sir Robert Smith the Enterprise Act and the provisions of the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 that affect BT because its shares are registered with the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC.
Guidelines are in place concerning the content presentation and delivery of papers for each Board meeting so that the directors have enough information to be properly briefed.
The Board has agreed that it will carry out an evaluation of its performance.
This will be carried out by questionnaire and where appropriate individual interviews during summer 2003 with a subsequent review at a board meeting.
Principal Board committees The Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen chairs the Operating Committee which meets weekly.
The other members are the Group Finance Director the Chief Executives of BT Retail BT Wholesale and BT Global Services and the Chief Broadband Ofcer.
The Secretary attends all meetings.
The Committee has collective responsibility for running the groups business endtoend.
To do that it develops the groups strategy and budget for Board approval recommends to the Board the groups capital expenditure and investments budgets monitors the nancial operational and customer quality of service performance of the whole group allocates resources across the group within plans agreed by the Board plans and delivers major crossbusiness programmes and reviews the senior talent base and succession plans of the group.
A subcommittee of the Operating Committee the Management Council meets monthly.
It consists of the Operating Committee members plus a number of other senior executives.
It is an advisory forum supporting the Chief Executive and the Operating Committee in policy formulation in areas such as public policy reputation and business practices policies human resources and employment policies.
Through a specic subcommittee of its own the Management Council monitors the performance of the BT Pension Scheme draws material matters on pensions policy to the Boards attention reviews public policy regulatory and Government activities in the pensions area and oversees internal and external communications on pensions matters.
The Nominating Committee consisting of the Chairman the Deputy Chairman and two other nonexecutive directors ensures an appropriate balance of experience and abilities on the Board using this evaluation to review annually the size and composition of the Board and to recommend any proposed changes to the Board.
It keeps under review the need for appointments to the Board prepares a description of the specic experience and skills needed for an appointment considers candidates who are put forward by the directors and external consultants and recommends to the Board the appointments of all directors after having met shortlisted candidates.
It also reviews the time required from the Deputy Chairman and other nonexecutive directors to carry out their duties and advises the Board on succession planning for the positions of the Chairman Deputy Chairman Chief Executive and all other Board appointments.
In the Boards opinion it is appropriate for the Chairman to chair the Nominating Committee in its task of reviewing and agreeing the structure of the board and considering candidates as directors both executive and nonexecutive.
The Committee met once during the 2003 nancial year.
The Audit Committee comprising solely independent nonexecutive directors is chaired by Sir Anthony Greener.
The members of the Committee all bring relevant experience from senior executive levels.
The Committee recommends the appointment and reappointment of the companys auditors ensuring that key partners are rotated at appropriate intervals and considers the resignation or dismissal of the auditors recommending to the Board appropriate action to appoint new auditors.
It reviews the auditors performance including the scope of the audit and recommends to the Board appropriate remuneration.
The Committee monitors the extent of nonaudit work to be performed by the companys auditors to ensure that the provision of nonaudit services does not impair their independence or objectivity.
It discusses with the auditors the scope of their audits before they commence reviews the results and considers the auditors Management Letter and reports the results of those reviews to the
The Audit Committee reviews the companys published nancial results the Annual Report and Form 20F and other published information for statutory and regulatory compliance.
It also reviews the disclosure made by the Chief Executive and Group Finance Director during the certication process for the annual report about the design or operation of internal controls or material weaknesses in the controls including any fraud involving management or other employees who have a signicant role in the companys nancial controls.
The Board as required by UK law takes responsibility for all disclosures in the annual report.
The Audit Committee monitors and reviews the standards of risk management and internal control the effectiveness of internal control nancial reporting accounting policies and procedures and the companys statements on internal controls before they are agreed by the Board for each years annual report.
It also reviews the companys internal audit function and its relationship with the external auditors including internal audits plans and performance.
The Group Finance Director and the Secretary attend its meetings.
Each year the Committee sets aside time to seek 54 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Corporate governance the views of the companys internal and external auditors in the absence of executives.
The Committee met four times during the 2003 nancial year.
At its meetings the Committee has reviewed the companys full year and quarterly results and its Annual Report and Form 20F and considered the adequacy of the nancial systems that have produced those results.
It has reported its views to the Board so it has been able to approve the results announcements and the annual report for publication.
It has also during the 2003 nancial year considered the groups risk register as submitted to it by the Management Council and reviewed the companys internal control accounting systems and related matters.
The Committee has agreed for the 2004 nancial year in accordance with the SarbanesOxley Act to and establish a process for dealing with complaints received by the company regarding accounting internal accounting controls or auditing matters and the condential anonymous submission by employees of concerns regarding questionable accounting or auditing matters.
Director Group Financial Control which is consistent with BTs overall statement of business ethics see Statement of business practice on page 56.
The Remuneration Committee comprises solely independent nonexecutive directors and is chaired by Sir Anthony Greener.
It met seven times during the 2003 nancial year.
Further details about the Committee are included in the Report on directors remuneration.
Committee memberships are shown in Board of directors and Operating Committee on pages 50 to 51.
Internal control and risk management The Board is responsible for the groups systems of internal control and risk management and for reviewing the effectiveness of those systems.
Such systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives any system can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Board also takes account of signicant social environmental and ethical matters that relate to BTs businesses.
The companys workplace practices specic environmental social and ethical risks and opportunities and details of underlying governance processes are dealt with in the Our people and Our commitment to society sections of this report.
BT has processes for identifying evaluating and managing the signicant risks faced by the group.
These processes have been in place for the whole of the 2003 nancial year and have continued up to the date on which this document was approved.
The processes are in accordance with the guidance for directors published in the UK in September 1999.
Risk assessment and evaluation takes place as an integral part of the groups annual strategic planning cycle.
The group has a detailed risk management process which identies the key risks facing the group and each business unit.
This information is reviewed by senior management as part of the strategic review.
The groups current key risks are summarised on page 140 of this document.
The key features of the risk management process comprise the following procedures and senior executives led by the groups Risk Manager review the groups key risks and have created a group risk register.
This is reviewed by the Management Council before being approved by the Board. addressed.
Line of business audit committees monitor the standards of internal controls in the lines of business.
Finance Director on the operation of internal controls in their area of responsibility. operation of internal controls during the nancial year. control.
They also promote effective risk management in the lines of business operations. year.
This follows consideration of the matter by the Management Council.
The Audit Committee reviews reports from the internal auditors and from the external auditors and reports its conclusions to the Board.
The Audit Committee has carried out these actions for the 2003 nancial year.
Material joint ventures and associates which BT does not control outside the UK have not been dealt with as part of the group for the purposes of this internal control assessment.
Relations with shareholders Senior executives led by the Chief Executive and the Group Finance Director hold meetings with the companys principal institutional shareholders to discuss the companys strategy nancial performance and specic major investment activities.
As explained in the Report on directors remunerationwe also maintain contact when appropriate through the chairman of the Remuneration Committee and other senior executives to discuss overall remuneration policies and plans.
Contact with institutional shareholders and with nancial analysts brokers and the media is controlled by written guidelines to ensure the protection of share price sensitive information that has not already been made generally available to the companys shareholders.
We are continuing our policy that shareholders vote on the annual report at the AGM.
Shareholders will also be asked this year to vote on the Report on directors remuneration as required by the Directors Remuneration Report Regulations 2002 having been BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 55 Corporate governance asked to vote on the companys remuneration policy at previous AGMs.
It is part of our policy to involve shareholders fully in the affairs of the company and to give them the opportunity at the AGM to ask questions about the companys activities and prospects.
We also give the shareholders the opportunity to vote on every substantially different issue by proposing a separate resolution for each issue.
The Boards opinion is that the reelection and the fees of the auditors are interrelated matters and should therefore be dealt with in one resolution.
The proxy votes for and against each resolution as well as abstentions will be counted before the AGM and the results will be made available at the meeting after the shareholders have voted on each resolution on a show of hands.
It is our policy for all directors to attend the AGM if at all possible.
Whilst because of ill health or other pressing reasons this may not always be possible in normal circumstances this means that the chairman of the Audit and Remuneration Committees is at the AGM and is available to answer relevant questions.
The Annual Review and if requested the Annual Report and Form 20F together with the Notice of the AGM are sent to shareholders in the most costeffective fashion given the large number of shareholders.
We aim to give as much notice as possible and at least 21 clear days as required by the companys articles of association.
In practice these documents are being sent to shareholders more than 20 working days before the AGM.
Established procedures ensure the timely release of share price sensitive information and the publication of the companys nancial results and regulatory nancial statements.
Non audit services provided by the external auditors As a result of regulatory or similar requirements it is necessary to employ the companys external auditors for certain nonaudit work.
In order to maintain the independence of the external auditors the Board has determined policies as to what nonaudit services can be provided by the companys external auditors and the approval processes related to them.
Under those policies work of a consultancy nature will not be offered to the external auditors unless there are clear efciencies and value added benets to the company.
The Audit Committee monitors the level of nonaudit fees paid to the external auditors.
Statement of business practice To reinforce our commitment to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity BT has a written statement of business practice The Way We Work.
The statement covers all our operations and reects the expectations in the area of corporate governance and business practice standards.
A copy of the statement has been sent to every employee and is also available on the companys intranet site.
These highlevel principles are supported by a comprehensive communications programme and online training.
A condential helpline and email facility are also available to employees who have questions about the application of these principles.
We also continue to require our agents and contractors to apply these principles when representing BT.
Political donations It has always been BTs policy that no company in the group shall make cash contributions to any political party.
This policy continues.
However the Companies Act 1985 requires companies to obtain shareholder authority before they can make donations to EU political organisations which includes UK political parties.
The denition of political donations used in the Act is very much broader than the ordinary sense in which these words are used.
As a result it covers activities which form part of normal relationships between BT and the political machinery.
These activities are not designed to support any political party or to inuence public support for a particular party and would not be thought of as political donations in the everyday sense of these words.
They are entirely nonpolitical in nature and are designed so that BT can make MPs and others aware of key industry issues and matters affecting the company.
The authority we are requesting from shareholders at the AGM is not designed to change the companys stated policy of not making cash contributions.
It will however ensure that BT acts within the provisions of the current UK law when carrying out the above activities.
They are carried out on an evenhanded basis related broadly to the major UK political parties electoral strength and the company believes that they make an important contribution to the success of BT.
Pension funds BTs two main pension funds  the BT Pension Scheme and the BT Retirement Plan  are not controlled by the Board but by separate trustees who are company and union nominees under independent chairmen.
The trustees look after the assets of the funds which are held separately from those of the company.
The pension schemes funds can only be used in accordance with their respective rules and for no other purpose.
Reporting
A statement by the directors of their responsibilities for preparing the nancial statements is included in the Statement of directors responsibility on page 73.
US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 BT has securities registered with the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC.
As a result BT is obliged to comply with those provisions of the SarbanesOxley Act the Act applicable to foreign issuers.
BT will comply with the legal and regulatory requirements introduced pursuant to this new legislation in so far as they are applicable to the group.
In accordance with the recommendations issued by the SEC BT has established a Disclosure Committee comprising appropriate senior executives which reports to the Chief Executive and Group Finance Director.
56 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Corporate governance The Chief Executive and Group Finance Director after evaluating the effectiveness of BTs disclosure controls and procedures within 90 days of the date of the groups Annual Report and Form 20F have concluded that at that date BTs disclosure controls and procedures were effective to ensure that material information relating to BT was made known to them by others within the BT group particularly during the period in which the Annual Report and Form 20F was being prepared.
The Chief Executive and Group Finance Director have also provided the certications required by the Act.
There were no signicant changes in BTs internal controls or in other factors that could signicantly affect these controls subsequent to the date the Chief Executive and Group Finance Director completed their evaluation nor were there any signicant deciencies or material weaknesses in BTs internal controls requiring corrective actions.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 57 Report on directors remuneration 58 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 The review is divided into the following sections 59 Remuneration policy Not audited
Annual package  2004 nancial year Executive share ownership
Other benets Service agreements Termination payments Outside appointments Nonexecutive directors contracts of appointment Nonexecutive directors remuneration Directors service agreements and contracts of appointment Directors interests Performance graph 65 Remuneration review Audited Directors remuneration Former directors
Pensions
Share options Share awards Deferred Bonus Plan Share awards under allemployee share ownership plans Operating Committee Report on directors remuneration The Remuneration Committee is made up wholly of independent nonexecutive directors.
Throughout the year the company has applied the principles in Section 1 of the Combined Code on Corporate Governance the Code and complied with the Code.
The Board is ultimately responsible for both the structure and amount of executive remuneration but it has delegated prime responsibility for executive remuneration to the Remuneration Committee.
The Committees role is to set the remuneration policy and individual remuneration packages for the Chairman the executive directors members of the Operating Committee OC and other senior executives reporting to the Chief Executive.
It also approves changes in the companys longterm incentive plans recommends to the Board those plans which require shareholder approval and oversees their operation.
The Committee met seven times during the 2003 nancial year.
Sir Anthony Greener has chaired the Committee since 18 July 2001.
Other members of the Remuneration Committee during the year were and Maarten van den Bergh and Louis Hughes and Margaret Jay appointed 5 November 2002 and Carl Symon.
The Chairman and Chief Executive are invited to attend meetings.
They are not present when matters affecting their own remuneration arrangements are considered.
Nonexecutive directors who are not members of the Committee are entitled to receive papers and minutes of the Committee.
The Committee has access to professional advisers both from within the company and externally.
Towers
Perrin HR consultants Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ian Livingston Group Finance Director Alex Wilson Group HR Director and his predecessor John Steele and Larry Stone Company Secretary and his predecessor Colin Green provided advice that materially assisted the Committee in relation to the 2003 nancial year.
The Committee has agreed that Towers Perrin may advise both the Committee and BT and should be invited to attend meetings when major remuneration policy issues are being discussed.
Towers Perrin provides BT with a range of data and advisory services covering all aspects of executive pay bonus arrangements shares and benets.
Remuneration policy This part of the report is not subject to audit.
BTs executive remuneration policy is to reward employees competitively taking into account individual performance company performance market comparisons and the competitive pressures in the information and communication technology industry.
Base salaries are positioned around the midmarket with total direct compensation basic salary annual bonus and the value of any longterm incentives to be at the upper quartile only for sustained and excellent performance.
There are no plans to change this policy.
A signicant proportion of the total executive remuneration package is linked to line of business and corporate performance.
Remuneration arrangements and performance targets are kept under regular review to achieve this.
Where any signicant changes are proposed to executive remuneration these are discussed with BTs principal shareholders and the main representative groups of the institutional shareholders.
Packages
The remuneration package for the executive directors members of the OC and certain other senior executives reporting to the Chief Executive comprises Basic salary Salaries are reviewed annually.
Salary increases are made where the Committee believes that adjustments are appropriate to reect contribution increased responsibilities andor market pressures.
Performancerelated remuneration Annual bonus The annual bonus plan is designed to reward the achievement of results against set objectives.
Targets set at the beginning of the 2003 nancial year for each objective were based on earnings per share cash ow and customer satisfaction.
Specic weights were attached to each objective.
Ontarget and maximum bonus levels as a percentage of salary were unchanged at 50% and 75% Chief Executive 85% and 130% under his service agreement.
The Committee retains the exibility to enhance or reduce bonus awards in exceptional circumstances.
Deferred bonus Awards in the form of BT shares granted under the Deferred Bonus Plan DBP are linked to the value of annual bonuses.
The shares are held in trust and transferred to the executive if still employed by the company in three years time.
There are no additional performance measures for the vesting of DBP awards.
Awards are generally equivalent in value to 50% of the executives gross annual bonus except in the case of the Chief Executive whose award in respect of the 2003 nancial year is 100% of gross annual bonus in accordance with his service agreement.
The awards under the DBP held by Ben Verwaayen Pierre Danon Andy Green and Paul Reynolds at the end of the 2003 nancial year are contained in the table on page 71.
The awards this year include an award for Ian Livingston.
The amounts are in note f on page 65.
Longterm incentives The BT Equity Incentive Portfolio the Portfolio is designed to ensure that equity participation is a signicant part of overall remuneration.
It comprises three elements share options incentive shares and retention shares.
Share options are currently the main element of equity participation replacing incentive shares in the 2003 nancial year.
Retention shares are used primarily as a recruitment tool.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 59 Report on directors remuneration No individual receives awards under all elements of the Portfolio in any one year.
Generally awards vest and options become exercisable only if a predetermined performance target has been achieved.
The performance measure is TSR total shareholder return compared with the FTSE 100 companies.
The Remuneration Committee chose TSR as it links the reward given to directors with the performance of BT against the shares of other major UK companies in which investors have the opportunity to invest.
For 1998 1999 2000 and 2001 awards the base price at the beginning of the performance period has been calculated by averaging the BT share price over the six months to 31 March in the year of award.
For the 2002 awards the period was from 19 November 2001 the date of the mmO demerger to 31 March 2002.
The end price is the average of the share price over the six months to the end of the performance period.
The end price is adjusted for all capital actions and dividend payments that occur during the performance periods.
Share options The price at which shares may be acquired under the Global Share Option Plan GSOP is the market price at the date of grant.
Other than for new recruits the size of option grant is based on corporate and individual performance and market relativity.
Options granted will be exercisable in three years only if a performance target has been met.
The Committee would not normally expect the initial value of annual grants of options based on the market price of a BT share to exceed three times salary.
In the 2003 nancial year as BT embarked on a radical business transformation and rejuvenation programme the initial value was four times salary in the case of the senior executives most responsible for delivering BTs strategic plan.
The grants comprised options with an initial value of 2.5 times salary relative to a TSR test and 1.5 times salary relative to an earnings per share test.
For those options that were granted subject to a TSR measure BTs TSR at the end of the threeyear period must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to be exercisable.
At median 30% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
If the performance measure is not met at the rst measurement it may be retested against a xed base in years four and ve.
If TSR has not reached the median at the end of the fth year previously unexercisable options will lapse.
To provide an additional incentive for exceptional performance in exceeding business goals further options were granted to seven senior executives.
For these options to become exercisable there must be a 35% compound annual growth in BTs earnings per share over three years equivalent to 22 pence per share at the end of the 2005 nancial year.
There will be no opportunity to retest.
An option was granted to Sir Christopher Bland on 22 June 2001 as part of his recruitment package.
This was not subject to a performance measure as it matched a personal investment in BT shares of 1 million.
The details of the options held by Sir Christopher Bland Ben Verwaayen Pierre Danon Andy Green Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds at the end of the 2003 nancial year are contained in the table on page 68.
Incentive shares There were no awards under the Incentive Share Plan ISP in the 2003 nancial year.
A number of awards made in previous years are however still outstanding.
Participants are entitled to shares at the end of a threeyear performance period if the company has met the relevant predetermined performance target and participants are still employed by the group.
At the end of the threeyear period BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all the shares to vest.
At median 25% of the shares under award vest.
Below that point none of the shares vest.
None of the awards of incentive shares granted in 2000 will vest as BTs TSR was at 85th position on 31 March 2003 the closing date of the performance period.
The awards under the ISP held by Sir Christopher Bland Pierre Danon Andy Green and Paul Reynolds at the end of the 2003 nancial year are contained in the table on page 69.
Retention shares Retention shares are granted under the Retention Share Plan RSP to individuals with critical skills as a recruitment or retention tool.
As a result awards of shares currently in place are not linked to the satisfaction of a corporate performance target.
The length of the retention period before awards vest is exible.
The shares are transferred at the end of the specied period if the individual is still employed by BT.
Retention shares are used only in exceptional circumstances and in the 2003 nancial year six awards were made for recruitment purposes one of which was made to an executive director and a further six were made for retention purposes.
The awards under the RSP held by Ben Verwaayen Pierre Danon and Ian Livingston at the end of the 2003 nancial year are contained in the table on page 69.
Executive Share Plan ESP The last awards under the ESP were granted in 1999.
Participants will generally only be entitled to shares at the end of a veyear performance period if the company has met the relevant predetermined performance target and participants are still employed by the group.
At the end of the veyear period if BTs TSR reaches 30th position all the shares vest.
If BT is at 70th position starting from the top of the list none of the shares vest.
Between those points the shares will vest on a straight line pro rata basis.
In 1994 1995 and 1996 ESP participants could invest 50% of their annual bonus in the ESP for the purchase of shares.
These invested shares were matched by the company.
60 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Report on directors remuneration The vesting date of 1998 ESP awards is in August 2003.
None of the shares will vest as BTs TSR was at 83rd position on 31 March 2003 the closing date of the performance period.
The awards under the ESP held by Andy Green and Paul Reynolds at the end of the 2003 nancial year are contained in the table on page 69.
Other share plans The executive directors may participate in BTs Inland Revenue approved allemployee share plans the Employee Sharesave Scheme and Employee Share Investment Plan which replaced the Employee Share Ownership Scheme on the same basis as other employees.
There are further details of these plans in note 34 to the accounts.
Annual package  2004 nancial year The Remuneration Committee has decided that there should be no increase in base pay for executive directors in 2004.
For the achievement of target performancerelated remuneration will be approximately 67% of total remuneration excluding pension for the Chief Executive and 54% for the other executive directors.
Under his current service agreement the Chairman is not entitled to be paid a bonus or to participate in the Equity Incentive Portfolio.
Performance targets for the 2004 nancial year are signicantly more challenging than the outturn of the 2003 nancial year.
To increase the proportion of performancerelated remuneration the maximum bonus level will increase to 100% of salary for truly exceptional performance for six executives only.
The ontarget and maximum bonus levels for the Chief Executive are unchanged.
The threshold level below which a bonus payment will not be paid has been set at a higher level than the results achieved in the 2003 nancial year.
The proportion of the bonus linked to corporate performance has been increased from 60% to 75% for the lines of business chief executives.
For all other relevant executives bonuses are based solely on corporate performance.
The Committee has decided that in 2004 and subsequent years the value of the Chief Executives DBP awards will be in line with other executives at 50% of his gross annual bonus.
The value of options granted in the 2004 nancial year will not exceed three times salary.
Grants will be subject to the same TSR performance conditions as described above except that the number of retests will be reduced to one only in year ve.
Executive share ownership A shareholding programme encourages executive directors and OC members to build up a shareholding in the company.
The programme which is not mandatory is designed to encourage executive directors and members of the OC to build up a shareholding with a value of 100% of their annual salary within a period of three years from appointment.
Pensions
For the executive directors and most other senior executives who joined the company prior to 1 April 2001 pension benets are onethirtieth of nal salary for each year of service with twothirds of the executives pension for the surviving spouse.
Those with longer BT service have undertakings of pension benets of twothirds of nal salary payable at normal retirement age inclusive of the pension equivalent of any retirement cash lump sum plus a pension of twothirds of the directors or executives pension for the surviving spouse.
On deathinservice a lump sum equal to four times annual salary is payable together with a pension of twothirds of the directors or executives prospective pension for the surviving spouse.
Pensions are based on salary alone  bonuses other benets and longterm incentives are excluded.
BT closed its nal salary pension arrangements to new employees with effect from 1 April 2001 and this has been reected in the retirement provision granted to executive directors and other senior executives hired since that date.
For these executive directors and other senior executives retirement provision is made on a dened contribution basis where the company agrees to pay a xed percentage of the executives salary each year towards the provision of retirement benets.
Typically this is 2030% of salary.
On deathinservice a lump sum equal to four times annual salary is payable.
Other benets Other benets for the Chairman and executive directors include some or all of the following company car fuel and driver personal telecommunications facilities and home security medical and dental cover for the director and immediate family professional subscriptions and personal tax and nancial counselling.
The company has a permanent health insurance policy to provide cover for the Chairman and executive directors and members of the OC who may become permanently incapacitated.
Service agreements It is the policy for the Chairman and executive directors to have service agreements providing for one years notice.
It may be necessary on recruitment to offer longer initial periods to new directors from outside BT or circumstances may make it appropriate to offer a longer xed term.
All the service agreements contain provisions dealing with the removal of a director through poor performance including in the event of early termination of the contract by BT.
Termination payments Sir Christopher Blands contract entitles him on termination of his contract by BT to payment of salary and the value of benets until 12 months from notice of termination.
Ben Verwaayens contract entitles him on termination of his contract by BT to payment of 700000.
The contracts of Pierre Danon Andy Green Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds entitle them on termination of their contract by BT to payment of salary and the value of benets until the earlier BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 61 Report on directors remuneration of 12 months from notice of termination or the director obtaining fulltime employment.
If the contract of an executive director is terminated by BT within one year after BT entering into a scheme of arrangement or becoming a subsidiary of another company he will be entitled to receive his salary the higher of that current years ontarget bonus or the previous years bonus the market value of shares awarded under an employee share ownership plan or deferred bonus plan that have not vested together with a years salary and the value of any benets.
The Committee intends to review contracts in the 2004 nancial year taking into account the joint statement of best practice on executive contracts and severance published in December 2002 by the Association of British Insurers and the National Association of Pension Funds and other relevant guidelines.
Outside appointments The Committee believes that there are signicant benets to both the company and the individual from executive directors accepting nonexecutive directorships of companies outside BT.
The Committee will consider up to two external appointments of which only one may be to the Board of a major company for which a director may retain the fees.
Nonexecutive directors contracts of appointment Nonexecutive directors have contracts of appointment.
They are normally appointed for an initial period of three years.
During that period either party can give the other at least three months notice.
At the end of the period the appointment may be continued by mutual agreement.
Further details of their appointment arrangements are set out on page 53 in the section dealing with corporate governance issues.
The contracts of appointment of nonexecutive directors are terminable on notice by the company without compensation.
Nonexecutive directors remuneration Seven of the directors on the Board are nonexecutive directors who in accordance with BTs articles of association cannot individually vote on their own remuneration.
Therefore nonexecutive remuneration is set by the Chairman and the Chief Executive after considering advice on appropriate levels of remuneration plus a general Board discussion.
The basic fee for nonexecutive directors which includes membership of one committee is 30000 per year.
Additional fees for membership of Board committees range from 3000 to 5000 per year.
Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman and senior nonexecutive director who also chairs both the Remuneration Committee and the Audit Committee is paid an inclusive annual fee of 90000.
Nonexecutive directors fees will be reviewed during the 2004 nancial year.
To align further the interests of the nonexecutive directors with those of shareholders the companys policy is to encourage these directors to purchase on a voluntary basis 5000 of BT shares each year.
The directors are asked to hold these shares until they retire from the Board.
This policy is not mandatory.
No element of nonexecutive remuneration is performancerelated.
Nonexecutive directors do not participate in BTs bonus or employee share plans.
62 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Report on directors remuneration Directors service agreements and contracts of appointment The dates on which the Chairmans and each current executive directors initial service agreement commenced and the current expiry dates are as follows Chairman and executive directors Commencement date of initial service agreement Expiry date of current service contract Sir Christopher Bland 1 May 2001 a B Verwaayen 14 January 2002 b P Danon 19 November 2001 d A Green 19 November 2001 d I Livingston 8 April 2002 c Dr P Reynolds 19 November 2001 d Sir Christopher Bland entered into a new service agreement on 19 November 2001 terminable on 12 months notice by either the company or the director.
The agreement was terminable during the rst year by the company giving two years notice and thereafter by notice of not less than one year terminable by the director on six months notice ending after the rst two years.
Ian Livingston entered into an initial service agreement on 8 April 2002 for two years.
The contract is terminable on 12 months notice by the company and six months notice by the director ending at any time after the initial period.
The initial contract period was for one year and the contract is terminable by the company on 12 months notice and by the director on six months notice ending after the initial period.
Philip Hampton left the company on 30 April 2002.
The commencement date of his initial service agreement was 1 November 2000.
The contract was for an initial period of two years.
The contract was terminable on 12 months notice ending at any time after the initial period by either the company or the director.
The dates on which current nonexecutive directors contracts of appointment commenced and the current expiry dates are as follows Nonexecutive director Commencement date of initial contract Expiry date of current contract Sir Anthony Greener 1 October 2000 30 September 2003 a M van den Bergh 1 September 2000 31 August 2003 a C Brendish 1 September 2002 31 August 2005 c LR Hughes 1 January 2000 31 December 2005 b Baroness Jay 14 January 2002 13 January 2005 c J Nelson 14 January 2002 13 January 2005 c CG Symon 14 January 2002 13 January 2005 c Each directors contract of appointment is for an initial period of three years.
After that period the contract will be terminable on three months notice by either the company or the director.
Contract extended for a further three years and is terminable by the company or the director on three months notice.
Each directors contract is for an initial period of three years and is terminable by the company or the director on three months notice.
The contract is renewable by mutual agreement.
There are no other service agreements or material contracts existing or proposed between the company and the directors.
There are no arrangements or understandings between any director or executive ofcer and any other person pursuant to which any director or executive ofcer was selected to serve.
There are no family relationships between the directors.
Directors interests The interests of directors and their families in the companys shares at 31 March 2003 and 1 April 2002 or date of appointment if later are shown below
Benecial holdings 2003 2002 Sir Christopher Bland 673876 673876 B Verwaayen 387876 387876 P Danon 61228 29590 A Green 85729 62316 ac I Livingston 110444 Dr P Reynolds 43223 ac Sir Anthony Greener 11167 11615 M van den Bergh 4800 4800 C Brendish 10920 LR Hughes 6800 6800 Baroness Jay 5572 J Nelson 50000 50000 CG Symon 10069 3819 P Hampton  1014 Total 1461704 1266070 Includes 4196 and 2462 shares purchased and held respectively by Andy Green and Paul Reynolds in the ESP.
These shares were transferred into their personal holdings on 1 August 2002.
During the period from 1 April 2003 to 15 May 2003 Paul Reynolds purchased 138 shares under the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan.
Includes free shares awarded under the Employee Share Investment Plan and Employee Share Ownership Scheme  details are set out on page 71.
Ian Livingston joined the Board on 8 April 2002.
Clayton Brendish joined the Board on 1 September 2002.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 63 Report on directors remuneration At 31 March 2003 Sir Christopher Bland Ben Verwaayen Pierre Danon Andy Green Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds each had a nonbenecial interest in 73069 shares 2002  73069 purchased by BT Employee Shares Trustees Limited for allocation to employees under the BT Employee Share Ownership Scheme and 31719402 shares 2002  24571130 held in trust by Ilford Trustees Jersey Limited for allocation to employees under the employee share schemes.
Also each had a nonbenecial interest in 15876189 shares 2002  45286908 held in trust by The Royal Bank of Scotland Trust Company Jersey Limited for allocation to employees under BTs employee share schemes.
Finally each also had a nonbenecial interest in 19822 shares 2002  nil held in trust by Halifax Corporate Trustees Limited for participants in the Employee Share Investment Plan.
Performance graph This graph illustrates as required by the Directors
Remuneration Report Regulations 2002
The FTSE 100 is considered to be the most appropriate index against which to measure performance as BT has been a constituent of the FTSE 100 throughout the veyear period and the index is widely used.
TSR is the measure of the returns that a company has provided for its shareholders reecting share price movements and assuming reinvestment of dividends.
BT
FTSE 100 5tel250 1 April 1998  100.
Source Datastream The graph shows our TSR performance adjusted for the rights issue and demerger of our mobile business in the 2002 financial year relative to the FTSE 100.
BTs total shareholder return TSR performance over five financial years to 31 March 2003 0203 0102 0001 9900 9899 64 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Report on directors remuneration Remuneration Review  the following pages comprise the audited part of the Report on directors remuneration Directors remuneration Directors remuneration for the 2003 nancial year was as follows
Pension allowance net of pension contribution Total salary and fees
Special bonus
Other
Termination
Payments Total Total Sir Christopher Bland 500  500    12  512 461 B Verwaayen cf 70tel 468 17  2174 339 P Danon bfg A Green fg I Livingston bf g 44tel190 19 8  1116 Dr P Reynolds bfg Sir Anthony Greener 90  90      90 86 M van den Bergh 40  40      40 40 C Brendish LR Hughes 37  37      37 36 Baroness Jay 35  35      35 7 J Nelson 35  35      35 7 CG Symon 37  37      37 8 P Hampton 36  36    tel3250 256 3506 211tel242 6701 2915 Balance or part of the pension allowance for the 2003 nancial year  see Pensions on page 66.
Pierre Danon Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds each received a monthly cash allowance in lieu of a company car totalling 18500 per annum.
Ben Verwaayen is entitled to relocation expenses of 200000 which were paid by the company during the 2003 nancial year.
He is also entitled to a housing allowance of 250000 per annum until 13 January 2005.
In the 2003 nancial year 250000 was paid in respect of that year and a further 18000 was paid in respect of the 2002 nancial year 2002  36000.
These amounts are included in the table above under Expenses allowance.
Ian Livingston received the sum of 190000 which was paid in lieu of the bonus to which he would have been entitled had he remained with his previous employer.
When added to his annual bonus his total bonus was 528000.
Includes some or all of the following company car fuel and driver personal telecommunications facilities and home security medical and dental cover for the director and immediate family professional subscriptions and personal tax and nancial counselling.
Deferred bonuses payable in shares in three years time were awarded to Ben Verwaayen 849000 2002  152000 Pierre Danon 169000 2002  150000 Andy Green 153000 2002  100000 Ian Livingston 169000 2002  nil and Paul Reynolds 144000 2002  90000.
When added to the amounts paid or payable for the 2003 nancial year in the table above the total remuneration of Ben Verwaayen was 3023000 2002  491000 Pierre Danon 998000 2002  630000 Andy Green 914000 2002  466000 Ian Livingston 1285000 2002  Nil and Paul Reynolds 876000 2002  428000.
Pierre Danon Andy Green and Paul Reynolds joined the Board on 19 November 2001.
Ian Livingston joined the Board on 8 April 2002.
Clayton Brendish joined the Board on 1 September 2002.
In the 2002 nancial year the aggregate emoluments of the directors of BT Group plc for their services following the completion of the BT restructuring on 19 November 2001 amounted to 3018000.
The aggregate amount paid to directors as deferred bonuses payable in shares was 492000.
The aggregate of contributions paid under dened contribution arrangements was 3975.
Retirement benets are accruing to three directors 2002  two under dened contribution arrangements and to three directors 2002  four under a dened benet scheme.
On the terms of his leaving the company on 30 April 2002 a termination payment of 217500 was made to Philip Hampton equivalent to the balance of the initial period of his service contract together with a sum of 9000 in respect of benets for that period.
He also received 15500 in lieu of holiday entitlement.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 65 Report on directors remuneration Sir Christopher Bland was appointed as parttime Chairman on 1 May 2001.
His annual salary on appointment was 500000.
Ben Verwaayen joined the company on 14 January 2002 on an annual salary of 700000.
He became Chief Executive on 1 February 2002.
Pierre Danon Andy Green and Paul Reynolds joined the Board on 19 November 2001 on salaries of 450000 425000 and 400000 respectively.
Ian Livingston joined the Board on 8 April 2002 on a salary of 450000.
The salaries of the Chairman and executive directors remained unchanged during the 2003 nancial year and following this years salary review the Committee decided there should be no increase from 1 June 2003 in basic salaries.
Annual bonus awards to executive directors ranged from 72% to 121% of salary in the 2003 nancial year.
These payments are not pensionable.
Former directors Yve Newbold who retired from the Board in June 1997 remains a member of the Community Support Committee for which she received fees of 5000 in the 2003 nancial year.
Dr Iain Anderson who retired from the Board in September 2001 is chairman of the BT Scotland Board for which he received 12000 in the 2003 nancial year.
On the terms of his leaving the company on 31 January 2002 Sir Peter Boneld was entitled to the sum of 820000 payable in 12 monthly instalments and contractual benets for one year.
During the 2003 nancial year he received 683000 as the nal ten monthly instalments of his contract and contractual benets of 1000.
Sir Iain Vallance following his retirement from the Board on 1 May 2001 received fees as President Emeritus of 350000 per annum until 31 July 2002.
He received 117000 for the 2003 nancial year.
He also received benets of 18000 in the 2003 nancial year.
He received a bonus of 600000 on the expiry of his contract of service on 31 July 2002.
Loans
Prior to the date of their appointment to the Board on 19 November 2001 Pierre Danon and Paul Reynolds each had interest free loans from the company to assist with relocation of 375000 and 300000 respectively.
At 31 March 2003 Pierre Danon owed 281250 2002  318750 and Paul Reynolds owed 290000 2002  300000.
During the 2003 nancial year the maximum amount outstanding was 571250.
There are no outstanding loans granted by any member of the BT group to any other of the directors or guarantees provided by any member of the BT group for their benet.
Pensions
Sir Christopher Bland is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company matches his contributions up to 10% of the earnings cap to a personal pension plan.
Company contributions of 9720 were payable in respect of the 2003 nancial year.
The earnings cap is a restriction on the amount of pay which can be used to calculate contributions and benets due to a tax approved pension scheme.
Ben Verwaayen is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company has agreed to pay an amount equal to 20% of his salary towards pension provision.
The company paid 24300 into his personal pension plan plus 140007 as a cash payment.
This amount which is included in the table on page 65 represents 110840 being part of the pension allowance for the 2003 nancial year plus 29167 which was outstanding from the previous nancial year.
The balance of the 2003 pension allowance of 4860 has been carried forward to the 2004 nancial year.
BT also provides him with a lump sum death in service benet of four times his salary.
Ian Livingston is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company has agreed to pay an amount equal to 30% of his salary towards pension provision.
The company paid 19440 into his personal pension plan plus a cash payment of 115560 representing the balance of the pension allowance for the 2003 nancial year which is included in the table on page 65.
BT also provides him with a lump sum death in service benet of four times his salary.
Pierre Danons pension accrues at the rate of onethirtieth of his nal salary for each year of service.
In addition a twothirds widows pension would be payable on his death.
He is a member of the BT Pension Scheme but as he is subject to the earnings cap the company has agreed to increase his benets to the target level by means of a nonapproved unfunded arrangement.
Andy Green is a member of the BT Pension
From 31 December 1997 the company has been purchasing an additional 203 days of pensionable service each year to bring his pensionable service at age 60 up to 40 years.
A twothirds widows pension would be payable on his death.
Paul Reynolds is a member of the BT Pension
From 1 July 1996 the company has been purchasing an additional 109 days of pensionable service each year to bring his pensionable service at age 60 up to 40 years.
A twothirds widows pension would be payable on his death.
Sir Iain Vallance was part time Chairman and subsequently President Emeritus.
His deferred pension under the BT Pension Scheme came into payment with effect from 1 April 2003 although as the pension is paid monthly in arrears the rst payment was not made until 30 April 2003.
During the year he received a pension payable by the company of 361580.
The pension payable by the company will be reduced in the 2004 nancial year by the equivalent amount of pension he will receive from the BT Pension Scheme.
A twothirds widows pension would be payable on his death.
66 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Report on directors remuneration BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 67 Pensions continued Philip Hampton left the company on 30 April 2002.
His pension accrued at the rate of onethirtieth of his nal salary for each year of service.
In addition a twothirds widows pension would have been payable on his death.
He was a member of the BT Pension Scheme but as he was subject to the earnings cap the company agreed to increase his benets to the target level by means of a nonapproved unfunded arrangement.
On leaving the company his deferred pension was increased to the level it would have been had he completed two years service.
The table below shows the increase in the accrued benets including those referred to above to which each director has become entitled during the year and the transfer value of the increase in accrued benet Accrued pension Transfer value of accrued benets Change in transfer value cd less directors contributions
Transfer value of increase in accrued benets less directors contributions P Danon A Green 109 99 1103 1420 343 7 42 P Reynolds 110 87 1014 1141 151 20 158 PR Hampton ad As required by the Companies Act 1985 Schedule 7A.
These amounts represent the deferred pension to which the directors would have been entitled had they left the company on 31 March 2002 and 2003 respectively.
Transfer value of the deferred pension in column a as at 31 March 2003 calculated on the basis of actuarial advice in accordance with Actuarial Guidance Note GN11 and excludes directors contributions.
The transfer value represents a liability of the company rather than any remuneration due to the individual and cannot be meaningfully aggregated with annual remuneration as it is not money the individual is entitled to receive.
The equivalent transfer value but calculated as at 31 March 2002 on the assumption that the director left service at that date.
The increase in pension built up during the year net of ination.
The transfer value of the pension in column e less directors contributions.
As explained above Philip Hamptons pension benet was increased on leaving the company.
The entitlement shown above is after taking account of this increase which was allowed for in last years accounts.
Report on directors remuneration 68 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Share options held at 31 March 2003 Number of shares under option Option exercise price per share Usual date from which exercisable Usual expiry date 1 April 2002 Granted Lapsed 31 March 2003 Sir Christopher Bland 314244 314244 318p 010504 010511 B Verwaayen 1121121 1121121 250p 110205 110212 935830 187p 290705 290712 561500 187p 290705 290712 1121121 1497330 2618451 P Danon  601610 601610 187p 290705 290712 360970 187p 290705 290712 962580  962580 A Green 567 567  653p 191101 130502 2905 255p 140805 130206 568190 187p 290705 290712 340910 187p 290705 290712 567 912005 567 912005 I Livingston  7290 7290 227p 140807 130208 601610 187p 290705 290712 360970 187p 290705 290712 969870  969870 Dr P Reynolds 1483 1483  465p 191101 130502 4555 218p 140207 140807 534760 187p 290705 290712 320860 187p 290705 290712 6038 855620 1483 860175 Total 1441970 5197405 2050 6637325 All of the above options were granted for nil consideration.
No options were exercised during the year.
Options granted under the GSOP.
The option is not subject to a performance measure.
It was a term of Sir Christopher Blands initial service contract that i he purchased BT shares to the value of at least 1 million and ii as soon as practicable after the purchase of the shares invested shares the company would grant a share option over shares to the value of at least 1 million.
So long as Sir Christopher Bland is the legal and benecial owner of the invested shares purchased on 1 May 2001 the option will become exercisable on 1 May 2004.
The option was granted on 22 June 2001.
Options granted under the GSOP on 11 February 2002.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to become exercisable.
At median 40% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
Options granted under the GSOP on 29 July 2002.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100.
Details are set out on page 60.
Options granted under the GSOP on 29 July 2002.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is earnings per share.
Details are set out on page 60.
Options granted on 24 June 2002 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Options granted under the Employee Sharesave Scheme to Andy Green and Paul Reynolds on 23 June 2000 and 25 June 1998 respectively.
Options granted on 21 December 2001 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Details of the GSOP and performance conditions are set out on page 60.
There were no unrealised gains on the above share options at 31 March 2003 based on the market price of the shares at that date.
At 31 March 2002 Ben Verwaayen had unrealised gains of 339000 in respect of 1121121 shares under option under the GSOP.
Paul Reynolds had unrealised gains of 3000 in respect of 6038 shares under option under the Employee Sharesave Scheme.
The market price of the shares at 31 March 2003 was 157p 2002  280p and the range during the 2003 nancial year was 286.25p  141p.
Report on directors remuneration BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 69 Share awards under longterm incentive schemes held at 31 March 2003 Details of the companys ordinary shares provisionally awarded to directors as participants under the ESP ISP and RSP are as follows Total number of award shares Range of value of award 1 April 2002 Awarded Vested Lapsed
31 March
Minimum
Maximum
Sir Christopher Bland ISP 2001 311073    7235 318308 010804  500 B Verwaayen RSP 2001 781576    18178 799754 100105 1256 1256 P Danon ISP 2000 97581    2269 99850 010803  157 ISP 2001 174978    4069 179047 010804  281 RSP 2000 104086  52585 1752 53253 041003 84 84 A Green ESP 1997 69530  30380 ESP 1998 37378    717 38095 010803  60 ESP 1999 37982    728 38710 010804  61 ISP 2000 83354    1938 85292 010803  134 ISP 2001 174978    4069 179047 010804  281 I Livingston RSP 2002  493601   11480 505081 050405 793 793 RSP 2002  110444   2568 113012 200505 177 177 Dr P Reynolds ESP 1997 22878  10523 ESP 1998 11409    217 11626 010803  18 ESP 1999 11388    217 11605 010804  18 ISP 2000 47019    1092 48111 010803  76 ISP 2001 144649    3363 148012 010804  232 Former directors Sir Peter Boneld ESP 1997 152652  75369 ESP 1998 110456    2123 112579 010803  177 ESP 1999 98351    1888 100239 010804  157 ISP 2000 266743    6204 272947 010803  429 ISP 2001 510159    11866 522025 010804  820 R Brace ESP 1997 101765  45666 ESP 1998 56073    1076 57149 010803  90 B Cockburn ESP 1998 76467    1468 77935 010803  122 ESP 1999 67142    1290 68432 010804  107 P Hampton RSP 2000 86796   86796 ISP 2001 202975   202975 Excluding shares purchased by each director and held under the ESP see page 60.
The ESP 1997 award which was granted on 13 November 1997 vested on 1 August 2002.
On that date the market price of a BT Group share was 199p.
The market price on the date of grant was 455.5p.
The ve year performance cycle for the award ended on 31 July 2002 and on the basis of BTs TSR position 32.5% of the performance shares under award including reinvested dividends vested.
In accordance with the terms of his service agreement an award of 493601 shares with a value of 1350000 was granted on 30 May 2002 to Ian Livingston under the RSP.
This award of shares will vest in three equal tranches on the rst three anniversaries of his joining BT.
In addition Ian Livingston purchased BT Group shares with a value of 300000 and on 20 May 2002 was granted an award under the RSP of 110444 shares with a value of 300000 which will vest on the third anniversary of the date of purchase of his purchased shares.
Under the terms of his service agreement the awards granted to Sir Peter Boneld were preserved on his leaving until the normal vesting date.
The awards granted to Bill Cockburn and Robert Brace were preserved at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee on their leaving until the normal vesting date.
The awards granted to Philip Hampton lapsed on his leaving the company.
The RSP 2000 award which was granted on 4 October 2000 vested on 4 October 2002.
On that date the market price of a BT Group share was 168p.
The market price on the date of grant was 697.5p.
Details of the ESP ISP and GSOP and any relevant performance conditions are set out on pages 60 and 61.
Vesting of outstanding share awards and options Details of options granted under the GSOP and awards of shares under the ESP and ISP which would vest based on BT Groups TSR compared with the other companies in the FTSE 100 for the relevant performance period up to 31 March 2003 are as follows 31 March 2003 31 March 2002
Expected vesting date TSR position Percentage of shares vesting TSR position Percentage of shares vesting Sir Christopher Bland ISP 2001 318308 010804 73  86 Ben Verwaayen GSOP 2002 1121121 110205 61 GSOP 2002 935830 290705 61 P Danon ISP 2000 99850 010803 85  90 ISP 2001 179047 010804 73  86 GSOP 2002 601610 290705 61 Ian Livingston GSOP 2002 601610 290705 61 A Green ESP 1998 38095 010803 83  86 ESP 1999 38710 010804 87  92 ISP 2000 85292 010803 85  90 ISP 2001 179047 010804 73  86 GSOP 2002 568190 290705 61 Dr P Reynolds ESP 1998 11626 010803 83  86 ESP 1999 11605 010804 87  92 ISP 2000 48111 010803 85  90 ISP 2001 148012 010804 73  86 GSOP 2002 534760 290705 61 Former directors Sir Peter Boneld ESP 1998 112579 010803 83  86 ESP 1999 100239 010804 87  92 ISP 2000 272947 010803 85  90 ISP 2001 522025 010804 73  86 R Brace ESP 1998 57149 010803 83  86 B Cockburn ESP 1998 77935 010803 83  86 ESP 1999 68432 010804 87  92 Options granted under the GSOP during the 2003 nancial year whose exercise is subject to a 35% compound annual growth in earnings per share being achieved over three years equivalent to 22p per share at the end of the 2005 nancial year are not included in the above table.
Earnings per share for the 2003 nancial year are 14.2p per share.
70 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Report on directors remuneration Report on directors remuneration Deferred Bonus Plan awards at 31 March 2003 The following deferred bonuses have been awarded to the directors under the DBP.
These shares will normally be transferred to participants at the end of the threeyear deferred period if those participants are still employed by BT Group.
1 April 2002 Awarded
Lapsed
Dividends reinvested Total number of award shares 31 March
Market value Market value B Verwaayen  75247   1749 76996 010805 121 P Danon 21872    420 22292 010804 35 61 74257   1726 75983 010805 119 A Green 8478  8478 10719    205 10924 010803 17 30 44327    852 45179 010804 71 124 49504   1150 50654 010805 80 Dr P Reynolds 2914  2914 4336    83 4419 010803 7 12 32195    618 32813 010804 52 90 44554   1036 45590 010805 72 Former directors Sir Peter Boneld ac 156056  156056 85090    1635 86725 01080tel626    2876 152502 010804 239 419 R Brace ab 11191  11191    31 B Cockburn ab 37995  37995     106 P Hampton 15553   15553   43 Andy Green Paul Reynolds Sir Peter Boneld Robert Brace and Bill Cockburn received 68p per share on their awards vesting as compensation for the difference between the price of a BT share at the date of vesting and the demerger when the awards should have vested.
The Remuneration Committee determined that the awards should continue until their normal vesting date and that participants should be compensated if there was a subsequent fall in the share price.
The awards granted to Bill Cockburn and Robert Brace were preserved at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee on leaving until the normal vesting date.
Under the terms of his service agreement the awards granted to Sir Peter Boneld were preserved on his leaving until the normal vesting date.
The award granted to Philip Hampton lapsed on his leaving the company on 30 April 2002.
Awards granted on 29 July 2002.
On that date the market price of a BT Group share was 202p.
Awards granted on 28 June 1999 vested on 1 August 2002.
On that date the market price of a BT Group share was 199p.
The market price on the date of grant was 764p.
Details of the DBP are set out on page 59.
Share awards under allemployee share ownership plans at 31 March 2003 1 April 2002 Awarded Vested Total number of award shares 31 March 2003
P Danon
A Green
ESOS 1999 bc ESOS 2000 85   85 170803 ESOS 2001 66   66 300704 P Reynolds
ESOS 1999 bc ESOS 2000 85   85 170803 ESOS 2001 66   66 300704 Awards granted under the Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP on 14 August 2002.
On that date the market price of a BT Group share was 195.75p.
Awards granted under the Employee Share Ownership Scheme ESOS on 2 August 1999 vested on 2 August 2002.
On that date the market price of a BT Group share was 191p.
The market price on the date of award was 753p.
Includes 16 shares purchased under the rights issue in 2001 and attaching to shares originally awarded.
Includes 19 shares purchased under the rights issue in 2001 and attaching to shares originally awarded.
The fth anniversary of the award at which date shares can be taken out of the ESIP with no tax charge.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 71 Report on directors remuneration Operating Committee The aggregate remuneration of members of the Operating Committee OC other than directors for services in all capacities during the 2003 nancial year was as follows Salaries and benets 275 3703 Annual bonuses 201 1551 Termination and retention payments  1276 Provision for longterm incentive awards 327 4959 Company pension contributions 32 857 Total 835 12346 The OC replaced the Executive Committee in February 2002.
Of the six members of the OC ve are members of the Board.
Pierre Danon Andy Green and Paul Reynolds were appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001 and from that date their directors salaries are reected in the table on page 65.
No options were granted under the BT Group Employee Sharesave Scheme to OC members other than directors during the 2003 nancial year 2002  5650.
The members of the OC benecially own less than 1% of the companys outstanding ordinary shares.
By order of the Board Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman and Chairman of Remuneration Committee 21 May 2003 72 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Statement of directors responsibility for preparing the financial statements The directors are required by law to prepare nancial statements for each nancial year which give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and the group as at the end of the nancial year and of the prot or loss and cash ows of the group for that period.
The directors consider that in preparing the nancial statements for the year ended 31 March 2003 on pages 75 to 135 the company has used appropriate accounting policies consistently applied and supported by reasonable and prudent judgements and estimates.
The directors also consider that all applicable accounting standards have been followed and conrm that the nancial statements have been prepared on the going concern basis.
The directors are responsible for ensuring that the company keeps accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the company and which enable them to ensure that the nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 1985.
The directors are also responsible for taking such steps that are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
The auditors responsibilities are stated in their report to the shareholders.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 73 Report of the independent auditors to the shareholders of BT Group plc We have audited the nancial statements which comprise the group prot and loss account group and company balance sheets group cash ow statement group statement of total recognised gains and losses and the related notes which have been prepared under the historic cost convention and the accounting policies set out in the Accounting Policies section and the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles section.
We have also audited the disclosures required by Part 3 of Schedule 7A to the Companies Act 1985 contained in the directors remuneration report the audited part.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditors The directors responsibilities for preparing the annual report the directors remuneration report and the nancial statements in accordance with applicable United Kingdom law and accounting standards and the requirements of the US Securities and Exchange Commission are set out in the statement of directors responsibilities.
Our responsibility is to audit the nancial statements and the audited part of the directors remuneration report in accordance with relevant legal and regulatory requirements United Kingdom Auditing Standards issued by the Auditing Practices Board and the Listing Rules of the Financial Services Authority.
We report to you our opinion as to whether the nancial statements give a true and fair view and whether the nancial statements and the audited part of the directors remuneration report have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
We also report to you if in our opinion the directors report is not consistent with the nancial statements if the company has not kept proper accounting records if we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or if information specied by law or the Listing Rules regarding directors remuneration and transactions is not disclosed.
We read the other information contained in the annual report and consider the implications for our report if we become aware of any apparent misstatements or material inconsistencies with the nancial statements.
The other information comprises only those sections set out in the table of contents including Financial headlines Chairmans message Chief Executives statement Business and Financial reviews Fiveyear nancial summary Report of the directors Corporate governance and Risk factors.
We review whether the corporate governance statement reects the companys compliance with the seven provisions of the Combined Code specied for our review by the Listing Rules and we report if it does not.
We are not required to consider whether the boards statements on internal control cover all risks and controls or to form an opinion on the effectiveness of the companys or groups corporate governance procedures or its risk and control procedures.
Basis of audit opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards issued by the Auditing Practices Board and in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States.
An audit includes examination on a test basis of evidence relevant to the amounts and disclosures in the nancial statements and the audited part of the directors remuneration report.
It also includes an assessment of the signicant estimates and judgements made by the directors in the preparation of the nancial statements and of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the companys circumstances consistently applied and adequately disclosed.
We planned and performed our audit so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered necessary in order to provide us with sufcient evidence to give reasonable assurance that the nancial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or other irregularity or error.
In forming our opinion we also evaluated the overall adequacy of the presentation of information in the nancial statements.
UK opinion In our opinion the nancial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and the group at 31 March 2003 and of the prot and cash ows of the group for the year then ended the nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and those parts of the directors remuneration report required by Part 3 of Schedule 7A of the Companies Act 1985 have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
US opinion In our opinion the nancial statements present fairly in all material respects the consolidated nancial position of the group as at 31 March 2003 and 31 March 2002 and the results of its operations and its cash ows for the years ended 31 March 2003 31 March 2002 and 31 March 2001 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United Kingdom.
Accounting principles generally accepted in the United Kingdom vary in certain respects from accounting principles generally accepted in the United
The application of the latter would have affected the determination of consolidated net income for the three years ended 31 March 2003 31 March 2002 and 31 March 2001 and the consolidated shareholders equity at 31 March 2003 and 31 March 2002 as shown in the summary of differences between United Kingdom and United States generally accepted accounting principles set out in the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles section.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors 1 Embankment Place London WC2N 6RH 21 May 2003 74 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Consolidated financial statements The consolidated nancial statements are divided into the following sections 76 Accounting policies 79 Group prot and loss account 82 Group statement of total recognised gains and losses 83 Group cash ow statement 84 Group balance sheet 85 Notes to the nancial statements 85 Accounting for the reorganisation and demerger changes in accounting policy and presentation and discontinued activities 86 Segmental analysis 90 Turnover 90 Other operating income 91 Operating costs 94 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures 94 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 95 Prot on sale of property xed assets 95 Amounts written off investments 95 Interest receivable 95 Interest payable 96 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 97 Minority interests 97 Dividends 97 Earnings loss per share 99 Reconciliation of operating prot loss to operating cash ows 99 Management of liquid resources 99 Acquisitions and disposals 104 Net debt 104 Intangible assets 105 Tangible xed assets 106 Fixed asset investments 107 Debtors 108 Current asset investments 108 Loans and other borrowings 109 Other creditors 109 Provisions for liabilities and charges 110 Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds 111 Related party transactions 111 Financial commitments contingent liabilities and subsequent events 112 Pension costs 116 Directors 117 People employed 117 Employee share schemes 121 Auditors 121 Financial instruments and risk management 126 Company balance sheet BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 75 Accounting policies I Basis of preparation of the nancial statements The nancial statements are prepared under the historical cost convention and in accordance with applicable accounting standards and the provisions of the Companies Act 1985.
The group nancial statements consolidate those of the company and all of its subsidiary undertakings.
Where the nancial statements of subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures do not conform with the groups accounting policies appropriate adjustments are made on consolidation in order to present the group nancial statements on a consistent basis.
The principal subsidiary undertakings nancial years are all coterminous with those of the company.
The preparation of nancial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the nancial statements and the reported amounts of income and expenditure during the reporting period.
Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Estimates are used principally when accounting for interconnect income provision for doubtful debts payments to telecommunication operators depreciation goodwill amortisation and impairment employee pension schemes provisions for liabilities and charges and taxes.
II Turnover Group turnover net of discounts which excludes value added tax and other sales taxes comprises the value of services provided and equipment sales by group undertakings excluding those between them.
Total turnover is group turnover together with the groups share of its associates and joint ventures turnover excluding the groups share of transactions between the group and its principal joint venture Concert BV.
Turnover from calls is recognised in the group prot and loss account at the time the call is made over the groups networks.
Turnover from rentals is recognised evenly over the period to which the charges relate.
Turnover from equipment sales is recognised at the point of sale.
Prepaid call card sales are deferred until the customer uses the stored value in the card to pay for the relevant calls.
Turnover arising from the provision of other services including maintenance contracts is recognised evenly over the periods in which the service is provided to the customer.
Turnover from installation and connection activities is recognised in the same period as the related costs.
Turnover from classied directories mainly comprising advertising revenue is recognised in the group prot and loss account upon completion of delivery.
III Research and development Expenditure on research and development is written off as incurred.
IV Leases Operating lease rentals are charged against the prot and loss account on a straightline basis over the lease period except where the contractual payment terms are considered to be a more systematic and appropriate basis.
V Interest Interest payable including that related to nancing the construction of tangible xed assets is written off as incurred.
Discounts or premiums and expenses on the issue of debt securities are amortised over the term of the related security and included within interest payable.
Premiums payable on early redemptions of debt securities in lieu of future interest costs are written off when paid.
VI Foreign currencies On consolidation assets and liabilities of foreign undertakings are translated into sterling at year end exchange rates.
The results of foreign undertakings are translated into sterling at average rates of exchange for the year.
Exchange differences arising from the retranslation at year end exchange rates of the net investment in foreign undertakings less exchange differences on borrowings which nance or provide a hedge against those undertakings are taken to reserves and are reported in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
All other exchange gains or losses are dealt with through the prot and loss account.
VlI Intangibles a Goodwill Goodwill arising from the purchase of subsidiary undertakings and interests in associates and joint ventures represents the excess of the fair value of the purchase consideration over the fair value of the net assets acquired.
For acquisitions completed on or after 1 April 1998 the goodwill arising is capitalised as an intangible asset or if arising in respect of an associate or joint venture recorded as part of the related investment.
Goodwill is amortised on a straight line basis from the time of acquisition over its useful economic life.
The economic life is normally presumed to be a maximum of 20 years.
For acquisitions on or before 31 March 1998 the goodwill is written off on acquisition against group reserves.
If an undertaking is subsequently divested the appropriate unamortised goodwill or goodwill written off to reserves is dealt with through the prot and loss account in the period of disposal as part of the gain or loss on divestment.
Licence fees paid to governments which permit telecommunication activities to be operated for dened periods are amortised from the later of the start of the licence period or launch of service to the end of the licence period on a straightline basis.
76 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Accounting policies VllI Tangible xed assets Tangible xed assets are stated at historical cost less depreciation.
Cost in the case of network services includes contractors charges and payments on account materials direct labour and directly attributable overheads.
Depreciation is provided on tangible xed assets on a straight line basis from the time they are available for use so as to write off their costs over their estimated useful lives taking into account any expected residual values.
No depreciation is provided on freehold land.
The lives assigned to other signicant tangible xed assets are Freehold buildings  40 years Leasehold land and buildings  Unexpired portion of lease or 40 years whichever is the shorter Transmission equipment duct  25 years cable  3 to 25 years radio and repeater equipment  2 to 25 years Exchange equipment  2 to 13 years Computers and ofce equipment  2 to 6 years Payphones other network equipment motor vehicles and cableships  2 to 20 years Software  2 to 5 years IX Fixed asset investments Investments in subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures are stated in the balance sheet of the company at cost less amounts written off.
Amounts denominated in foreign currency are translated into sterling at year end exchange rates.
Investments in associates and joint ventures are stated in the group balance sheet at the groups share of their net assets together with any attributable unamortised goodwill on acquisitions arising on or after 1 April 1998.
The groups share of prots less losses of associates and joint ventures is included in the group prot and loss account.
Investments in other participating interests and other investments are stated at cost less amounts written off.
X Asset impairment Intangible and tangible xed assets are tested for impairment when an event that might affect asset values has occurred.
Goodwill is also reviewed for impairment at the end of the rst nancial year after acquisition.
An impairment loss is recognised to the extent that the carrying amount cannot be recovered either by selling the asset or by the discounted future cash ows from operating the assets.
XI Stocks Stocks mainly comprise items of equipment held for sale or rental consumable items and work in progress on longterm contracts.
Equipment held and consumable items are stated at the lower of cost and estimated net realisable value after provisions for obsolescence.
Work in progress on longterm contracts is stated at cost after deducting payments on account less provisions for any foreseeable losses.
XII Debtors Debtors are stated in the balance sheet at estimated net realisable value.
Net realisable value is the invoiced amount less provisions for bad and doubtful debtors.
Provisions are made specically against debtors where there is evidence of a dispute or an inability to pay.
An additional provision is made based on an analysis of balances by age previous losses experienced and general economic conditions.
XIII Redundancy costs Redundancy or leaver costs arising from periodic reviews of staff levels are charged against prot in the year in which the group is demonstrably committed to the employees leaving the group.
If the estimated cost of providing incremental pension benets in respect of employees leaving the group exceeds the total accounting surplus based on the latest actuarial valuation of the groups pension scheme and the amount of the provision for pension liabilities on the balance sheet then the excess estimated costs are charged against prot in the year in which the employees agree to leave the group within redundancy or leaver costs.
XIV Pension schemes The group operates a funded dened benet pension scheme which is independent of the groups nances for the substantial majority of its employees.
Actuarial valuations of the main scheme are carried out by an independent actuary as determined by the trustees at intervals of not more than three years to determine the rates of contribution payable.
The pension cost is determined on the advice of the companys actuary having regard to the results of these valuations.
In any intervening years the actuaries review the continuing appropriateness of the contribution rates.
The cost of providing pensions is charged against prots over employees working lives with the group using the projected unit method.
Variations from this regular cost are allocated on a straightline basis over the average remaining service lives of current employees to the extent that these variations do not relate to the estimated cost of providing incremental pension benets in the circumstances described in XIII above.
Interest is accounted for on the provision or prepayment in the balance sheet which results from differences between amounts recognised as pension costs and amounts funded.
The regular pension cost variations from the regular pension cost described above and interest are all charged within staff costs.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 77 Accounting policies The group also operates dened contribution pension schemes and the prot and loss account is charged with the contributions payable.
XV Taxation Full provision is made for deferred taxation on all timing differences which have arisen but have not reversed at the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is regarded as more likely than not that there will be taxable prots from which the underlying timing differences can be deducted.
No deferred tax is provided in respect of any future remittance of earnings of foreign subsidiaries or associates where no commitment has been made to remit such earnings.
The deferred tax balances are not discounted.
XVI Financial instruments a Debt instruments Debt instruments are stated at the amount of net proceeds adjusted to amortise any discount evenly over the term of the debt and further adjusted for the effect of currency swaps acting as hedges.
The group uses derivative nancial instruments to reduce exposure to foreign exchange risks and interest rate movements.
The group does not hold or issue derivative nancial instruments for nancial trading purposes.
Criteria to qualify for hedge accounting The group considers its derivative nancial instruments to be hedges when certain criteria are met.
For foreign currency derivatives the instrument must be related to actual foreign currency assets or liabilities or a probable commitment and whose characteristics have been identied.
It must involve the same currency or similar currencies as the hedged item and must also reduce the risk of foreign currency exchange movements on the groups operations.
For interest rate derivatives the instrument must be related to assets or liabilities or a probable commitment such as a future bond issue and must also change the interest rate or the nature of the interest rate by converting a xed rate to a variable rate or vice versa.
Accounting for derivative nancial instruments Principal amounts underlying currency swaps are revalued at exchange rates ruling at the date of the group balance sheet and to the extent that they are not related to debt instruments are included in debtors or creditors.
Interest differentials under interest rate swap agreements used to vary the amounts and periods for which interest rates on borrowings are xed are recognised by adjustment of interest payable.
The forward exchange contracts used to change the currency mix of net debt are revalued to balance sheet rates with net unrealised gains and losses being shown as part of debtors creditors or as part of net debt.
The difference between spot and forward rate for these contracts is recognised as part of net interest payable over the term of the contract.
The forward exchange contracts hedging transaction exposures are revalued at the prevailing forward rate on the balance sheet date with net unrealised gains and losses being shown as debtors and creditors.
Instruments that form hedges against future xedrate bond issues are marked to market.
Gains or losses are deferred until the bond is issued when they are recognised evenly over the term of the bond.
78 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Continuing activities
Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items
Total
Total turnover 2 20182  20182 Groups share of joint ventures turnover 3 425  425 Groups share of associates turnover 3 1030  1030 Group turnover 2 18727  18727 Other operating income 4 215  215 Operating costs 5 16152 218 16370 Group operating prot loss 2790 218 2572 Groups share of operating prot loss of joint ventures 6 31 150 119 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates 6 212 2 210 Total operating prot loss 2971 70 2901 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 7  1700 1700 Loss on sale of group undertakings 7  9 9 Prot on sale of property xed assets 8 11  11 Interest receivable 10 195  195 Amounts written off investments 9 7  7 Interest payable 11 1341 293 1634 Prot on ordinary activities before taxation 1829 1328 3157 Tax on prot on ordinary activities 12 598 139 459 Prot on ordinary activities after taxation 1231 1467 2698 Minority interests 13 5 7 12 Prot for the nancial year 1226 1460 2686 Dividends 14 560 Retained prot for the nancial year 28 2126 Basic earnings per share 15 14.2p 31.2p Diluted earnings per share 15 14.1p 31.0p Group profit and loss account for the year ended 31 March 2003 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 79 Continuing activities
Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items
Total continuing activities
Total
Total turnover 2 21815  21815 2827 24642 Groups share of joint ventures turnover 3 2752  2752 76 2828 Groups share of associates turnover 3 1297  1297 639 1936 Trading between group and principal joint venture 3 681  681  681 Group turnover 2 18447  18447 2112 20559 Other operating income 4 361  361 1 362 Operating costs 5 16037 2817 18854 2546 21400 Group operating prot loss 2771 2817 46 433 479 Groups share of operating prot loss of joint ventures 6 323 1160 1483 19 1464 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates 6 215 175 40 43 83 Total operating prot loss 2663 4152 1489 371 1860 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 7  169 169 3208 3377 Prot loss on sale of group undertakings 7  148 148 1160 1012 Prot on sale of property xed assets 8 27 1062 1089  1089 Interest receivable 10 360  360  360 Amounts written off investments 9  535 535  535 Interest payable 11 1777 162 1939 43 1982 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation 1273 3766 2493 3954 1461 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 12 528 143 385 58 443 Prot loss on ordinary activities after taxation 745 3623 2878 3896 1018 Minority interests 13 10  10 13 23 Prot loss for the nancial year 735 3623 2888 3883 995 Dividends see note below 14 173 Retained prot for the nancial year 28 822 Basic earnings loss per share 15 8.8p 34.8p 12.0p Diluted earnings loss per share 15 8.8p 34.8p 11.9p In addition to the nal dividend for the year of 173 million there was a demerger distribution of 19490 million representing the net assets of mmO including purchased goodwill as at the date of demerger.
Of the demerger distribution 9 million represents a cash dividend paid by British Telecommunications plc to mmO plc as part of the demerger process.
Group profit and loss account for the year ended 31 March 2002 80 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Continuing activities
Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items
Total continuing activities
Total
Total turnover 2 21068  21068 8598 29666 Groups share of joint ventures turnover 3 3420  3420 598 4018 Groups share of associates turnover 3 1205  1205 4714 5919 Trading between group and principal joint venture 3 698  698  698 Group turnover 2 17141  17141 3286 20427 Other operating income 4 346  346 13 359 Operating costs 5 14405 95 14500 6259 20759 Group operating prot loss 3082 95 2987 2960 27 Groups share of operating loss of joint ventures 6 268 241 509 257 766 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates 6 111 133 22 391 369 Total operating prot loss 2925 469 2456 2826 370 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 7  Prot on sale of group undertakings 7 84 84  84 Prot on sale of property xed assets 8 34  34  34 Interest receivable Interest payable 11 1575  1575 147 1722 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation 1763 174 1937 2968 1031 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 12 385 47 432 280 712 Prot loss on ordinary activities after taxation 1378 127 1505 3248 1743 Minority interests 13 23 21 2 129 127 Prot loss for the nancial year 1401 106 1507 3377 1870 Dividends 14 571 Transfer from reserves for the nancial year 28 2441 Basic earnings loss per share 15 19.3p 20.7p 25.7p Diluted earnings loss per share 15 19.0p 20.4p 25.7p Group profit and loss account for the year ended 31 March 2001 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 81 2003 Prot loss for the nancial year Group 2483 2580 975 Joint ventures 103 1524 974 Associates 100 61 79 Total prot loss for the nancial year 2686 995 1870 Currency movements arising on consolidation of nonUK Subsidiaries 2 14 215 Joint ventures 5 46 245 Associates 2 45 31 Unrealised gain loss on transfer of assets and group undertakings to a joint venture  5 49 Total recognised gains and losses for the nancial year 2691 985 1490 Group statement of total recognised gains and losses for the year ended 31 March 2003 82 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Notes Net cash inow from operating activities 16 6023 5257 5887 Dividends from associates and joint ventures 6 210 Returns on investments and servicing of nance Interest received 231 309 293 Interest paid including nance costs 1737 2004 1020 Net cash outow for returns on investments and servicing of nance 1506 1695 727
UK corporation tax paid 425 557 669 NonUK tax paid 9 5 Taxation paid 434 562 669 Capital expenditure and nancial investment Purchase of intangible xed assets   4208 Purchase of tangible xed assets 2580 4069 4756 Sale of tangible xed assets 94 2645 440 Purchase of xed asset investments 1 37 93 Disposal of xed asset investments 106 107 175 Net cash outow for capital expenditure and nancial investment 2381 1354 8442 Free cash ow before acquisitions disposals and dividends 1708 1648 3941 Acquisitions and disposals Purchase of subsidiary undertakings net of 13m cash acquired 2002  nil 2001  101m 56 896 11215 Investments in joint ventures 133 235 3214 Investments in associates   72 Disposal of subsidiary undertakings net of nil cash disposed 2002  28m 2001  nil 3 1959 245 Sale of investments in joint ventures and associates 2916 4957 502 Net cash inow outow for acquisitions and disposals 2842 5785 13754 Equity dividends paid 367  1432 Cash inow outow before management of liquid resources and nancing 4183 7433 19127 Management of liquid resources 17 1729 1864 480
Issue of ordinary share capital 42 6057 149 Issue of shares to minorities  36 Inow on demerger of mmO New loans 20 30 14552 Repayment of loans 2471 1851 225 Net decrease increase in shortterm borrowings 64 10155 5223 Net cash outow inow from nancing 2473 5479 19735 Decrease increase in cash in the year 19 90 128 Decrease increase in net debt in the year 19 4225 13930 18942 Group cash flow statement for the year ended 31 March 2003 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 83 Notes Fixed assets Intangible assets 20 218 252 Tangible assets 21 15888 16078 Investments in joint ventures 22 Share of gross assets and goodwill 741 2452 Share of gross liabilities 610 1998 Total investments in joint ventures 131 454 Investments in associates 22 27 224 Other investments 22 397 543 Total investments 22 555 1221 Total xed assets 16661 17551 Current assets Stocks 82 111
Falling due within one year 4413 5041 Falling due after more than one year 630 231 Total debtors 23 5043 5272 Investments 24 6340 4581 Cash at bank and in hand 91 158 Total current assets 11556 10122 Creditors amounts falling due within one year Loans and other borrowings 25 2548 2195 Other creditors 26 7132 7195 Total creditors amounts falling due within one year 9680 9390 Net current assets 1876 732 Total assets less current liabilities 18537 18283 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year Loans and other borrowings 25 13456 16245 Provisions for liabilities and charges Deferred taxation 27 2017 2140 Total provisions for liabilities and charges 2376 2324 Minority interests 63 72 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 28 37 434 434 Share premium account 28 2 2 Other reserves 28 998 1025 Prot and loss account 28 1208 1819 Total equity shareholders funds deciency 28 2642 358 18537 18283 The nancial statements on pages 75 to 135 were approved by the board of directors on 21 May 2003 and were signed on its behalf by Sir Christopher Bland Chairman Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ian Livingston Group Finance Director Group balance sheet as at 31 March 2003 84 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 1.
Accounting for the reorganisation and demerger changes in accounting policy and presentation and discontinued activities a Reorganisation and demerger On 19 November 2001 the legal separation of the mmO business from the rest of the former British Telecommunications plc group was completed and BT Group plc BT Group became the ultimate parent company of British Telecommunications plc BT.
The legal structure of the transaction was such that BT transferred the mmO business to mmO plc and BT Group Investments Limited BTGI became the immediate parent company of BT on 16 November 2001.
On 19 November 2001 mmO plc transferred the shares in BTGI to BT Group as consideration for the issue to former BT shareholders of one ordinary share of 115 pence in the company credited as fully paid for each ordinary share in BT held on 16 November 2001.
On 21 November 2001 following the approval of the Court the nominal value of BT Group shares was reduced from 115 pence per ordinary share to 5 pence per ordinary share by way of a reduction of capital under section 135 of the Companies Act 1985.
The surplus of 9537 million arising from this capital reduction has been credited to the group prot and loss reserve.
The transfer of BTGI to the company has been accounted for as a group reconstruction in accordance with the principles of merger accounting set out in Financial Reporting Standard 6 FRS 6 and Schedule 4A to the Companies Act 1985.
The consolidated nancial statements are therefore presented as if the company had been the parent company of the group throughout the year ended 31 March 2001 and up to the date of the demerger.
The results of mmO have been included in discontinued activities in all three years.
The transfer of BT to BTGI on 16 November 2001 was a group reorganisation effected for nonequity consideration.
This transaction has been accounted for in these nancial statements using the principles of merger accounting as if BT had been owned and controlled by BTGI throughout the year ended 31 March 2001 and up to 16 November 2001.
This is not in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 since the group reorganisation does not meet all the conditions for merger accounting.
If acquisition accounting had been applied to account for the reorganisation whereby BTGI became the parent company of BT this would have resulted in all the separable assets and liabilities of the BT Group as at 16 November 2001 being recorded at their fair values substantial goodwill and goodwill amortisation charges arising and only the post demerger results being reected within the BT Group consolidated nancial statements.
The directors consider that to have applied acquisition accounting in preparing these nancial statements would have failed to give a true and fair view of the groups state of affairs and results.
This is because in substance BT Group is the successor to BT and its shareholders have had a continuing interest in the BT business both before and after the demerger.
The directors consider that it is not practicable to quantify the effects of this departure from the requirements of the Companies Act 1985.
In the companys nancial statements its investment in BTGI is stated at the nominal value of shares issued.
In accordance with sections 131 and 133 of the Companies Act 1985 no premium was recorded on the ordinary shares issued see note 37.
On consolidation the difference between the nominal value of the shares issued and the aggregate share capital share premium and capital redemption reserve of BT at the date of the demerger the merger difference has been debited to the other reserves see note 28.
During the year ended 31 March 2003 the group has made a number of changes in the presentation of its nancial statements.
Comparative gures have been restated accordingly.
These are explained in the notes where material.
There have been no changes to accounting policies in the 2003 nancial year.
On 1 June 2001 BT disposed of its interests in Japan Telecom and JPhone Communications and on 29 June 2001 its interest in Airtel.
On 22 June 2001 BT sold Yell its classied advertising directory businesses in the UK and the USA.
These activities together with mmO are shown as discontinued operations in the prot and loss accounts.
The eliminations are intragroup eliminations.
The interest charge allocated to mmO for all periods presented up to the date of the demerger has been calculated assuming that mmO s net debt at the date of the demerger of 500 million had been in existence for the whole of the period and had been bearing an interest charge of 8% per annum.
The interest charge allocated to Yell for all periods presented up to the date of disposal represents amounts payable on intercompany loans charged at an arms length rate of interest.
The taxation charge allocated to discontinued activities for all periods presented up to the date of demerger or disposal represents amounts charged to these entities before recognising credit for group relief surrendered to entities within continuing activities.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 85 2.
Segmental analysis The group provides telecommunication services principally in the UK and essentially operates as a unitary business.
Its main services and products are xed voice and data calls the provision of xed exchange lines to homes and businesses the provision of communication services to other operators the provision of private services to businesses and the supply of telecommunication equipment for customers premises.
The turnover of each line of business is derived as follows and BT Retail derives its turnover from the supply of exchange lines and from the calls made over these lines the leasing of private circuits and other private services the sale and rental of customer premises equipment to the groups UK customers and other lines of business and from its narrowband and broadband internet access products. and from interconnecting the groups UK network to other operators. integration work and from the xed network operations of the groups European subsidiaries.
The business also derives revenues from providing web hosting facilities to end customers and through BT lines of business.
Segmented information on the lines of business is given below for the years ended 31 March 2003 31 March 2002 and 31 March 2001 as required by the UK accounting standard SSAP 25 and the US accounting standard SFAS No.
131 SFAS 131.
There is extensive trading between the lines of business and protability is dependent on the transfer price levels.
These intragroup trading arrangements and operating assets have been subject to review and have changed in certain instances.
In addition the group moved management responsibility of BT Openworld to BT Retail.
Comparative gures have been restated for these and other changes and in certain instances have been determined using apportionments and allocations.
Turnover
Depreciation and amortisation
Total operating prot loss External Internal
Year ended 31 March 2003 m m m m m m BT Retail 11333 1968 13301 210 3 1421 BT Wholesale 3472 7788 11260 1923 1 1923 BT Global Services 3882 1369 5251 624 180 266 Other  177 Intragroup  11126 11126 Group totals 18727  18727 3035 329 2901
Depreciation and amortisation
Total operating prot loss External Internal
Year ended 31 March 2002 m m m m m m BT Retail 10724 2087 12811 255 6 866 BT Wholesale 3700 8556 12256 1914  2163 BT Global Services 3635 837 4472 2828 144 2540 Concert  1123 1123 Other 458 855 Intragroup  11162 11162 Total continuing activities 18117 330 18447 5345 1443 1489 mmO 2273 392 2665 648 5 461 Other Intragroup  724 724 Total discontinued activities 2442 330 2112 656 62 371 Group totals 20559  20559 6001 1381 1860 Notes to the financial statements 86 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 2.
Segmental analysis continued
Depreciation and amortisation
Total operating prot loss External Internal
Year ended 31 March 2001 m m m m m m BT Retail 10721 1820 12541 220 59 595 BT Wholesale 3005 8723 11728 1738  2538 BT Global Services 2966 502 3468 646 72 668 Concert  1 1 Other 399 8 Intragroup  10734 10734 Total continuing activities 16819 322 17141 2980 531 2456 mmO 2865 523 3388 3416 290 3416 Other Intragroup  851 851 Total discontinued activities 3608 322 3286 3451 134 2826 Group totals 20427  20427 6431 397 370 Transactions between divisions are at prices set in accordance with those agreed with Oftel where the services provided are subject to regulation.
Other transactions are at arms length.
The following tables show the capital expenditure on plant equipment and property the net operating assets or liabilities and the net book value of associates and joint ventures by line of business for the years ended 31 March 2003 and 2002.
Net operating assets comprise tangible and intangible xed assets stocks debtors less creditors excluding loans and other borrowings and provisions for liabilities and charges excluding deferred tax.
Year ended 31 March 2003
Net operating assets liabilities
BT Retail 115 430 8 BT Wholesale 1652 12041 BT Global Services 439 1912 141 Total 2445 13740 158 Year ended 31 March 2002
Net operating assets liabilities
BT Retail 153 215 3 BT Wholesale 1974 12163 1 BT Global Services 609 1907 320 Concert  338 Total continuing activities 3100 14334 678 mmO Other 1 Total discontinued activities 808 Total 3908 14334 678 Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 87 2.
Segmental analysis continued Information about geographic areas Turnover with external customers Attributable to UK 17536 16703 15924 Attributable to nonUK countries 1191 1414 895 Total continuing activities 18727 18117 16819 Attributable to UK  1555 2718 Attributable to nonUK countries Total discontinued activities  2442 3608 Group turnover 18727 20559 20427 Turnover attributable to nonUK countries comprises the external turnover of group companies and branches operating outside the UK income from nonUK operators for calls terminating in or in transit through the UK and turnover with nonUK joint ventures and associates.
The group turnover from continuing activities as disclosed in the group prot and loss account includes intragroup trading with discontinued activities.
Group xed assets are located UK 14785 15384 Europe excluding the UK 1227 1275 Americas 510 683 Asia and Pacic 139 209 Total 16661 17551 Geographical segment analysis in accordance with the requirements of SSAP 25 is as follows Total turnover on basis of origin UK 17544 16428 15580 Europe excluding the UK 2151 2449 1840 Americas 155 2000 2557 Asia and Pacic 332 608 769 Total continuing activities 20182 21485 20746 UK  1635 2920 Europe excluding the UK  927 1244 Americas  36 214 Asia and Pacic  559 4542 Total discontinued activities  3157 8920 Total 20182 24642 29666 The total turnover from continuing activities as disclosed in the group prot and loss account includes intragroup trading with discontinued activities.
Group turnover on basis of origin UK 17536 16703 15924 Europe excluding the UK 978 1113 507 Americas 153 147 154 Asia and Pacic 60 154 234 Total continuing activities 18727 18117 16819 UK  1555 2718 Europe excluding the UK  851 676 Americas  36 214 Total discontinued activities  2442 3608 Total 18727 20559 20427 The group turnover from continuing activities as disclosed in the group prot and loss account includes intragroup trading with discontinued activities.
Notes to the financial statements 88 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 2.
Segmental analysis continued The analysis of turnover by geographical area is stated on the basis of origin.
In an analysis of turnover by destination incoming and transit international calls by country of origin and turnover with nonUK joint ventures and associates would be treated differently but would not lead to a materially different geographical analysis.
See the information about geographic areas above.
Group operating prot loss UK 3220 2628 3330 Europe excluding the UK 627 2829 252 Americas 28 153 15 Asia and Pacic 7 2 106 Total continuing activities 2572 46 2987 Europe excluding the UK  429 3094 Americas  6 22 Asia and Pacic  2 Total discontinued activities  433 2960 Total 2572 479 27 Share of operating results of associates and joint ventures including goodwill amortisation  prots losses Europe excluding the UK 305 240 212 Americas 1 1135 66 Asia and Pacic 27 51 202 Total continuing activities 329 1443 531 UK  519 Europe excluding the UK  20 259 Asia and Pacic  37 374 Total discontinued activities  62 134 Total 329 1381 397 2003 2002
Associates and joint ventures
Net operating assets
Total
Net operating assets liabilities UK 12196 8 12188 13186 2 13184 Europe excluding the UK 1652 76 1728 925 178 1103 Asia and Pacic 23 Total 13740 158 13898 14334 678 15012 Net operating assets comprise tangible and intangible xed assets stocks debtors less creditors excluding loans and other borrowings and provisions for liabilities and charges excluding deferred tax.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 89 3.
Turnover
Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover comprised Joint ventures Continuing activities 425 2752 3420 Discontinued activities  76 598 425 2828 4018
Continuing activities 1030 1297 1205 Discontinued activities  639 4714 1030 1936 5919 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 1455 4764 9937 Concert the joint venture with ATandT was formed on 5 January 2000 and was unwound on 1 April 2002 see note 18.
The groups share of trading with Concert in the 2001 and 2002 nancial years primarily in respect of international calls made to and from the UK and for services provided to Concert in the UK for the multinational customers transferred to Concert is eliminated in arriving at total turnover including the proportionate share of the groups associates and joint ventures and is added back in arriving at group turnover.
Other operating income 2003 Seconded staff administration and other services provided to Concert  135 168 Total continuing activities 215 361 346 Discontinued activities  113 Total other operating income 215 362 359 Notes to the financial statements 90 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 5.
Operating costs Total Group Staff costs Wages and salaries 3621 4013 3954 Social security costs 275 304 313 Pension costs Employee share ownership Total staff costs 4254 4724 4625 Own work capitalised 583 659 693 Depreciation note 21 3011 3680 3045 Amortisation and impairment of goodwill and other intangibles note 20 24 2321 3386 Payments to telecommunications operators 3846 4299 3802 Other operating costs 5818 7035 6594 Total operating costs 16370 21400 20759 Operating costs included the following Early leaver costs Research and development 380 362 364 Rental costs relating to operating leases including plant and equipment hire of 34 million 2002  51 million 2001  15 million 395 283 166 Foreign currency gains 12 1 50 Amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items comprising Property rationalisation provision 198 Goodwill impairment in subsidiary undertakings  1955 3000 Asset impairments  324 Costs relating to the Concert unwind  172 Costs relating to the demerger of mmO BT Retail call centre rationalisation costs  68 BT Wholesale bad debt costs  79 Credit for rates refunds relating to prior years   193 Write off of subscriber acquisition costs Write off of Viag Interkom IT systems  43 Total exceptional items 198 2707 2857 Goodwill amortisation 20 352 373 Total amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items 218 3059 3230 No charge for the cost of providing incremental pension benets for employees taking early retirement was made in the year ended 31 March 2001 in view of the combined surplus in the BT Pension Scheme and the amount provided for pension costs within provisions for liabilities and charges.
Amount set aside for the year for allocation of ordinary shares in the company to eligible employees.
Includes 61 million of leaver costs associated with the rationalisation of the BT Retail call centres in the year ended 31 March 2002.
The accounting of all the mmO operating units was aligned this resulted in a write off of previously capitalised costs in certain nonUK operations.
The directors believe that the nature of the groups business is such that the analysis of operating costs required by the Companies Act 1985 is not appropriate.
As required by the Act the directors have therefore adapted the prescribed format so that operating costs are disclosed in a manner appropriate to the groups principal activity.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 91 5.
Operating costs continued Continuing activities Staff costs Wages and salaries 3621 3659 3465 Social security costs 275 270 273 Pension costs Employee share ownership Total staff costs 4254 4321 4069 Own work capitalised 583 623 642 Depreciation note 21 3011 3266 2689 Amortisation and impairment of goodwill and other intangibles note 20 24 2079 291 Payments to telecommunications operators 3846 4289 3736 Other operating costs 5818 5522 4357 Total operating costs 16370 18854 14500 Operating costs included the following Early leaver costs Research and development 380 362 361 Rental costs relating to operating leases including plant and equipment hire of 34 million 2002  51 million 2001  13 million 395 277 156 Foreign currency gains 12 1 50 Amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items comprising Property rationalisation provision 198 Goodwill impairment in subsidiary undertakings  1955 200 Asset impairments  324 Costs relating to the Concert unwind  172 Costs relating to the demerger of mmO BT Retail call centre rationalisation costs  68 BT Wholesale bad debt costs  79 Credit for rates refunds relating to prior years   193 Total exceptional items 198 2696 7 Goodwill amortisation 20 121 88 Total amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items 218 2817 95 No charge for the cost of providing incremental pension benets for employees taking early retirement was made in the year ended 31 March 2001 in view of the combined surplus in the BT Pension Scheme and the amount provided for pension costs within provisions for liabilities and charges.
Amount set aside for the year for allocation of ordinary shares in the company to eligible employees.
Includes 61 million of leaver costs associated with the rationalisation of the BT Retail call centres in the year ended 31 March 2002.
Notes to the financial statements 92 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 5.
Operating costs continued Discontinued activities Staff costs Wages and salaries  354 489 Social security costs  34 40 Pension costs note 31  15 27 Total staff costs  403 556 Own work capitalised  36 51 Depreciation note 21  414 356 Amortisation and impairment of goodwill and other intangibles note 20  242 3095 Payments to telecommunications operators  10 66 Other operating costs  1513 2237 Total operating costs  2546 6259 Operating costs included the following Early leaver costs  59 Research and development  3 Rental costs relating to operating leases including plant and equipment hire of nil 2002  nil million 2001  2 million  610 Amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items comprising Goodwill impairment in subsidiary undertakings   2800 Costs relating to the demerger of mmO Write off of subscriber acquisition costs Write off of Viag Interkom IT systems  43 Total exceptional items  11 2850 Goodwill amortisation  231 285 Total amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items  242 3135 No charge for the cost of providing incremental pension benets for employees taking early retirement was made in the year ended 31 March 2001 in view of the combined surplus in the BT Pension Scheme and the amount provided for pension costs within provisions for liabilities and charges.
The accounting of all the mmO operating units was aligned this resulted in a write off of previously capitalised costs in certain nonUK operations.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 93 6.
Groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures The groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures comprised Joint ventures Continuing activities 119 1483 509 Discontinued activities  19 257 119 1464 766
Continuing activities 210 40 22 Discontinued activities Groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures 329 1381 397
Exceptional costs relating to the impairment of goodwill  433 200 Exceptional costs relating to the impairment of investments and release charge of related exit costs 150 780 Exceptional costs relating to the Concert unwind  81 Exceptional costs relating to write off of subscriber acquisition costs   132 Amortisation of goodwill arising in joint ventures and associates 2 53 185 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings In the year ended 31 March 2003 disposals of subsidiary undertakings resulted in losses of 9 million the consideration received in relation to these disposals was 3 million.
In January 2003 the group sold its 26% interest in Cegetel Groupe SA to Vivendi Universal SA for consideration of e4000 million 2603 million in cash.
The prot on disposal was 1509 million before the recognition of an exceptional interest charge of 293 million on closing out xed interest rate swaps following receipt of the sale proceeds and includes a writeback of 862 million of goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
In October 2002 the group sold its 2% interest in Mediaset for consideration of 87 million in cash.
The prot on disposal was 14 million.
In May 2002 and November 2002 the group sold its remaining holding of shares in BSkyB received for the exchange of the residual interest in British Interactive Broadcasting for consideration of 192 million recognising a prot of 131 million.
In December 2002 the group sold its interest in Blu SpA for consideration of 29 million.
The prot on disposal was 19 million.
Other gains of 39 million and losses of 12 million were recognised during the year ended 31 March 2003.
These gains and losses included a writeback of 7 million of goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
The consideration received in relation to these disposals was 114 million.
In June 2001 the group sold its interest in the Yell Group comprising mainly the Yellow Pages unit of BT Yellow Pages Sales Limited and Yellow Book USA Inc. and its subsidiary undertakings.
The consideration for this sale was 1960 million and a prot of 1128 million was realised.
This prot includes a writeback of 9 million of goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
In December 2001 the group sold its wholly owned subsidiary Clear Communications Limited which operates in New Zealand for consideration of 119 million.
A loss of 126 million was recognised on this sale of which 45 million relates to goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
Other disposals of subsidiary companies in the year ended 31 March 2002 resulted in gains on disposal of 10 million.
A prot of 120 million was recognised for the exchange of the residual interest in British Interactive Broadcasting for BSkyB shares in May 2001.
The consideration received was 241 million of BSkyB shares and the prot recognised relates to those shares that were marketable.
In June 2001 the group sold its effective 20% interest in Japan Telecom Co.
Limited and its 20% interest in JPhone Communications Co.
Limited to Vodafone plc for 3075 million in cash.
Under the sale agreement the group also sold shares representing 4.9% of JPhone Communications Co.
Limited obtained by exercising an option in June 2001 for 634 million in cash.
The realised prot on the sale of the 20% interest in Japan Telecom
Limited and JPhone Communications Co.
Limited and the sale of the 4.9% share of JPhone Communications Co.
Limited obtained through the exercise of options was 2358 million.
In June 2001 the group sold its 17.81% interest in Airtel Movil SA to Vodafone plc for 1084 million in cash.
The prot on disposal was 844 million.
Other gains of 135 million and losses of 80 million were also recognised during the year ended 31 March 2002.
These gains and losses included a writeback of 14 million of goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
The consideration received in relation to these disposals was 860 million including deferred and noncash amounts of 63 million.
Notes to the financial statements 94 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 7.
Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings continued In November 2000 the group sold its 34% stake in sunrise communications its joint venture in Switzerland to a fellow shareholder for consideration of 464 million on which a realised prot of 454 million has been recognised.
In December 2000 BT sold off part of its Aeronautical and Maritime division at a prot of 46 million.
Reductions in BTs holdings in I.
38 million and 25 million respectively.
Other gains during the 2001 nancial year totalled 56 million.
Prot on sale of property xed assets In December 2001 the group entered into a sale and leaseback transaction with Telereal under which substantially all of the groups interest in most of its UK freehold and long leasehold properties and its obligations in respect of rack rented properties were transferred to Telereal for cash consideration of 2380 million.
Of
Amounts written off investments Amounts written off investments were 7 million 2002  535 million 2001  nil.
In the year ended 31 March 2002 these were mainly attributable to investments in ATandT Canada 347 million and Impsat 157 million.
Interest receivable 2003 Income from listed investments 2 530 Other interest receivable Joint ventures 1 14 19 Associates 5 77 Total interest receivable 195 360 408 Includes 25 million of interest on rates refunds received in the year ended 31 March 2001 relating to prior years.
Interest payable 2003 Interest payable and similar charges in respect of Bank loans and overdrafts 82 184 181 Other borrowings ab 1527 1695 1245 Group 1609 1879 1426 Joint ventures 17 60 176 Associates 8 43 120 Total interest payable 1634 1982 1722 Includes 293 million charged in the year ended 31 March 2003 on the termination of interest rate swap agreements following the receipt of the Cegetel sale proceeds.
Includes 162 million charged in the year ended 31 March 2002 on the novation of interest rate swap agreements as a consequence of the property sale and leaseback transaction with Telereal.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 95 12.
Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities United Kingdom Corporation tax at 30% 447 275 690 Taxation on the groups share of results of associates  26 Taxation on the groups share of results of joint ventures  42 Prior year adjustments 12  185 NonUK taxation Current 47 23 24 Taxation on the groups share of results of associates 81 50 33 Taxation on the groups share of results of joint ventures  34 146 Prior year adjustments 26 7 20 Total current taxation 561 377 736 Deferred taxation charge credit at 30% Origination and reversal of timing differences 29 34 87 Prior year adjustments 73 32 111 Total deferred taxation 102 66 24 Total tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 459 443 712 The tax credit relating to exceptional items is 139 million 2002  143 million credit 2001  22 million charge of which nil 2002  nil 2001  12 million charge relates to prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings and prot on sale of property xed assets.
A tax charge on recognised gains and losses not included in the prot and loss account of 16 million 2002  11 million 2001  29 million related to exchange movements offset in reserves.
In the year ended 31 March 2001 the loss on ordinary activities before taxation was 1031 million after charging 3200 million of goodwill impairment which is not an allowable expense for taxation.
In the following table the effective corporation tax rate is reconciled to the prot of 2169 million before this impairment charge.
Current tax and total tax on prot on ordinary activities differs from the amount computed by applying the corporation tax rate to prot on ordinary activities before taxation.
The differences were attributable to the following factors % % % UK corporation tax rate 30.0 30.0 30.0 Nondeductible depreciation amortisation and impairment 0.4 92.6 9.0 Nondeductible nonUK losses 3.3 17.8 11.3 Higher taxes on nonUK prots 0.4 0.8 4.0 Excess depreciation over capital allowances 3.4 9.7 0.7 Pension provisions and prepayments 3.2 11.5 4.0 Other timing differences 0.7 0.5 0.7 Lower effective tax on gain on disposal of xed asset investments and group undertakings 16.5 66.3 8.3 Higher lower effective tax on gain on disposal of non qualifying assets 2.0 44.6 Prior year adjustments 2.0 0.5 9.5 Other 0.8 1.7 1.4 Current tax  effective corporation tax rate 17.7 25.8 33.9 Deferred taxes on excess depreciation over capital allowances 3.4 9.7 0.7 Pension provisions and prepayments 3.2 11.5 4.0 Other timing differences 0.7 0.5 0.7 Prior year adjustments 2.3 2.2 5.1 Total tax  effective corporation tax rate 14.5 30.3 32.8 Factors that may affect future tax charges The group operates in countries where the tax rate is different to the UK corporate tax rate primarily the USA the Netherlands the Republic of Ireland Germany and Spain.
As at 31 March 2003 the group had overseas corporate tax losses estimated to be 1.2 billion which are not recognised as deferred tax assets.
In addition the group has unutilised capital losses estimated to be in excess of 10 billion which were not recognised as deferred tax assets.
Notes to the financial statements 96 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 13.
Minority interests Minority interests in prots Group 4 76 Associates 8 16 121 Total minority interests 12 23 127 Dividends 2003 pence per share pence per share pence per share Interim dividend paid 2.25  7.80 194  571 Proposed nal dividend 4.25 2.00  366 173 Total dividends 6.50 2.00 7.8telIn addition to the nal dividend for the year ended 31 March 2002 of 173 million there was a demerger distribution of 19490 million representing the net assets of mmO including purchased goodwill as at the date of demerger.
Of the demerger distribution 9 million represents a cash dividend paid by British Telecommunications plc to mmO plc as part of the demerger process.
Earnings loss per share The basic earnings loss per share are calculated by dividing the prot for the nancial year attributable to shareholders by the weighted average number of shares in issue after deducting the companys shares held by employee share ownership trusts.
In calculating the diluted earnings loss per share share options outstanding and other potential ordinary shares have been taken into account.
The weighted average number of shares in the years were 2003 millions of shares millions of shares millions of shares Basic 8616 8307 7276 Dilutive ordinary shares from share options outstanding and shares held in trust 52 70 107 Total diluted 8668 8377 7383 Options over 177 million shares 2002  16 million 2001  nil were excluded from the calculation of the total diluted number of shares as they were antidilutive.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 97 15.
Earnings loss per share continued The items in the calculation of earnings loss per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items in the years were pence per share pence per share pence per share Attributable to exceptional items and goodwill amortisation from continuing activities Property rationalisation costs 2.3  198 Goodwill impairment in subsidiary undertakings  23.5 2.7  1955 200 Asset impairment in subsidiary undertakings  3.9   324 Costs relating to the Concert unwind  3.0   253 Costs relating to the demerger of mmO BT Retail call centre rationalisation costs  0.8   68 BT Wholesale bad debts costs  0.9   79 Rates refunds relating to prior years   2.7   193 Write off of subscriber acquisition costs   1.3   96 Goodwill impairment in associates and joint ventures  5.2 2.7  433 200 Impairment of investment in associates and joint ventures and release charge for related exit costs 1.8 9.4  150 780 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 19.8 2.0 7.3 1700 169 534 Loss prot on sale of group undertakings 0.1 1.8 1.2 9 148 84 Prot on sale of property xed assets  12.8   1062 Amounts written off investments  6.4   535 Finance cost of novating interest rate swaps 3.4 2.0  293 162 Interest receivable on rates refunds relating to prior years   0.3  25 Goodwill amortisation 0.3 2.0 2.4 22 162 166 Tax credit charge 1.6 1.7 0.7 139 143 47 Minority interest 0.1  0.3 7  21 Net credit charge attributable to exceptional items and goodwill amortisation from continuing activities 17.0 43.6 1.4 1460 3623 106 Attributable to discontinued activities Costs relating to the demerger of mmO Goodwill impairment in subsidiary undertakings   38.5   2800 Write off of Viag Interkom IT Systems   0.6   43 Write off of subscriber acquisition costs   0.6   43 Prot on sale of group undertakings  14.0   1160 Prot on sale of xed asset investments  38.6   3208 1 Goodwill amortisation  3.0 5.3  243 392 Tax credit   0.4  25 Results of discontinued activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items after tax and minority interest  2.7 1.8  231 125 Net credit charge attributable to discontinued activities  46.8 46.4  3883 3377 Basic earnings loss per shareprot loss for the nancial year after goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 31.2 12.0 25.7 2686 995 1870 Less Basic earnings loss per shareprot loss for the nancial year attributable to discontinued activities  46.8 46.4  3883 3377 Basic earnings loss per shareprot loss for the nancial year before discontinued activities 31.2 34.8 20.7 2686 2888 1507 Less Basic earnings loss per shareprot loss for the nancial year attributable to exceptional items and goodwill amortisation from continuing activities 17.0 43.6 1.4 1460 3623 106 Basic earnings per shareprot for the nancial year from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 14.2 8.8 19.3 1226 735 1401 Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items are provided to help readers evaluate the performance of the group.
Notes to the financial statements 98 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 16.
Reconciliation of operating prot loss to operating cash ows 2003 Group operating prot loss 2572 479 27 Depreciation 3011 3680 3045 Goodwill amortisation and impairment 24 2321 3386 Decrease increase in stocks 31 43 67 Decrease increase in debtors 764 545 432 Decrease increase in creditors 294 803 203 Increase in pension prepayment and decrease in pension liabilities 314 537 294 Increase in provisions 171 52 72 Other 58 81 53 Net cash inow from operating activities 6023 5257 5887 Analysed as Continuing activities 6023 5023 5410 Discontinued activities  234 477 Net cash inow from operating activities 6023 5257 5887 Management of liquid resources 2003 Purchase of shortterm investments and payments into shortterm deposits over 3 months 3990 7601 1344 Sale of shortterm investments and withdrawals from shortterm deposits over 3 months 4082 4695 1765 Net movement of shortterm investments and shortterm deposits under 3 months not repayable on demand 1821 1042 901 Net cash outow from management of liquid resources 1729 1864 480 Movements in all shortterm investments and deposits not repayable on demand are reported under the heading of management of liquid resources.
Acquisitions and disposals Acquisition of subsidiary companies and businesses Year ended 31 March 2003
Other
Total
Consideration
Cash 13 13 Carrying value of Concert global venture 338  338 In addition net cash of 56 million was received in settlement of the unwind of the Concert global venture.
Year ended 31 March 2002 Esat Digifone
Total
Consideration
Deferred 8 8 Year ended 31 March 2001
Interkom
Telfort
Other
Total
Consideration
Cash 8770 1207 160 10137 Carrying value of joint venture wholly acquired 479 235  714 Total 9249 1442 160 10851 In addition cash of 1179 million was paid in settlement of deferred consideration on acquisitions in earlier years.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 99 18.
Acquisitions and disposals continued On completion of the unwind of Concert on 1 April 2002 the former Concert businesses customer accounts and networks were returned to the two parent companies with BT and ATandT each taking ownership of substantially those parts of the Concert global venture originally contributed by them.
As part of the settlement with ATandT for the unwind of the Concert global venture BT received net cash of 72 million 56 million.
This net settlement included the receipt of 350 million reecting the allocation of the businesses and the payment of 278 million to achieve the equal division of specied working capital and other liability balances.
The results of the acquired businesses both pre and post acquisition cannot be separately identied and therefore cannot be reported.
Book value and fair value Fixed assets 398 Current assets 301 Current liabilities 405 Provisions for liabilities and charges 2 Longterm debt 10 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets 282 Net receivable from ATandT 56 Total net assets acquired 338
Total cost 338 The consideration was satised through the unwind of the Concert global venture the carrying value of which was 338 million.
Accordingly there is no further prot or loss on the unwind and no goodwill on the acquisition.
During the year ended 31 March 2003 the acquisition of other subsidiary companies and businesses and the consideration given comprised Book value and fair value Fixed assets 1 Current liabilities 1 Groups share of original book value of net assets and fair value to group Goodwill 13 Total cost 13 On 18 April 2001 the group took full control of O Communications Ireland formerly Esat Digifone.
Under an agreement made in 2000 the group purchased from Telenor its 49.5% interest in Esat Digifone for 869 million.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition was being amortised over 20 years until it was demerged with mmO Book value and fair value Minority interest 7 Groups share of original book value of net liabilities 7 Goodwill 876 Total cost 869 Other subsidiary companies During the year ended 31 March 2002 the acquisition of interests in other subsidiary companies and the consideration given comprised Book value and fair value Fixed assets 3 Current assets 5 Current liabilities 6 Groups share of original book value of net assets and fair value to group 2 Goodwill 33 Total cost 35 Notes to the financial statements 100 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 18.
Acquisitions and disposals continued On 20 February 2001 the group took full control of Viag Interkom GmbH and Co Viag Interkom.
Under an agreement announced in August 2000 the group purchased from E.
N its 45% interest in Viag Interkom by means of a put option priced at e7.25 billion 4562 million.
In January 2001 the group acquired the 10% interest in the company previously owned by Telenor for e1.6 billion 1032 million.
As part of the transactions the group repaid loans due by Viag Interkom to E.
N and Telenor totalling 3165 million.
The total cash consideration amounted to 8770 million including 11 million expenses.
Book value and fair value Fixed assets 6728 Current assets 619 Current liabilities 585 Longterm liabilities 2505 Groups share of original book value of net assets 4257 Goodwill 4992 Total cost 9249 Since the acquisition was made towards the end of the year ended 31 March 2001 the fair values of the identiable assets and liabilities were determined on a provisional basis which were then conrmed in the 2002 nancial year.
Goodwill arising on acquisition of Viag Interkom and remaining in the group was being amortised over 20 years until it was partially demerged with mmO and the remaining balance was written off in the 2002 nancial year.
The consolidated results of Viag Interkom for the year ended 31 December 2000 and for the period from 1 January 2001 to 19 February 2001 on the basis of its accounting policies are summarised as follows Period 1 January to 19 February 2001 Year ended 31 December 2000 Group turnover 216 856 Total operating loss 108 686 Loss before taxation 160 784 Loss for the nancial period 160 784 Other subsidiary companies During the year ended 31 March 2001 the acquisition of interests in other subsidiary companies and the consideration given comprised Year ended 31 March 2001
Other
Total
Minority interest 31 31 Fixed assets 496  496 Current assets 221 16 237 Current liabilities 261  261 Group share of original book value of net assets and fair value to group 456 47 503 Goodwill 986 113 1099 Total cost 1442 160 1602 On 22 June 2000 BT received regulatory approval to acquire the remaining 50% interest of Telfort BV its provider of xed and mobile services to businesses and consumers in the Netherlands that it did not already own for 1207 million.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition of Telfort BV and remaining in the group was being amortised over 20 years until it was partially demerged with mmO and the remaining balance was written off in the 2002 nancial year.
Telfort BVs loss after tax for the year ended 31 December 1999 was 141 million and its loss for the six months ended 30 June 2000 was 86 million.
On 5 January 2000 BT and ATandT formed their global venture named Concert for the two companies transborder communications activities.
The venture is jointly owned and controlled.
The group contributed the majority of its crossborder international networks its international trafc its business with selected multinational customers and its international products for business customers as well as Concert
ATandT contributed a similar set of assets and businesses.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 101 18.
Acquisitions and disposals continued The book value of the assets contributed by the group to the joint venture comprised Intangible assets 568 Tangible xed assets 870 Total xed assets 1438 Current assets 123 Current liabilities 183 Net current liabilities 60 Provisions for liabilities and charges 13 Longterm debt owed to the BT group 1169 Net assets contributed 196 The acquisition of the groups 50% interest in Concert comprised Groups share of Concerts opening net assets US GAAP 631 Groups share of US to UK GAAP adjustments 180 Groups share of Concerts opening net assets UK GAAP 451 Net assets contributed by the group to the joint venture 196 Transition costs 96 Unrealised gain on the contribution 159 The gain on the transfer of the assets is unrealised since the group continues to maintain a 50% interest in the assets contributed.
This gain has been taken to a nondistributable reserve and is shown in the statement of total recognised gains and losses for the year ended 31 March 2000.
There is no tax charge on the gain.
During the year ended 31 March 2001 the groups share of Concerts opening net assets was amended due to certain true up contributions reducing the unrealised gain by 49 million.
This is shown in the statement of total recognised gains and losses for the year ended 31 March 2001.
Acquisition of associates and joint ventures Year ended 31 March 2002
Group share of original book value of net assets and fair value to the group 16 Goodwill 50 Total cost 66 Year ended 31 March 2001
JPhone
Group share of original book value of net assets and fair value to the group 10 5 Goodwill 84 Total cost 94 5 On 31 January 2002 one of the venture partners in Blu exercised a put option for BT to purchase a 9% interest for 66 million.
The cost of 66 million arising on this purchase was written off.
In addition in the year ended 31 March 2002 the value of BTs investment was reviewed and provision was made for the associated impairment and exit costs.
In December 2002 the group sold its interest in Blu note 7.
On 8 September 2000 BT increased its existing 33% interest in Telenordia based in Sweden to 50% for 94 million.
Goodwill was being amortised over 20 years until its disposal in October 2001.
On 8 May 2000 the group acquired a 40% interest in a company with Japan Telecom owning the other 60% interest which holds a 74% interest in JPhone Communications Co.
Limited JPC.
JPC in turn acquired controlling interests averaging 51% in nine regional Japanese mobile phone JPhone companies.
These JPhone companies merged into three larger regional companies during the year ended 31 March 2001.
Japan Telecom also held a direct 18% interest in the JPhone companies.
During the year ended 31 March 2001 the group held an effective 23% interest in JPhone.
The impact of the combined JPhoneJapan Telecom ownership structure however led the group to reect 63% of the JPhone results at the turnover and operating prot levels and all items below including interest and taxation in accordance with the requirements of FRS 9.
In June 2001 the group sold this interest note 7.
Notes to the financial statements 102 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 18.
Acquisitions and disposals continued Disposal of subsidiaries and the demerger of mmO In the year ended 31 March 2003 BT disposed of subsidiaries with net assets of 12 million.
Consideration amounted to 3 million resulting in a loss on disposal of 9 million.
The table below analyses the disposal of subsidiaries and the demerger of mmO for the year ended 31 March 2002.
Year ended 31 March 2002 mmO2
Other
Total
Net assets demerged or disposed of Fixed assets 20459 467 211 21137 Stocks 109 98  207 Debtors 1381 400 19 1800 Cash Creditors amounts falling due within one year 1790 153 46 1989 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year  10  10 Provisions 229   229 Intercompany loans 561   561 Goodwill previously written off to reserves  9 44 53 Net assets disposed of 19490 832 235 20557 Prot loss on disposal  1128 116 1012 Consideration 19490 1960 119 21569 Cash  1859 119 1978 Demerger distribution 19490   19490 Loan notes 60  60 Other 41  41 Total 19490 1960 119 21569 In addition 9 million deferred consideration was received during the year ended 31 March 2002 in settlement of the disposals on 18 July 1999 of BT New Towns Cable and Westminster Cable Limited.
Amounts included in the cash ow statement for the year ended 31 March 2002 attributable to mmO and Yell and the results of mmO and Yell included in the results for the 2002 nancial year to the date of demerger and disposal respectively were mmO
Net cash ow from operating activities 227 7 Capital expenditure 865 2 Decrease in cash in the year 262 4 Results of mmO and Yell included to date of demergerdisposal Group turnover 2665 171 Total operating loss prot 461 33 Loss prot before taxation 569 27 Taxation charge 24 9 Loss prot for the nancial year 593 18 On 19 November 2001 BT completed the demerger of mmO the groups former mobile phone business in
UK Limited formerly BT Cellnet Limited O Communications Ireland Limited formerly Esat Digifone Limited Telfort Mobiel BV Viag Interkom GmbH and Co Manx Telecom and Genie.
On 22 June 2001 BT completed the sale of the Yell Group.
The Yell Group consisted of the Yellow Pages division of British Telecommunications plc Yellow Pages Sales Limited and Yellow Book USA Inc. group undertakings.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 103 19.
Net debt At 1 April Cash ow
Other
Currency movement At 31 March Analysis of net debt Cash in hand and at bank 158 67    91 Overnight deposits 232 36    268 Bank overdrafts 16 12    4 Other current asset investments 4349 1729 23 13 16 6072 Shortterm investments and cash less bank overdrafts 4723 1710 23 13 16 6427 Debt due within one year excluding bank overdrafts 2179 2109  2414 60 2544 Debt due after one year 16245 406 10 2384 9 13456 Total debt excluding bank overdrafts 18424 2515 10 30 51 16000 Net debt 13701 4225 13 43 67 9573 Reconciliation of net cash ow to movement in net debt Decrease increase in cash in the year 19 90 128 Cash outow inow from decrease increase in debt 2515 11976 19550 Cash outow from increase in liquid resources 1729 1864 480 Decrease increase in net debt resulting from cash ows 4225 13930 18942 Currency and translation movements 67 32 26 Decrease increase in debt on disposal acquisition of subsidiary undertakings 13 75 48 Other noncash movements 43 268 226 Decrease increase in net debt in the year 4128 14241 19242 Net debt at 1 April 13701 27942 8700 Net debt at 31 March 9573 13701 27942 On the demerger mmO had net debt of approximately 500 million of which BT Group was owed approximately 440 million in addition to ordinary trading account balances.
19 November 2001.
Intangible assets
Telecommuni cation licences
Cost
1 April 2002 2588 21 2609 Acquisitions 13  13 Currency movements 23  23 Total cost at 31 March 2003 2578 21 2599
1 April 2002 2351 6 2357 Charge for the year 20 4 24 Total amortisation at 31 March 2003 2371 10 2381 Net book value at 31 March Net book value at 31 March Notes to the financial statements 104 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 21.
Tangible xed assets Land and buildings Plant and equipment
Total
Cost
1 April 2002 984 32745 1183 34912 Acquisitions of subsidiary undertakings 4telAdditions 9 489 1956 2454 Transfers 48 2257 2305 Disposal of subsidiary undertakings  8  8 Other disposals and adjustments 147 1596 34 1777 Currency movements 13 180 9 184 Total cost at 31 March 2003 955 34346 958 36259
1 April 2002 413 18475  18888 Acquisitions of subsidiary undertakings 2 96  98 Charge for the year 66 2945  3011 Disposal of subsidiary undertakings  5  5 Other disposals and adjustments 134 1537  1671 Currency movements 5 90  95 Total depreciation at 31 March 2003 352 20064  20416 Net book value at 31 March 2003 603 14282 958 15843 Engineering stores   45 45 Total tangible xed assets at 31 March 2003 603 14282 1003 15888 Net book value at 31 March 2002 571 14270 1183 16024 Engineering stores   54 54 Total tangible xed assets at 31 March 2002 571 14270 1237 16078 The net book value of land and buildings comprised Freehold 374 343 Long leases over 50 years unexpired 27 34 Short leases 202 194 Total net book value of land and buildingstel Expenditure on tangible xed assets comprised Plant and equipment Transmission equipment 1277 1373 Exchange equipment 228 428 Other network equipment 466 694 Computers and ofce equipment 281 273 Motor vehicles and other 162 189 Land and buildings 40 153 2454 3110 Decrease in engineering stores 9 10 Total continuing activities 2445 3100 Total discontinued activities  808 Total expenditure on tangible xed assets 2445 3908 Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 105 22.
Fixed asset investments Interests in associates and joint ventures
Loans
Share of post acquisition losses
Total
Cost
1 April 2002 3673 22 795 1240 4140 Additions 46 107   153 Acquisitions of subsidiary undertakings    3 3 Disposals 1652  180 664 2136 Unwind of Concert joint venture 1475  314  1161 Share of prots for the year   49  49 Repayments and other transfers 3 110 16 1 96 Currency movements 6 1  5 12 Total cost at 31 March 2003 595 20 236 585 964 Provisions and amounts written off 1 April 2002 2222   697 2919 Goodwill amortisation for the year 2    2 Disposals 1179   540 1719 Unwind of Concert joint venture 823    823 Repayments and other transfers 1   1 Increase in the year    30 30 Total provisions and amounts written off at 31 March 2003 221   188 409 Net book value at 31 March 2003 374 20 236 397 555 Net book value at 31 March 2002 1451 22 795 543 1221 Subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures Details of the principal operating subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates are set out on page 135.
Associates and joint ventures 2003
Goodwill 1 15 Loans 1 1 Share of other net assets 25 208 Total associates 27 224 Joint ventures Loans 19 21 Share of other net assets 112 433 Total joint ventures 131 454 Net book value at 31 March 158 678 Notes to the financial statements 106 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 22.
Fixed asset investments continued The groups proportionate share of its associates and joint ventures assets and liabilities in aggregate at 31 March was as follows Fixed assets 570 1668 Current assets 186 1973 Current liabilities 344 2362 Net current liabilities 158 389 Longterm liabilities 271 558 Minority interests 4 66 Share of net assets 137 655 The groups proportionate share of its associates and joint ventures prots less losses before taxation excluding minority interests totalled 310 million losses less prots 2002  1463 million losses less prots 2001 667 million and its share of their prots less losses attributable to shareholders excluding minority interests totalled 229 million for the year ended 31 March 2003 losses less prots 2002  1548 million losses less prots 2001  895 million.
Up to 21 August 2001 the group had a 74.5% interest in eescape Limited a UK telecommunications service provider having acquired an additional 25.5% on 19 December 2000.
This additional interest was not for holding as a longterm investment and was sold on 22 August 2001.
For this reason the investment in this company continued to be accounted for on the equity basis.
For the period to 21 August 2001 eescapes turnover was 1 million and it incurred a loss after taxation of 2 million.
Purchases from the group amounted to 1 million.
Other investments Other investments include ordinary shares of the company with a net book value of 61 million 2002 69 million and a market value of 50 million 2002  69 million held in trust for the BT Incentive Share Plan the BT Retention Share Plan the BT Executive Share Plan and the BT Deferred Bonus Plan note 34.
They also include ordinary shares of the company with a net book value of 37 million 2002  108 million and a market value of 25 million 2002  127 million held in trust for employee sharesave schemes.
In the group balance sheet at 31 March 2003 listed investments were held with a book value of 22 million 2002  94 million and a market value of 15 million 2002  171 million.
Debtors 2003 Trade debtors 2240 2393 Amounts owed by joint ventures trading 9 582 Amounts owed by associates trading  1 Other debtors 517 664 Accrued income 1486 1262 Pension fund prepayment Other prepayments 161 139 Total debtors 5043 5272 Trade debtors are stated after deducting 491 million 2002  450 million for doubtful debts.
The amount charged to the group prot and loss account for doubtful debts for the year ended 31 March 2003 was 264 million 2002  369 million including an exceptional charge of 79 million 2001  227 million.
Falling due after more than one year.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 107 24.
Current asset investments 2003 Listed investments 267 231 Other shortterm deposits and investments 6073 4350 Total current asset investments 6340 4581 Market value of listed investments 268 246 Included within other shortterm deposits and investments is 149 million invested with a swap counterparty.
The counterparty has security over this investment in the event of BT defaulting on the swap.
Loans and other borrowings 2003 US dollar 8.875% notes 2030 minimum 8.625% 1928 1928 5.75% bonds tel3.5% indexed linked notes tel8.625% bonds tel7.75% notes 2016 minimum 7.5% Euro 7.125% notes 2011 minimum 6.875% 1368 1368 US dollar 8.375% notes 2010 minimum 8.125% 2049 2072 US dollar 8.765% bonds telEuro 11.875% senior notes 2009 3 129 US dollar 11.875% senior notes 2008  124 US dollar 7% notes tel12.25% bonds tel7.375% notes 2006 minimum 7.125% Euro 6.375% notes 2006 minimum 6.125% 1858 1857 US dollar 7.875% notes 2005 minimum 7.624% 1942 2066 US dollar 6.75% bonds telEuro 5.875% notes 2004 minimum 5.625% 1087 1085 US dollar oating rate notes 2003 7.125% bonds tel12.25% bonds 2003  180 Euro oating rate notes 2003 US dollar 6.75% notes 2002  830 Total listed bonds debentures and notes 15317 17323 Lease nance 13 4 Bank loans due 20012009 average effective interest rate 9.8% 558 659 Floating rate note 20012009 average effective interest rate 4.1% 112 126 Other loans  123 Bank overdrafts and other shortterm borrowings 4 16 Euro Medium Term Notes  125 Commercial paper  64 Total loans and other borrowings 16004 18440 The interest rate payable on these notes will be subject to adjustment from time to time if either Moodys or Standard and Poors SandP reduces the rating ascribed to the groups senior unsecured debt below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of SandP.
In this event the interest rate payable on the notes and the spread applicable to the oating notes will be increased by 0.25% for each ratings category adjustment by each ratings agency.
In addition if Moodys or SandP subsequently increase the rating ascribed to the groups senior unsecured debt then the interest rate then payable on notes and the spread applicable to the oating notes will be decreased by 0.25% for each rating category upgrade by each rating agency but in no event will the interest rate be reduced below the minimum interest rate reected in the table above.
Notes to the financial statements 108 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 25.
Loans and other borrowings continued Apart from the lease nance all borrowings at 31 March 2003 are unsecured.
Lease nance is repayable by instalments.
Repayments fall due as follows Within one year or on demand 2548 2195 Between one and two years 846 2408 Between two and three years 4031 844 Between three and four years 501 4152 Between four and ve years 606 497 After ve years 7472 8344 Total due for repayment after more than one year 13456 16245 Total loans and other borrowings 16004 18440 Other creditors 2003 Trade creditors 2772 2396 Amounts owed to joint ventures trading 3 529 Corporation taxes 406 336 Other taxation and social security 438 477 Other creditors 1389 1558 Accrued expenses 718 772 Deferred income 1040 954 Dividends payable 366 173 Total other creditors 7132 7195 Provisions for liabilities and charges Provisions for liabilities and charges excluding deferred taxation
Pension provisions
Total
Balances at 1 April Charged against prot for the year Utilised in the year 27  8 35 Total provisions at 31 March Property provisions comprise amounts provided for obligations to complete nearly nished new properties and remedial work to be undertaken on properties and the onerous lease provision on rationalisation of the groups London ofce portfolio.
Provision for unfunded pension obligations.
Other provisions include amounts provided for legal or constructive obligations arising from insurance claims and litigation.
Deferred taxation Deferred tax is provided for in full on certain timing differences BT does not discount the provision.
Balance at 1 April 2002 2140 Credit against prot for the year 102 Transfer to current tax 23 Acquisition 2 Total deferred tax provisions at 31 March 2003 2017 Tax effect of timing differences due to Excess capital allowances 2035 2161 Pension prepayment 167 69 Other 185 90 Total provision for deferred taxation 2017 2140 Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 109 28.
Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds
Share premium account
Prot and loss account
Balances at 1 April 2000 7485  3345 9700 13840 Employee share option schemes  78 million shares issued note 34 88  546  634 Movement relating to BTs employee share ownership trust Currency movements including 65 million net movements in respect of foreign currency borrowings Loss for the nancial year    1870 1870 Dividend 7.8p per ordinary share    571 571 Adjustment to unrealised gain on transfer of assets and group undertakings to a joint venture   49  49 Balances at 1 April 2001 7573  2848 7329 12054 Rights issue 2272  3604  5876 Shares issued to special purpose trust Other allotments of ordinary shares prior to demerger  52 million shares issued 61  160  221 Distribution relating to demerger of mmO 19490 19490 Capital reduction on 21 November 2001 9537   9537 Goodwill previously written off to reserves taken back to the prot and loss account note 7  68 68 Employee share option schemes  1 million shares issued note 34 2   2 Movement relating to BTs employee share ownership trust Unrealised gain on start up of joint ventures   5  5 Realisation of gain made on start up of joint ventures   2  2 Movement in other reserves due to demerger   2  2 Currency movements including 36 million net movements in respect of foreign currency borrowings Prot for the nancial year    995 995 Dividend 2.0p per ordinary share    173 173 Balances at 1 April 2002 434 2 1025 1819 358 Goodwill previously written off to reserves taken back to the prot and loss account Employee share option schemes  0.2 million shares issued note 34 Transfer between reserves Currency movements including 106 million net movements in respect of foreign currency borrowings Prot for the year    2686 2686 Dividend 6.5p per ordinary share    560 560 Balances at 31 March 208 2642 During the year ended 31 March 2002 the company issued shares at a market value of 154 million 2001  400 million in respect of the exercise of options awarded under its principal savingsrelated share option scheme.
Employees paid 84 million 2001  145 million to the group for the issue of these shares and the balance of 70 million 2001  255 million comprised contributions to the qualifying employee share ownership trust from group undertakings.
The movement relating to BTs Employee Share Ownership Trust in 2001 included the writedown of shares held in trust.
The cumulative foreign currency translation adjustment which increased retained earnings at 31 March 2003 was 222 million 2002  217 million 2001  278 million.
The groups rights issue closed on 15 June 2001 when British Telecommunications plc was the parent company of the group.
A total of 1976 million ordinary shares of 25p each was issued at 300p per share in a 3 for 10 rights issue.
Of the total of 5876 million raised net of 52 million expenses 494 million was credited to share capital and 5382 million to the share premium account of British Telecommunications plc.
Following the introduction of BT Group plc as the parent company of the group the increase in consolidated share capital has been restated to reect the nominal value of BT Group plc shares and the balance has been credited to other reserves.
In connection with outstanding share options at the date of demerger 57 million British Telecommunications plc ordinary shares were issued on 14 November 2001 to a special purpose trust.
Of the consideration of 173 million 159 million was credited to the share premium account of British Telecommunications plc.
Following the introduction of BT Group plc as the parent company of the group the increase in consolidated share capital has been restated to reect the nominal value of BT Group plc shares and the balance has been credited to other reserves.
The demerger distribution of 19490 million represents the net assets of mmO including purchased goodwill as at the date of the demerger.
See also the note on the face of the group prot and loss account for the year ended 31 March 2002.
Following the approval of the Court the nominal value of BT Group shares was reduced from 115p per share to 5p per share on 21 November 2001 by way of a reduction of capital under section 135 of the Companies Act 1985.
The surplus of 9537 million arising from this reduction has been credited to group prot and loss reserve.
Aggregate goodwill at 31 March 2003 in respect of acquisitions completed prior to 1 April 1998 of 385 million 2002  1254 million 2001  1383 million has been written off against retained earnings in accordance with the groups accounting policy.
The goodwill written off against retained earnings will be charged in the prot and loss account on the subsequent disposal of the business to which it related.
Release of statutory reserves in subsidiary undertakings on cessation of associated activities.
Notes to the financial statements 110 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 29.
Related party transactions In the year ended 31 March 2003 the groups turnover with its associates and joint ventures amounted to 3 million 2002  15 million 2001  21 million and the group purchased 69 million 2002  99 million 2001  63 million in services and products from these undertakings.
Interest for the year of nil 2002  1 million 2001  81 million was receivable on debt due from these undertakings.
The amount of debt outstanding with these undertakings at 31 March 2003 was 20 million 2002  22 million.
The maximum debt outstanding during the year was 92 million 2002  73 million.
As at the latest practicable date 30 April 2003 the amount of debt outstanding was 20 million.
There were a number of transactions during the year between the company and its subsidiary undertakings which are eliminated on consolidation and therefore not disclosed.
Financial commitments contingent liabilities and subsequent events 2003 Contracts placed for capital expenditure not provided in the accounts 616 740 Operating lease payments payable within one year of the balance sheet date were in respect of leases expiring Within one year 11 13 Between one and ve years 26 11 After ve years 317 314 Total payable within one year 354 338 Future minimum operating lease payments for the group at 31 March 2003 were as follows 2003 Payable in the year ending 31 Marchtel 347tel 354 2007 357 Thereafter 9597 Total future minimum operating lease payments 11360 Operating lease commitments were mainly in respect of leases of land and buildings.
At 31 March 2003 other than disclosed below there were no contingent liabilities or guarantees other than those arising in the ordinary course of the groups business and on these no material losses are anticipated.
The group has insurance cover to certain limits for major risks on property and major claims in connection with legal liabilities arising in the course of its operations.
Otherwise the group generally carries its own risks.
The group has provided guarantees relating to certain leases entered into by O UK Limited prior to its demerger with mmO on 19 November 2001 amounting to US96 million 61 million as at 31 March 2003. plc has given BT a counterindemnity for these guarantees.
The company does not believe there are any pending legal proceedings which would have a material adverse effect on the nancial position or results of operations of the group.
Proceedings have been initiated in Italy against 21 defendants including a former BT employee in connection with the Italian UMTS auction.
Blu in which BT held a minority interest participated in that auction process.
The rst hearing has been scheduled for 11 July 2003 in Rome.
If the proceedings are successful BT could be held liable with others for any damages.
The company has concluded that it is not appropriate to make a provision in respect of any such potential claim.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 111 31.
Pension costs
The group continues to account for pension costs in accordance with UK Statement of Standard Accounting Practice No.
24 Pension Costs SSAP 24.
In addition disclosures have been presented in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard No.
17 Retirement Benets FRS 17.
The group offers retirement plans to its employees.
The groups main scheme the BT Pension Scheme BTPS is a dened benet scheme where the benets are based on employees length of service and nal pensionable pay.
The BTPS is funded through a legally separate trustee administered fund.
This scheme has been closed to new entrants since 31 March 2001 and replaced by a dened contribution scheme.
Under this dened contribution scheme the prot and loss charge represents the contribution paid by the group based upon a xed percentage of employees pay.
The total pension costs of the group including discontinued activities expensed within staff costs in the year was 322 million 2002  382 million 2001  326 million of which 314 million 2002  373 million 2001  315 million related to the groups main dened benet pension scheme the BTPS.
The decline in the pension cost reects the reduction in the number of active members of the BTPS and the interest credit relating to the balance sheet prepayment.
This total pension cost includes the cost of providing enhanced pension benets to leavers which amounted to 60 million 2002  46 million 2001  nil.
In the year ended 31 March 2002 this prot and loss charge of 46 million was not the full cash cost of 186 million because there was a pension fund accounting surplus including the provision on the balance sheet of 140 million that was fully utilised before making a charge to the prot and loss account.
The pension cost applicable to dened contribution schemes in the year ended 31 March 2003 was 4 million 2002  5 million 2001  nil and 0.4 million 2002  0.3 million 2001  nil of contributions to the schemes were outstanding at 31 March 2003.
The group occupies seven properties owned by the scheme on which an annual rental of 3 million is payable.
The BTPS assets are invested in UK and overseas equities UK and overseas properties xed interest and index linked securities deposits and shortterm investments.
At 31 March 2003 the UK equities included 37 million 2002  55 million 2001  51 million ordinary shares of the company with a market value of 58 million 2002  154 million 2001  258 million.
BT Pension Scheme Funding valuation A triennial valuation is carried out for the independent scheme trustees by a professionally qualied independent actuary using the projected unit method.
The purpose of the valuation is to design a funding plan to ensure that present and future contributions should be sufcient to meet future liabilities.
The triennial valuation as at 31 December 2002 forms the basis of determining the groups pension fund contributions for the year ending 31 March 2004 and future periods until the next valuation is completed.
The funding valuation is performed at 31 December because this is the nancial year end of the BTPS.
The valuation basis for funding purposes is broadly as follows and scheme assets are valued at market value at the valuation date and and scheme liabilities are measured using a projected unit method and discounted at the estimated rate of return reecting the assets of the scheme.
The last three triennial valuations were determined using the following longterm assumptions Real rates per annum Nominal rates per annum valuation % valuation % valuation % valuation % valuation % valuation % Return on existing assets relative to market values 4.52 2.38 3.80 7.13 5.45 7.95 after allowing for an annual increase in dividends of 1.00 1.00 0.75 3.53 4.03 4.78 Return on future investments 4.00 4.00 4.25 6.60 7.12 8.42 Average increase in retail price index    2.50 3.00 4.00 Average future increases in wages and salaries 1.50 1.75 1.75 4.04 4.80 5.82 Average increase in pensions    2.50 3.00 3.754.00 There is a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 1.25% for the rst three years.
Notes to the financial statements 112 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 31.
Pension costs continued The mortality assumption reects improvements in life expectancy since the 1999 valuation and incorporates further future improvements.
The assumed rate of investment return salary increases and mortality all have a signicant effect on the funding valuation.
A 0.25 percentage point change in these assumptions would have the following effects on the funding decit Impact on funding decit
Decrease bn 0.25 percentage point change in Investment return 0.9 0.9 Wage and salary increases 0.2 0.2 An additional year of life expectancy would result in a 0.7 billion increase in the decit.
At 31 December 2002 the assets of the BTPS had a market value of 22.8 billion 1999  29.7 billion and were sufcient to cover 91.6% 1999  96.8% of the benets accrued by that date after allowing for expected future increases in wages and salaries but not taking into account the costs of providing incremental pension benets for employees leaving under release schemes since that date.
This represents a funding decit of 2.1 billion compared to 1.0 billion at 31 December 1999.
The funding valuation uses conservative assumptions whereas had the valuation been based on the actuarys view of the median estimate basis the funding decit would have been reduced to 0.4 billion.
Although the current market value of equity investments has fallen the investment income and contributions received by the scheme exceeded the benets paid by 0.3 billion in the year ended 31 December 2002.
As a result of the triennial funding valuation the group has agreed to make employers contributions at a rate of 12.2% of pensionable pay from April 2003 and annual deciency payments of 232 million.
This compares to the employers contribution rate of 11.6% and annual deciency payments of 200 million that were determined under the 1999 funding valuation.
In the year ended 31 March 2003 the group made regular contributions of 278 million 2002  303 million 2001  308 million and additional special contributions for enhanced pension benets to leavers in the year ended 31 December 2001 of 129 million in the 2003 nancial year 2002  400 million 2001  100 million and deciency contributions of 200 million 2002  200 million 2001  200 million.
The group will also pay a special contribution in December 2003 which is expected to amount to approximately 100 million in respect of early leavers in the year ended 31 December 2002 which has already been reected in the prot and loss account.
Under the terms of the trust deed that governs the BTPS the group is required to have a funding plan that should address the decit over a maximum period of 20 years whilst the agreed funding plan addresses the decit over a period of 15 years.
The group will continue to make annual deciency payments until the decit is made good.
The BTPS was closed to new entrants on 31 March 2001 and the age prole of active members will consequently increase.
Under the projected unit method the current service cost as a proportion of the active members pensionable salaries is expected to increase as the members of the scheme approach retirement.
Despite the scheme being closed to new entrants the projected payment prole extends over more than 60 years.
SSAP 24 accounting valuation The SSAP 24 valuation is broadly on the following basis and scheme assets are valued at market value and and scheme liabilities are measured using the projected unit method and discounted at the estimated rate of return reecting the assets of the scheme.
For the purpose of determining the groups pension expenses under SSAP 24 in the years ended 31 March 2003 2002 and 2001 the same assumptions were used as set out above for the December 1999 funding valuation with the exception that over the long term it has been assumed that the return on the existing assets of the scheme relative to market values would be a nominal 5.6% per annum allowing for real equity dividend growth of 1.25% per annum.
This equates to a real return of 2.5% per annum rather than the more conservative funding valuation which used a real return of 2.4% per annum.
At 31 March 2000 there was a SSAP 24 decit of 0.2 billion and the regular cost for the 2003 2002 and 2001 nancial years was 11.6% of pensionable salaries based on the 31 March 2000 SSAP 24 valuation.
The pension cost for the 2004 nancial year will be based upon the 31 March 2003 SSAP 24 valuation.
At 31 March 2003 there was a SSAP 24 decit of 1.4 billion before taking account of the balance sheet prepayment and the regular cost will be 11.3% of pensionable salaries.
The SSAP 24 valuation at 31 March 2003 is based on the 31 December 2002 funding valuation rolled forward and uses the same assumptions as set out above with the following exceptions and return on existing assets is assumed to be a nominal 7.1% per annum which equates to a real return of 4.7% and average increase in retail price index is assumed to be 2.25% per annum and and the average future increases in wages and salaries is assumed to include a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 0.75% for the rst three years before returning to 1.5%.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 113 31.
Pension costs continued The cumulative difference since the adoption of SSAP 24 between the cash contributions paid by the group to the pension scheme and the prot and loss charge is reected on the balance sheet.
The cumulative cash contributions exceed the prot and loss charge and the resulting difference is shown as a prepayment on the balance sheet.
At 31 March 2003 the prepayment was 630 million 2002  231 million with the increase being principally due to the additional special and deciency contributions in the year.
The pension charge to the prot and loss account will also include the amortisation of the combined pension fund position and pension prepayment over the average remaining service lives of scheme members which amounts to 13 years and the cost of enhanced pension benets provided to leavers.
FRS 17  Retirement benets The group continues to account for pensions in accordance with SSAP 24.
Full implementation of FRS 17 has been deferred by the Accounting Standards Board until accounting periods commencing on or after 1 January 2005.
The requirements for disclosure under FRS 17 remain in force between its issue and full implementation and the required information is set out below.
FRS 17 species how key assumptions should be derived and applied.
These assumptions are often different to the assumptions adopted by the pension scheme actuary and trustees in determining the funding position of pension schemes.
The accounting requirements under FRS 17 are broadly as follows and scheme assets are valued at market value at the balance sheet date and scheme liabilities are measured using a projected unit method and discounted at the current rate of return on high quality corporate bonds of equivalent term to the liability and and movement in the scheme surplusdecit is split between operating charges and nancing items in the prot and loss account and in the statement of total recognised gains and losses actuarial gains and losses.
The nancial assumptions used to calculate the BTPS liabilities under FRS 17 at 31 March 2003 are Real rates per annum Nominal rates per annum % % % % Average future increases in wages and salaries 1.50 1.50 3.78 4.04 Average increase in pensions in payment and deferred pensions   2.25 2.50 Rate used to discount scheme liabilities 3.08 3.41 5.40 6.00 Ination  average increase in retail price index   2.25 2.50 There is a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 0.75% for the rst three years.
The expected nominal rate of return and fair values of the assets of the BTPS at 31 March were 31 March 2003 31 March 2002 Expected longterm rate of return per annum Asset fair value Expected longterm rate of return per annum Asset fair value % bn % % bn % UK equities 8.2 7.4 34 8.0 11.1 41 NonUK equities 8.2 6.4 30 8.0 8.1 30 Fixedinterest securities 5.2 3.1 14 5.6 3.0 11 Indexlinked securities 4.3 1.7 8 4.8 1.9 7 Property 7.0 3.3 15 7.0 2.8 10 Cash and other 4.0 0.4 1 4.5 0.2 1 Notes to the financial statements 114 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 31.
Pension costs continued The longterm expected rate of return on investments does not affect the level of the decit but does affect the level of the expected return on assets within the net nance cost charged to the prot and loss account under FRS 17.
The net pension decit set out below under FRS 17 is as if this standard was fully applied.
The fair value of the BTPS assets the present value of the BTPS liabilities based on the nancial assumptions set out above and the resulting decit together with those of unfunded pension liabilities at 31 March 2003 are shown below.
The fair value of the BTPS assets is not intended to be realised in the short term and may be subject to signicant change before it is realised.
The present value of the liabilities is derived from longterm cash ow projections and is thus inherently uncertain.
31 March 2003 31 March 2002
Present value of liabilities
Assets
Present value of liabilities
BTPS 21500 30500 9000 27100 28900 1800 Other liabilities 3333 3030 Total decit 9033 1830 Deferred tax asset at 30% 2710 549 Net pension liability 6323 1281 If the above amounts had been recognised in the nancial statements the groups net assets and prot and loss reserve at 31 March would be as follows 31 March 2003 31 March 2002 Net assets deciency Net assets deciency as reported 2642 358 SSAP 24 pension prepayment net of deferred tax 441 162 SSAP 24 pension provision net of deferred tax 23 20 Net pension liability under FRS 17 6323 1281 Net deciency including net pension liability 4099 1781 31 March 2003 31 March 2002 Prot and loss reserve Prot and loss reserve as reported 1208 1819 SSAP 24 pension prepayment net of deferred tax 441 162 SSAP 24 pension provision net of deferred tax 23 20 Net pension liability under FRS 17 6323 1281 Prot and loss reserve including net pension liability 5533 3242 On the basis of the above assumptions and in compliance with FRS 17 the amounts that would have been charged to the consolidated prot and loss account and the statement of total recognised gains and losses for the year ended 31 March 2003 would be as follows Analysis of amounts that would be charged to operating prot on an FRS 17 basis Current service cost 444 Past service cost 60 Total operating charge 504 Amount that would be charged credited to net interest payable on an FRS 17 basis Expected return on pension scheme assets 1983 Interest on pension scheme liabilities 1694 Net nance expense return 289 Amount that would be charged to prot before taxation on an FRS 17 basis 215 Analysis of the amount that would be recognised in the consolidated statement of total recognised gains and losses on an FRS 17 basis Expected return less actual return on pension scheme assets 6995 Experience gains losses arising on pension scheme liabilities 1056 Changes in assumptions underlying the present value of the pension scheme liabilities 1660 Actuarial loss recognised 7599 Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 115 31.
Pension costs continued The net pension cost of 215 million for the year ended 31 March 2003 under FRS 17 is 107 million lower than the prot and loss charge recognised under SSAP 24.
The movements in the net pension liability on an FRS 17 basis during the year ended 31 March 2003 were Decit at 1 April 2002 1830 Current service cost 444 Contributions 611 Past service costs 60 Other nance income 289 Actuarial loss recognised 7599 Decit at 31 March 2003 9033 Net pension liability post tax at 31 March 2003 6323 The history of experience gains losses which would have been recognised under FRS 17 were Difference between expected and actual return on scheme assets Amount m 6995 Percentage of scheme assets 32.5% Experience gains and losses on scheme liabilities Amount m 1056 Percentage of the present value of scheme liabilities 3.5% Total amount recognised in statement of total recognised gains and losses Amount m 7599 Percentage of the present value of scheme liabilities 24.9%
Directors emoluments The emoluments of the directors for the year ended 31 March 2003 and the benets received under the longterm incentive plans were in summary as follows Salaries 3212 2223 2199 Performancerelated and special bonus 2309 1691 1036 Deferred bonus in shares 1484 492 531 Other benets 644 160 182 7649 4566 3948 Payments to nonexecutive directors 294 414 388 Total emoluments 7943 4980 4336 Gain on the exercise of share options Value of shares vested under the Executive Share Plan and Retention Share Plan The amount for the year ended 31 March 2002 is entirely attributable to former directors.
The amount for the year ended 31 March 2001 is entirely attributable to former directors.
More detailed information concerning directors remuneration shareholdings pension entitlements share options and other longterm incentive plans is shown in the report on directors remuneration on pages 58 to 72.
Notes to the financial statements 116 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 33.
People employedtel Year end
Year end
Year end
Number of employees in the group Total continuing activities 104.7 107.4 108.6 114.6 116.8 118.3 NonUK   4.4 8.7 4.5 Total discontinued activities    10.2 20.2 15.1 Employee share schemes The company has a share ownership scheme used for employee share allocations prot sharing an employee share investment plan savingsrelated share option schemes for its employees and those of participating subsidiaries further share option schemes for selected group employees and an employee stock purchase plan for employees in the United States.
It also has several share plans for executives.
Share option schemes The major share option scheme the BT Group Employee Sharesave Scheme is savings related and the share options are normally exercisable on completion of a three or ve year Save As You Earn contract.
A similar savings related scheme exists for group employees based outside the UK.
Following the scheme of arrangement and demerger in November 2001 all options under the savings related schemes became exercisable for a period of six months.
On expiry of this period these options lapsed to the extent to which they had not been exercised.
Shortly before the scheme of arrangement 57 million shares were allotted to a special purpose trust to satisfy options which were likely to be exercised during that six month period.
Participants in the BT Share Option Scheme the BT US Stock Option Plan the BT Worldwide Share Option Scheme and the BT Global Share Option Plan the Executive Option Plans were given the opportunity to i conditionally on the scheme of arrangement being sanctioned by the Court release their options over British Telecommunications plc shares in consideration for the grant of options in their employers new holding company BT Group plc or mmO plc or ii if their options were already exercisable exercise their options over ordinary shares irrespective of whether the scheme of arrangement was sanctioned by the Court or iii if their options were not already exercisable conditionally on the scheme of arrangement being sanctioned by the Court exercise their options immediately following that time but prior to the reduction of BT Groups share capital.
To the extent that they had not already been exercised these options lapsed on 16 November 2001 the effective date of the scheme of arrangement.
On 17 December 2001 replacement unapproved options over BT Group shares were granted under the BT Group Legacy Option Plan to all participants in the Executive Option Plans who had released their options over British Telecommunications plc shares.
The value of the replacement options was determined by averaging the combined prices of BT Group plc and mmO plc shares over the 20 dealing days following the demerger on 19 November 2001.
This resulted in a factor of 1.3198 being applied to the former option over British Telecommunications plc shares in order to give the number of BT Group shares under the new option.
The option prices of the original options were also adjusted to take account of the different number of shares under option.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 117 34.
Employee share schemes continued Options outstanding under these share option schemes at 31 March 2003 and 2002 together with their exercise prices and dates were as follows Normal dates of exercise Option price per share millions Option price per share millions BT Employee Sharesave schemes British Telecommunications plc shares 20022005   322p852p 92 BT Group Employee Sharesave schemes BT Group plc shares Total 164 160 BT Group Legacy Option Plan BT Group plc shares 19932009 277p727p 2 231p727p 4 20012011 318p602p 14 602p 15 20042011 318p602p 3 318p 3 Total 19 22 BT Group Global Share Option Plan BT Group plc shares 20052012 163p263p 66 263p 2 Total outstanding options 249 276 The option prices of shares under the BT Group Legacy Option Plan were adjusted at the time of the demerger as detailed on page 117.
On the demerger BTs share option plans ceased to operate and were replaced by similar BT Group Employee Sharesave schemes and the BT Group Global Share Option Plan.
The weighted average fair value of share options granted during the year ended 31 March 2003 has been estimated on the date of grant using the BlackScholes option pricing model.
The following weighted average assumptions were used in that model an expected life extending one month later than the rst exercise date estimated annualised dividend yield of approximately 5% 2002  5% 2001  2% risk free interest rates of approximately 5% 2002  6% 2001  7% and expected volatility of approximately 40% 2002  34% 2001  41%.
The weighted average fair value of the share options granted in the year ended 31 March 2003 was 55p 2002  55p 2001  329p for options exercisable three years after the date of grant and 72p 2002  55p 2001  424p for options exercisable ve years after the date of grant.
The weighted average fair value of options granted under the BT Group Global Share Option Plan has been estimated as 24p.
The total value of share options granted by BT in the year ended 31 March 2003 was 41 million 2002  88 million 2001  168 million.
In accordance with UK accounting practices no compensation expense is recognised for the fair value of options granted where the exercise price equals the market price at date of grant or options granted under approved Sharesave schemes.
See United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles  IV Accounting for share options for the treatment under US GAAP.
Notes to the financial statements 118 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 34.
Employee share schemes continued Options granted exercised and lapsed under these share option schemes during the years ended 31 March 2001 2002 and 2003 and options exercisable at 31 March 2001 2002 and 2003 were as follows
Savings related schemes millions
Total millions
Weighted average exercise price Outstanding 31 March p1206p 432p Granted 41 8 49 534p885p 751p Exercised 46 1 47 168p1315p 319p Lapsed 17 1 18 168p1351p 619p Outstanding 31 March p1351p 564p Rights issue adjustment 21 2 23 Granted  6 6 420p 420p Exercised 83 1 84 240p523p 259p Lapsed 50  50 240p852p 622p Outstanding pre demerger 92 19 111 299p959p 533p Lapsed at demerger  19 19 299p959p 595p Outstanding at demerger  92  92 322p852p 520p Exercised   1 1 231p292p 232p Lapsed   1 1 318p602p 358p Outstanding 31 March  218p852p 448p Exercised  8  8 240p332p 321p Outstanding 31 March 2003 164  85 249 Exercisable 31 March 2000  3 3 289p460p 369p Exercisable 31 March 2001  3 3 289p460p 369p Exercisable 31 March p852p 395p Exercisable 31 March 2003   11 11 255p727p 491p The BT Group Employee Sharesave schemes.
The BT Employee Sharesave schemes.
Incentive Share Plan and Retention Share Plan The BT Incentive Share Plan ISP and the BT Retention Share Plan RSP were introduced for employees of the group in 2000.
Under the plans company shares are acquired by an employee share ownership trust and are conditionally awarded to participants.
Under the ISP participants are normally only entitled to these shares in full at the end of a threeyear period if the company has met the relevant predetermined corporate performance measure and if the participants are still employed by the group.
If the company has exceeded the predetermined corporate performance measure the participants may be awarded up to double the shares conditionally awarded.
The corporate performance measure assesses the companys overall performance against those top 100 companies listed on the London Stock Exchange as rated by the Financial Times the FTSE 100 index at the beginning of the relevant performance period.
Under the RSP the length of retention period before awards vest is exible.
Awards may vest in annual tranches.
The shares are transferred at the end of a specied period only if the individual is still employed by the group.
During the 2003 nancial year 374039 2002  162772 shares vested in 11 2002  12 participants in the RSP.
Executive Share Plan and Deferred Bonus Plan The BT Executive Share Plan ESP was introduced for employees of the group in 1994.
Under the ESP company shares are acquired by an employee share ownership trust and are conditionally awarded to participants.
Participants are only entitled to these shares in full at the end of a veyear period under the ESP if at the end of the period the company has met the relevant predetermined corporate performance measure.
Awards of shares were granted in each of the years from 1994 to 1999 under the ESP.
In 1994 1995 1996 and 1997 ESP participants could invest 50% of their annual bonus in the ESP for the purchase of shares.
These invested shares were matched by the company.
The corporate performance measure assesses the companys overall performance against those top 100 companies listed on the London Stock Exchange as rated by the FTSE 100 index at the beginning of the relevant performance period.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 119 34.
Employee share schemes continued The fourth veyear performance cycle of the ESP ended on 31 July 2002 and on the basis of the corporate performance measure the companys Total Shareholder Return TSR target relative to the other companies in the FTSE 100 32.5% 2002  85% of the shares vested on 1 August 2002 in 65 participants 1 August 2001 62 participants and 1.0 million shares 1 August 2001  1.2 million shares were transferred to those participants.
The BT Deferred Bonus Plan DBP was established in 1998 and awards were granted to employees of the group in July 1998 1999 2000 2001 and June 2002.
Under this plan shares in the company are acquired by an employee share ownership trust and transferred to participants at the end of three years if he or she has continued to be employed by the group throughout that period.
On 1 August 2002 657592 shares 1 August 2001  303326 were transferred to 223 participants 1 August 2001  154 at the end of the threeyear deferred period.
At31March200331.7millionshares200224.6millionsharesinthecompanywereheldintrustfor employeeshareschemesofwhich15.5millionshares200216.5millionshareswereheldfortheISP2.9million shares20021.1millionshareswereheldfortheRSP2.3millionshares20024.4millionshareswereheld fortheESPand4.2millionshares20022.7millionshareswereheldfortheDBP. benetoftheparticipants.
Additional information relating to the plans is as follows Year ended 31 March 2003
RSP
ESP
DBP
Total
Value of range of possible future transfers nil to 24.3 4.6 3.6 6.7 39.2 Provision for the costs of the plans charged credited to the prot and loss account in year  0.2 0.2 5.8 5.4 Nominal value of shares held in trust 0.8 0.1 0.1 0.2 1.2 Market value of shares held in trust 24.3 4.6 3.6 6.7 39.2 Year ended 31 March 2002
RSP
ESP
DBP
Total
Value of range of possible future transfers nil to 46.0 3.0 12.3 7.5 68.8 Provision for the costs of the plans charged credited to the prot and loss account in year  5.4 9.2 2.1 1.7 Nominal value of shares held in trust 0.8 0.1 0.2 0.1 1.2 Market value of shares held in trust 46.0 3.0 12.3 7.5 68.8 Of the total BT Group plc shares held 6.8 million shares were held at 31 March 2003 in trust for future awards under employee share schemes.
These shares had a nominal value of 0.3 million and a market value of 10.7 million at 31 March 2003.
The values of possible future transfers of shares under the plans were based on the BT Group plc share price at 31 March 2003 of 157p 2002  280p.
The provisions for the costs of the ISP RSP and ESP were based on best estimates of the companys performance over the plans conditional periods relating to those portions of the plan conditional periods from commencement up to the nancial year end.
Employee Share Investment Plan From December 2001 the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP was in operation.
The ESIP which has been approved by the Inland Revenue gives UK employees an opportunity to purchase shares partnership shares monthly out of pretax salary up to a maximum value of 125 per month.
During the 2003 nancial year 5.3 million shares 2002  0.7 million shares were purchased by the Trustee of the ESIP on behalf of 12092 employees at a total cost of 10.6 million 2002  1.8 million.
The free shares element of the ESIP allows BT to provide free shares to UK employees which are held in trust for at least three years.
A phantom plan which delivers cash awards equivalent to the value of the free shares operates for employees outside the UK.
In 2003 2% of pretax prots amounting to 36 million was set aside for the ESIP and the phantom plan for employees outside the UK 2002  25 million.
The allocation of this sum was subject to two performance targets one of increasing earnings per share by 25% and the other of reducing customer dissatisfaction by 25% both of which were achieved.
The ESIP replaced the BT Employee Share Ownership Scheme which operated for employee prot sharing until 2001.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan The BT Group Employee Stock Purchase Plan ESPP for employees in the US enables participants to purchase ADSs quarterly at a price the Base Option Price which is 85% of the market price of an ADS at the start of the offer and in the case of employees who have joined the ESPP after the start of the offer 85% of the market price on the date of joining whichever is higher.
At 15 May 2003 69164 shares have been issued under the BT Group
As the ADS price has been less than the Base Option Price since the date of the quarterly purchase in July 2002 the ESPP has been suspended until the ADS price rises above the Base Option Price.
Notes to the financial statements 120 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 35.
Auditors
The auditors remuneration for the year ended 31 March 2003 for the group was 2943000 2002 2702000 2001  3639000.
The audit fees payable to the companys auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP and formerly PricewaterhouseCoopers for the company and UK subsidiary undertakings statutory accounts were 1910000 2002  1656000 2001  2100000.
The audit fee of the company was 31000 2002  44000.
The following fees for nonaudit services were paid or are payable to the companys auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP in the UK for the years ended 31 March 2003 31 March 2002 and 31 March 2001 Rights issue restructuring and demerger projects  14161 9756 Regulatory audit and associated services 1690 1142 1130 Tax services 1817 1075 1539 Concert global venture related work 505 591 1196 Systems advice 3765 2565 1360 Corporate Finance advice 265 982 730 Other 938 2167 512 Total 8980 22683 16223 In addition fees of 1586000 were paid or are payable to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP for the year ended 31 March 2003 2002  2540000 2001  3025000 in respect of audit and other services to the companys subsidiary undertakings outside the UK.
Total fees paid or payable to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP for all services in the year ended 31 March 2003 were 12476000 2002  26879000 2001  21348000.
In order to maintain the independence of the external auditors the Board has determined policies as to what non audit services can be provided by the companys external auditors and the approval processes related to them.
Under those policies work of a consultancy nature will not be offered to the external auditors unless there are clear efciencies and value added benets to the company.
Under the terms of BTs main licence the group is required to publish audited regulatory nancial statements.
The fees for regulatory work principally reect the audit fees associated with those regulatory nancial statements.
The fees for tax services include tax compliance and tax advisory services.
The fees for systems advice in the year ended 31 March 2003 related to advisory services provided in connection with the implementation of certain billing systems.
These services which were provided by PwC Consulting the consulting business of PricewaterhouseCoopers that was sold to IBM in October 2002 commenced in the prior year and are now completed.
Financial instruments and risk management The group holds or issues nancial instruments mainly to nance its operations for the temporary investment of shortterm funds and to manage the currency and interest rate risks arising from its operations and from its sources of nance.
In addition various nancial instruments  for example trade debtors and trade creditors arise directly from the groups operations.
The group nances its operations primarily by a mixture of issued share capital retained prots deferred taxation longterm loans and shortterm loans principally by issuing commercial paper and mediumterm notes.
The group borrows in the major longterm debt markets in major currencies.
Typically but not exclusively the bond markets provide the most costeffective means of longterm borrowing.
The group uses derivative nancial instruments primarily to manage its exposure to market risks from changes in interest and foreign exchange rates.
The derivatives used for this purpose are principally interest rate swaps gilt locks currency swaps and forward currency contracts.
The types of nancial instrument used for investment of shortterm funds are prescribed in group treasury policies with limits on the exposure to any one organisation.
Shortterm investing in nancial instruments is undertaken on behalf of the group by substantial external fund managers who are limited to dealing in debt instruments and certain dened derivative instruments and are given strict guidelines on credit diversication and maturity proles.
During the year ended 31 March 2003 the groups net debt reduced from 13.7 billion to 9.6 billion.
2.6 billion was realised from the disposal of the groups interest in Cegetel Groupe SA in the year and the group has closed out 2.6 billion of associated xed interest rate swaps.
The groups xedoating interest rate prole therefore remains at 8812 at 31 March 2003.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 121 36.
Financial instruments and risk management continued During the year ended 31 March 2002 net debt was reduced from 27.9 billion to 13.7 billion mainly by the groups rights issue disposal of its Yell business its Japanese and Spanish interests and the property sale and leaseback transaction.
The proceeds of the rights issue and sale of assets were applied mainly in reducing shortterm borrowings.
The group repaid substantially all of its mediumterm notes and commercial paper in that year.
As a result of the demerger of the mmO business including its European operations the group swapped an additional e7 billion into oating rate sterling debt.
This in conjunction with the novation of 1 billion xed rate swaps to Telereal for the property transaction enabled the group to maintain its xedoating ratio at approximately 8812 at 31 March 2002.
During the year ended 31 March 2001 net debt increased from 8.7 billion to 27.9 billion mainly as a result of the group making acquisitions of businesses and thirdgeneration mobile licences.
This increase in debt was funded primarily by the issuance of longterm debt together with use of the groups mediumterm note programme.
As a result of this together with the groups interest rate swap activity the borrowing prole changed during that year from one mainly at oating rates to one with a xed oating rate ratio of approximately 7030.
This change was in line with the groups intention to limit the groups exposure to interest rate increases given the substantial size of the groups debt portfolio at the time.
During the second quarter of the year ended 31 March 2001 it was not practical for the group to issue longerterm debt in the global capital markets.
The group therefore prehedged its desired xed rate prole by transacting 9.3 billion of interest rate swaps with maturities ranging from ve to 30 years at a weighted average xed interest payable rate of 6.2%.
The group uses nancial instruments to hedge some of its currency exposures arising from its nonUK assets liabilities and forward purchase commitments.
The group also hedges some of its interest liabilities.
The nancial instruments used comprise borrowings in foreign currencies forward foreign currency exchange contracts gilt locks and interest and currency swaps.
There has been no change in the nature of the groups risk prole between 31 March 2003 and the date of these nancial statements.
The notional amounts of derivatives summarised below do not necessarily represent amounts exchanged by the parties and thus are not necessarily a measure of the exposure of the group through its use of derivatives.
The amounts exchanged are calculated on the notional amounts and other terms of the derivatives which relate to interest and exchange rates.
The group has entered into interest rate swap agreements with banks and other institutions to vary the amounts and periods for which interest rates on borrowings are xed.
Under interest rate swaps the group agrees with other parties to exchange at specied intervals the differences between xed rate and oating rate interest amounts calculated by reference to an agreed notional principal amount.
Under gilt locks forward sales of UK government longdated treasury stock were entered into for periods of up to one year.
This hedge effectively xed in the interest on part of the groups then future borrowings all of which have now been taken on.
At 31 March 2003 the group had outstanding interest rate swap agreements having a total notional principal amount of 5170 million 2002  7870 million.
Cross currency swaps and forward foreign exchange contracts have been entered into to reduce the foreign currency exposure on the groups operations and the groups net assets.
The group also enters into forward foreign exchange contracts to hedge investments interest expense and purchase and sale commitments denominated in foreign currencies principally US dollars and the euro.
The remaining terms of the currency swaps are up to 30 years and the terms of currency forward exchange contracts are typically less than one year.
The purpose of the groups foreign currency hedging activities is to protect the group from the risk that the eventual net inows and net outows will be adversely affected by changes in exchange rates.
At 31 March 2003 the group had outstanding foreign currency swap agreements and forward exchange contracts having a total notional principal amount of 14545 million 2002  16670 million.
The fair values of forward foreign currency contracts at 31 March 2003 were 673 million 2002  864 million for purchases of currency and 1041 million 2002  1582 million for sales of currency.
These fair values have been estimated by calculating their present values using the market discount rates appropriate to the terms of the contracts in effect at the balance sheet dates.
At 31 March 2003 the group had deferred unrealised gains of 2 million 2002  1 million and losses of nil 2002  13 million based on dealerquoted prices from hedging purchase and sale commitments and in addition had deferred realised net gains of 10 million 2002  20 million.
These are included in the prot and loss account as part of the hedged purchase or sale transaction when it is recognised or as gains or losses when a hedged transaction is no longer expected to occur.
Notes to the financial statements 122 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 36.
Financial instruments and risk management continued c Concentrations of credit risk and credit exposures of nancial instruments The group considers that it is not exposed to major concentrations of credit risk.
The group however is exposed to creditrelated losses in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to nancial instruments but does not expect any counterparties to fail to meet their obligations.
The group limits the amount of credit exposure to any one counterparty.
The group does not normally see the need to seek collateral or other security.
The longterm debt instruments issued in December 2000 and February 2001 both contained covenants that if the group credit rating was downgraded below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of SandP additional interest would accrue from the next interest coupon period at the rate of 0.25 percentage points for each ratings category adjustment by each ratings agency.
In May 2001 Moodys downgraded BTs credit rating to Baa1 which increased BTs interest charge by approximately 32 million per annum.
BTs current credit rating from SandP is A minus.
Based upon the total debt of 12 billion outstanding on these instruments at 31 March 2003 BTs annual interest charge would increase by approximately 60 million if BTs credit ratings were to be downgraded by one credit rating category by both agencies below a longterm debt rating of Baa1A minus.
If BTs credit rating with Moodys was to be upgraded by one credit rating category the annual interest charge would be reduced by approximately 30 million.
The following table shows the carrying amounts and fair values of the groups nancial instruments at 31 March 2003 and 2002.
The carrying amounts are included in the group balance sheet under the indicated headings with the exception of derivative amounts which are included in debtors or other creditors or as part of net debt as appropriate.
The fair values of the nancial instruments are the amount at which the instruments could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties other than in forced or liquidation sale.
Carrying amount Fair value
Assets
Cash at bank and in hand Shortterm investments 6311 4590 6319 4605 Fixed asset investments 31telLiabilities Shortterm borrowings Longterm borrowings excluding nance leases 15966 18750 17720 19774 Derivatives relating to investments and borrowings net Assets 10 427 229 Liabilities    234 Derivative nancial instruments held or issued to hedge the current exposure on expected future transactions net Assets 2  2 Liabilities    12 The fair values of listed shortterm investments were estimated based on quoted market prices for those investments.
The carrying amount of the other shortterm deposits and investments approximated to their fair values due to the short maturity of the instruments held.
The fair values of listed xed asset investments were estimated based on quoted market prices for those investments.
The fair value of the groups bonds debentures notes and other longterm borrowings has been estimated on the basis of quoted market prices for the same or similar issues with the same maturities where they existed and on calculations of the present value of future cash ows using the appropriate discount rates in effect at the balance sheet dates where market prices of similar issues did not exist.
The fair value of the groups outstanding foreign currency and interest rate swap agreements was estimated by calculating the present value using appropriate discount rates in effect at the balance sheet dates of affected future cash ows translated where appropriate into pounds sterling at the market rates in effect at the balance sheet dates.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 123 36.
Financial instruments and risk management continued The following information is provided in accordance with the requirements of FRS 13  Derivatives and other nancial instruments disclosures.
Except for disclosures under currency exposures below the nancial information excludes all of the groups shortterm debtors and creditors.
Financial liabilities After taking into account the various interest rate swaps and forward foreign currency contracts entered into by the group the interest rate prole of the groups nancial liabilities at 31 March was 2003 2002
Fixed rate nancial liabilities Floating rate nancial liabilities
Total
Fixed rate nancial liabilities Floating rate nancial liabilities
Total
Sterling 8814 7172  15986 11809 5686  17495 US dollar  118   118 Euro  Total 8814 7172 18 16004 12100 6297 43 18440 For the xed rate nancial liabilities the average interest rates and the average periods for which the rates are xed are 2003 2002
Weighted average interest rate %
Years
Weighted average interest rate %
Years
Sterling 8.5 13 8.5 12 US dollar  8.0 7 Euro  6.7 8 The oating rate nancial liabilities bear interest at rates xed in advance for periods ranging from one day to one year by reference to LIBOR.
The nancial liabilities on which no interest is paid are due to mature within one year of the balance sheet date.
The maturity prole of nancial liabilities is as given in note 25.
Financial assets After taking into account the various interest rate swaps and forward foreign currency contracts entered into by the group the interest rate prole of the groups nancial assets at 31 March was 2003 2002
Fixed rate nancial assets Floating rate nancial assets Financial assets on which no interest is paid
Fixed rate nancial assets Floating rate nancial assets Financial assets on which no interest is paid
Sterling 457 5974 255 6686 15 4724 255 4994 US dollar  2 2  4 4 Total 457 5974 317 6748 15 4724 373 5112 The sterling xed rate nancial assets yield interest at a weighted average of 4.3% 2002  4.3% for a weighted average period of 16 months 2002  39 months.
The oating rate nancial assets bear interest at rates xed in advance for periods up to one year by reference to LIBOR.
Notes to the financial statements 124 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 36.
Financial instruments and risk management continued Currency exposures The table below shows the currency exposures of the groups net monetary assets liabilities in terms of those transactional exposures that give rise to net currency gains and losses recognised in the prot and loss account.
Such exposures comprise the monetary assets and monetary liabilities of the group that are not denominated in the operating or functional currency of the operating unit involved other than certain nonsterling borrowings treated as hedges of net investments in nonUK operations.
At 31 March these exposures were as follows 2003 2002
US dollar
Other
Total
Sterling
US dollar
Other
Total
Functional currency of group operation Sterling  1 1 1 1 Other 13   4 The amounts shown in the table above take into account the effect of any currency swaps forward contracts and other derivatives entered into to manage those currency exposures.
At 31 March 2003 the group also held various forward currency contracts that the group had taken out to hedge expected future foreign currency purchases and sales.
Fair values of nancial assets held for trading 2003 Net gain included in prot and loss account 34 50 Fair value of nancial assets held for trading at 31 March 2610 1510 The net gain was derived from government bonds commercial paper and similar debt instruments.
The average fair value of nancial assets held during the year ended 31 March 2003 did not differ materially from the year end position.
Hedges
Gains and losses on instruments used for hedging are not recognised until the exposure that is being hedged is itself recognised.
Unrecognised and deferred gains and losses on instruments used for hedging and those recognised in the years ended 31 March 2003 and 31 March 2002 are as follows 2003 2002
Losses
Gains
Losses
Gains and losses recognised in the year but arising in previous years unrecognised at the balance sheet date 1carried forward in the year end balance sheet pending recognition in the prot and loss account expected to be recognised in the following year unrecognised at balance sheet date carried forward in the year end balance sheet pending recognition in the prot and loss account Excluding gains and losses on hedges accounted for by adjusting the carrying amount of a xed asset.
During the year ended 31 March 2003 the group entered into two derivatives contracts as an investment in a UK listed equity with limited net overall exposure.
At 31 March 2003 the two contracts had a net value of nil consisting of a futures purchase contract with a fair value of 68 million and a futures sales contract with a fair value of 68 million.
Unused committed lines of credit Unused committed lines of credit for shortterm nancing available at 31 March 2003 totalled approximately 575 million 2002  2100 million which was in support of a commercial paper programme or other borrowings.
These lines of credit are available for up to one year.
Notes to the financial statements BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 125 37.
Company balance sheet Fixed assets Investment in subsidiary undertaking 9971 9971 Total xed assets 9971 9971 Current assets
Investments
Cash at bank and in hand 2 Total current assets 372 175 Creditors amounts falling due within one year Net current assets 2 2 Total assets less current liabilities 9973 9973 Capital and reserves Called up share capital Share premium account Prot and loss account 9537 9537 Total equity shareholders funds 9973 9973 The nancial statements of the company on page 126 were approved by the board of directors on 21 May 2003 and were signed on its behalf by Sir Christopher Bland Chairman Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ian Livingston Group Finance Director During the year ended 31 March 2002 the company acquired BT Group Investments Limited BTGI for 9971 million see note 1.
BTGI is the intermediate holding company of British Telecommunications plc.
Debtors consists of amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings of 368 million 2002  173 million and other debtors of nil 2002  1 million.
The company invested in a listed investment with a book value and market value of 1 million 2002  1 million and short term loans to subsidiary undertakings of 1 million 2002  nil.
Creditors consists of dividends payable of 366 million 2002  173 million and other creditors of 4 million 2002  nil.
Capital and reserves are
Share premium account
Total
Balances on incorporation at 30 March 2001 Balances at 31 March 2001 Issue of shares 9971   9971 Capital reduction 9537  9537 Movement relating to BTs employee share ownership trust  2  2 Prot for the nancial year Dividend 2.0p per ordinary share   173 173 Balances at 31 March 2002 434 2 9537 9973 Movement relating to BTs employee share ownership trust Prot for the nancial year Dividend 6.5p per ordinary share   560 560 Balances at 31 March 2003 434 2 9537 9973 The authorised share capital of the company throughout the year ended 31 March 2003 and 31 March 2002 was 13463 million representing 269260253468 ordinary shares of 5 pence each.
The allotted called up and fully paid ordinary share capital of the company at 31 March 2003 and 31 March 2002 was 434 million representing 8670849554 ordinary shares of 5 pence each 2002  8670692996.
Of the authorised but unissued share capital at 31 March 2003 25 million ordinary shares 2002  25 million were reserved to meet options granted under employee share option schemes described in note 34.
The share premium account representing the premium on allotment of shares is not available for distribution.
The prot for the nancial year dealt with in the prot and loss account of the company and after taking into account dividends from subsidiary undertakings was 560 million 2002  173 million.
As permitted by Section 230 of the Companies Act 1985 no prot and loss account of the company is presented.
Ordinary shares allotted during the year were as follows
Nominal value
Savings related schemes 3944 Other share option schemes 152614 Totals for the year ended 31 March 2003 156558 Notes to the financial statements 126 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 127 The United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles are divided into the following sections 128 Differences between United Kingdom and United States generally accepted accounting principles 130 Net income and shareholders equity reconciliation statements 131 Minority interests 131 Accounting for share options 131 Consolidated statements of cash ows 132 Current asset investments 132 Pension costs 134 US GAAP developments The groups consolidated nancial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the UK UK GAAP which differ in certain respects from those applicable in the US US GAAP.
I Differences between United Kingdom and United States generally accepted accounting principles The following are the main differences between UK and US GAAP which are relevant to the groups nancial statements.
Under UK GAAP the sale of BTs property portfolio is treated as a xed asset disposal and the subsequent leaseback is an operating lease.
Under US GAAP the transaction is regarded as nancing and the land and buildings are recorded on the balance sheet at their net book value an obligation equivalent to the cash proceeds is recognised and the gain on disposal is deferred until the properties are vacated by BT.
Rental payments made by BT are reversed and replaced by a nance lease interest charge and a depreciation charge.
Under UK GAAP pension costs are accounted for in accordance with UK Statement of Standard Accounting Practice No.
24 costs being charged against prots over employees working lives.
Under US GAAP pension costs are determined in accordance with the requirements of US Statements of Financial Accounting Standards SFAS Nos.
87 and 88.
Differences between the UK and US GAAP gures arise from the requirement to use different actuarial methods and assumptions and a different method of amortising surpluses or decits.
Under UK GAAP the cost of providing incremental pension benets in respect of workforce reductions is taken into account when determining current and future pension costs unless the most recent actuarial valuation combined with the provision for pension costs in the group balance sheet under UK actuarial conventions shows a decit.
In this case the cost of providing incremental pension benets is included in redundancy charges in the year in which the employees agree to leave the group.
Under US GAAP the associated costs of providing incremental pension benets are charged against prots in the period in which the termination terms are agreed with the employees.
Under UK GAAP the group does not capitalise interest in its nancial statements.
To comply with US GAAP the estimated amount of interest incurred whilst constructing major capital projects is included in xed assets and depreciated over the lives of the related assets.
This included capitalisation of interest incurred on funding the 3G licences up to the date of the demerger.
The amount of interest capitalised is determined by reference to the average interest rates on outstanding borrowings.
At 31 March 2003 under US GAAP gross capitalised interest of 461 million 2002  330 million with regard to the company and its subsidiary companies was subject to depreciation generally over periods of 3 to 25 years.
Under UK GAAP in respect of acquisitions completed prior to 1 April 1998 the group wrote off goodwill arising from the purchase of subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures on acquisition against retained earnings.
The goodwill is reected in the net income of the period of disposal as part of the calculation of the gain or loss on divestment.
All unamortised and preApril 1998 goodwill will be brought back to the prot and loss account on disposal.
Following the implementation of UK Financial Reporting Standard No.
10 FRS 10 goodwill arising on acquisitions completed after 1 April 1998 is capitalised and amortised on a straight line basis over its useful economic life.
Under US GAAP up to 31 March 2002 goodwill arising on the acquisition of subsidiaries associates and joint ventures was capitalised as an intangible asset and amortised over its useful life.
With effect from 1 April 2002 BT has adopted SFAS No.
142 and goodwill is no longer amortised but tested annually for impairment.
In connection with the adoption of SFAS No.
142 transitional and annual impairment reviews were performed.
There was no transitional impairment charge recorded.
As a result of the annual impairment review a goodwill impairment charge of 54 million has been recognised in the year ended 31 March 2003.
Goodwill of 20 million amortised under UK GAAP is written back through the income statement.
Certain intangible xed assets recognised under US GAAP purchase accounting requirements are subsumed within goodwill under UK GAAP.
Under US GAAP these separately identied intangible assets are valued and amortised over their useful lives of 20 years.
Under UK GAAP investments are held on the balance sheet at historical cost and own shares held in trust for share schemes are recorded in xed asset investments.
Gains and losses on instruments used for hedges are not 128 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles I Differences between United Kingdom and United States generally accepted accounting principles continued recognised until the exposure being hedged is recognised.
Under US GAAP trading securities and availablefor sale securities are carried at market value with appropriate valuation adjustments recorded in prot and loss and shareholders equity respectively.
Certain derivative nancial instruments which qualify for hedge accounting under UK GAAP do not qualify for hedge accounting under US GAAP.
Under US GAAP nancial instruments do not qualify for hedge accounting due to the extensive documentation requirements.
These nancial instruments under US GAAP are carried at market value with valuation adjustments recorded in the prot and loss account.
The reassessment and purchase of derivatives in the year ended 31 March 2003 gave rise to an adjustment increasing net income by 610 million net of tax 2002  reduction 20 million.
The net unrealised holding gain on availableforsale securities for the year ended 31 March 2003 was 22 million 2002  271 million 2001  8 million.
SFAS 133 became effective for BT on 1 April 2001 and the unamortised transitional adjustment of 26 million net of tax remains in shareholders equity at 31 March 2003.
Under UK GAAP assets contributed to a joint venture by the groups partners are measured at their net replacement cost.
Any difference between the groups share of the joint ventures resulting net assets and the net book value of assets contributed by the group to the joint venture including certain accrued start up costs is immediately reected by adjusting the groups investment in the joint venture and recording a deferred difference in shareholders equity.
Under US GAAP the assets contributed by all joint venture partners are carried at their historical net book value and any difference between the groups share of the joint ventures resulting net assets and the net book value of assets contributed by the group to the joint venture is amortised over the life of the items giving rise to the difference.
Certain share options have been granted under BT saveasyouearn plans at a 20% discount.
Under UK GAAP the share issues are recorded at their discounted price when the options are exercised.
Under US GAAP a plan is considered compensatory when the discount to market price is in excess of 15%.
Compensation cost is recognised for the difference between the exercise price of the share options granted and the quoted market price of the shares at the date of grant or measurement date and accrued over the vesting period of the options.
Under UK GAAP shares held by employee share ownership trusts are recorded as xed asset investments at cost less amounts written off.
Under US GAAP those shares not fully vested are regarded as treasury stock and recorded at cost as a deduction from shareholders equity.
Under UK GAAP the economic interest in the associates operating prots before minority interest is reported as part of the total operating prot.
For those associates in whom a minority interest is recognised in their respective statements of prot and loss such minority interest is reported as minority interest in the consolidated prot and loss account.
Under US GAAP the minority interest in the associates is reclassied from minority interest and reported within the share of results of associates.
Under UK GAAP provision is made for deferred tax in so far as a liability or asset arose as a result of transactions that had occurred by the balance sheet date and give rise to an obligation to pay more tax in the future or a right to pay less tax in the future.
Under US GAAP deferred taxation is provided for on a full liability basis.
Future tax benets are recognised as deferred tax assets to the extent that their realisation is more likely than not.
As a result of changes in circumstances previously recognised deferred tax liabilities have been released in the 2003 nancial year.
At 31 March 2003 total deferred tax liabilities were 2806 million primarily in respect of accelerated capital allowances and total deferred tax assets were 2491 million primarily in respect of pension obligations.
Under UK GAAP dividends are recorded in the year in respect of which they are declared in the case of interim or any special dividends or proposed by the board of directors to the shareholders in the case of nal dividends.
Under US GAAP dividends are recorded in the period in which dividends are declared.
Under UK GAAP if there is an indication of impairment the assets should be tested for impairment and if necessary written down to the value in use calculated based on discounted future pretax cash ows related to the asset or the income generating unit to which the asset belongs.
US GAAP requires that an entity assess whether impairment has occurred based on the undiscounted future cash ows.
An impairment loss exists if the sum of these cash ows is less than the carrying amount of the asset.
The impairment loss recognised in the income statement is based on the assets fair value being either market value or the sum of discounted future cash ows.
United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 129 I Differences between United Kingdom and United States generally accepted accounting principles continued n Discontinued operations Under UK GAAP the disposal of certain lines of business and joint ventures and associates are shown as discontinued activities.
Under US GAAP only the disposals of lines of business under SFAS No.
144 would be reported as discontinued operations.
Under UK GAAP the cost of classied advertising directories in progress deferred in stock represents direct xed and variable costs as well as directly attributable overhead costs.
Under US GAAP the deferred costs associated with directories in progress comprise only the incremental direct costs associated with selling and creating the directories.
Directories in progress acquired in a business purchase are valued at replacement value under UK GAAP and at retail value under US GAAP.
Under UK GAAP this difference is included in goodwill.
There are timing differences between UK GAAP and US GAAP for recognition of gains on the sale of certain businesses.
Foreign exchange movements taken to reserves under UK GAAP are reported in the income statement under US GAAP.
Historical GAAP differences on disposed businesses are also shown under this line item.
Under UK GAAP in the 2003 nancial year a provision in connection with the rationalisation of the Groups London ofce property portfolio was recognised.
Under US GAAP in accordance with SFAS No 146 these costs are not recognised until the group fully exits and therefore ceases to use the affected properties.
II Net income and shareholders equity reconciliation statements The following statements summarise the material estimated adjustments gross of their tax effect which reconcile net income and shareholders equity from that reported under UK GAAP to that which would have been reported had US GAAP been applied.
Net income Years ended 31 March Net income loss applicable to shareholders under UK GAAP 2686 995 1870 Restatement for deferred tax under FRS 19  60 Net income loss applicable to shareholders under UK GAAP as previously reported 2686 995 1810 Adjustment for Sale and leaseback of properties 114 1178 Pension costs 177 106 42 Redundancy charges  140 453 Capitalisation of interest net of related depreciation 17 398 348 Goodwill 35 11 55 Mobile licences software and other intangible asset capitalisation and amortisation net 26 32 32 Financial instruments 731 23 133 Deferred gain  313 71 Impairment 24 147 Employee share plans 11 8 38 Property rationalisation provision 147 Directories in progress   82 Disposals of businesses 130 254 Deferred taxation 976 1320 64 4266 643 2432 Tax effect of US GAAP adjustments 132 89 75 Net income loss as adjusted for US GAAP 4134 732 2357 Basic earnings loss per American Depositary Share as adjusted for US GAAP Diluted earnings loss per American Depositary Share as adjusted for US GAAP Each American Depositary Share is equivalent to ten ordinary shares.
In the 2003 nancial year all the adjustments relate to continuing operations 2002  2009 million reduction 2001  823 million reduction.
Net income from continuing operations was 4134 million 2002  1680 million loss 2001  809 million.
The adjustments to net income relating to discontinued operations are nil 2002  282 million 2001  276 million.
United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 130 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 II Net income and shareholders equity reconciliation statements continued Shareholders equity At 31 March Shareholders equity under UK GAAP 2642 358 Adjustment for Sale and leaseback of properties 1292 1178 Pension costs 6371 3003 Capitalisation of interest net of related depreciation 225 250 Goodwill 113 186 Mobile licences software and other intangible asset capitalisation and amortisation  482 Financial instruments 86 592 Impairment 124 147 Disposals of businesses  120 Property rationalisation provision 147 Deferred taxation 63 1375 Dividend declared after the nancial year end 366 173 4023 5148 Tax effect of US GAAP adjustments 1765 901 Shareholders equity as adjusted for US GAAP 2258 4247 III Minority interests Under US GAAP the income to minority interests would have been reduced by 27 million 2002  26 million 2001  122 million after adjusting for goodwill amortisation and accounting for associates and joint ventures.
Net assets attributable to minority interests would have been unchanged 2002  26 million higher after adjusting for nancial instruments.
IV Accounting for share options Under UK GAAP the company does not recognise compensation expense for the fair value at the date of grant of share options granted under the employee share option schemes.
Under US GAAP the company adopted the disclosureonly provisions in SFAS No.
123 Accounting for StockBased Compensation.
Accordingly the company accounts for share options in accordance with APB Opinion No.
25 Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees under which no compensation expense is recognised.
Had the group expensed recognised compensation cost for options granted in accordance with SFAS No.
123 the groups pro forma net income loss basic earnings loss per share and diluted earnings loss per share under US GAAP would have been 4127 million 2002  792 million loss 2001  2419 million loss 47.9p 2002  9.5p loss 2001  33.2p loss and 47.6p 2002  9.5p loss 2001  33.2p loss respectively.
The SFAS No.
123 method of accounting does not apply to share options granted before 1 January 1995 and accordingly the resulting pro forma compensation costs may not be representative of that to be expected in future years.
See note 34 for the SFAS
123 disclosures of the fair value of options granted under employee schemes at date of grant.
V Consolidated statements of cash ows Under UK GAAP the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows are presented in accordance with UK Financial Reporting Standard No.
1 FRS 1.
The statements prepared under FRS 1 present substantially the same information as that required under SFAS No.
Under SFAS No.
95 cash and cash equivalents include cash and shortterm investments with maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase.
Under FRS 1 cash comprises cash in hand and at bank and overnight deposits net of bank overdrafts.
Under FRS 1 cash ows are presented for operating activities returns on investments and servicing of nance taxation capital expenditure and nancial investments acquisitions and disposals dividends paid to the companys shareholders management of liquid resources and nancing.
SFAS No.
95 requires a classication of cash ows as resulting from operating investing and nancing activities.
Cash ows under FRS 1 in respect of interest received interest paid net of that capitalised under US GAAP and taxation would be included within operating activities under SFAS No.
Cash ows from purchases sales and maturities of trading securities while not separately identied under UK GAAP would be included within operating activities under US GAAP.
Capitalised interest while not recognised under UK GAAP is included in investing activities under US GAAP.
Dividends paid are included within nancing activities under US GAAP.
United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 131 V Consolidated statements of cash ows continued The following statements summarise the statements of cash ows as if they had been presented in accordance with US GAAP and include the adjustments which reconcile cash and cash equivalents under US GAAP to cash at bank and in hand reported under UK GAAP.
Net cash provided by operating activities 3395 1455 5515 Net cash provided by used in investing activities 1253 3049 22785 Net cash used in provided by nancing activities 2852 5611 18311 Net increase decrease in cash and cash equivalents 1796 1107 1041 Effect of exchange rate changes on cash 13 50 15 Cash and cash equivalents under US GAAP at beginning of year 1124 2281 1255 Cash and cash equivalents under US GAAP at end of year 2933 1124 2281 Shortterm investments with original maturities of less than three months 2842 966 1869 Cash at bank and in hand under UK GAAP at end of year 91 158 412 VI Current asset investments Under US GAAP investments in debt securities would be classied as either trading availableforsale or heldtomaturity.
Trading investments would be stated at fair values and the unrealised gains and losses would be included in income.
Securities classied as availableforsale would be stated at fair values with unrealised gains and losses net of deferred taxes reported in shareholders equity.
Debt securities classied as heldtomaturity would be stated at amortised cost.
The following analyses do not include securities with original maturities of less than three months.
At 31 March 2003 the group held trading investments as dened by US GAAP with fair values totalling 935 million 2002  1260 million.
Heldtomaturity securities at 31 March 2002 and 2003 consisted of the following
Estimated fair value Commercial paper mediumterm notes and other investments 2565 2565 Total at 31 March 2003 2565 2565 Commercial paper mediumterm notes and other investments 2372 2372 Total at 31 March 2002 2372 2372 The contractual maturities of the heldtomaturity debt securities at 31 March 2003 were as follows
Fair value Maturing on or before 31 March 2004 1663 1663 Maturing after 31 March telTotal at 31 March 2003 2565 2565 VII Pension costs The following position for the main pension scheme is computed in accordance with US GAAP pension accounting rules under SFAS No.
87 and SFAS No.
88 the effect of which is shown in the above reconciliation statements.
The pension cost determined under SFAS No.
87 was calculated by reference to an expected longterm rate of return on scheme assets of 6.9% 2002  6.5% 2001  6.25%.
The components of the pension cost for the main pension scheme comprised Service cost 453 564 580 Interest cost 1707 1739 1673 Expected return on scheme assets 1813 1863 1850 Amortisation of prior service costs 24 24 24 Amortisation of net obligation at date of limited application of SFAS No.
Recognised gains 22 67 133 Additional cost of termination benets 60 140 349 Pension cost for the year under US GAAP 461 589 695 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 132 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 VII Pension costs continued The information required to be disclosed in accordance with SFAS No.
132 concerning the funded status of the main scheme at 31 March 2002 and 31 March 2003 based on the valuations at 1 January 2002 and 1 January 2003 respectively is given below.
Minimum liability intangible asset and other comprehensive income Plan assets at fair value 22757 Accumulated benet obligation 28551 Minimum liability 5794 Net amount recognised at end of year 2497 Minimum additional liability 3297 Intangible asset as at 31 March 2003 Unrecognised net transition obligation 2 Unrecognised prior service cost 103 Accumulated other comprehensive income 3192 Changes in benet obligation 2003 Benet obligation at the beginning of the year 29097 31184 Service cost 453 564 Interest cost 1707 1739 Employees contributions 156 180 Additional cost of termination benets 60 140 Actuarial movement 152 3428 Other changes 13 27 Benets paid or payable 1361 1309 Benet obligation at the end of the year 30277 29097 Changes in scheme assets 2003 Fair value of scheme assets at the beginning of the year 26597 29031 Actual return on scheme assets 3255 2355 Employers contributions 607 1023 Employees contributions 156 180 Other changes 13 27 Benets paid or payable 1361 1309 Fair value of scheme assets at the end of the year 22757 26597 Funded status under US GAAP 2003 Projected benet obligation in excess of scheme assets 7520 2500 Unrecognised net obligation at date of initial application of SFAS No.
Unrecognised prior service costs Other unrecognised net actuarial gains losses 4918 324 Net amount recognised under US GAAP 2497 2643 The employers contributions for the year ended 31 March 2003 includes special contributions of 200 million paid on 11 December 2002 and 129 million paid on 12 December 2002 2002  300 million paid on 21 November 2001 and 300 million paid on 4 December 2001.
The unrecognised net obligation at the date of initial application is being amortised over 15 years from 1 April 1988.
Unrecognised prior service costs on scheme benet improvements are being amortised over periods of 15 or 16 years commencing in the years of the introduction of the improvements.
The benet obligation for the main pension scheme was determined using the following assumptions at 1 January 2002 and 1 January 2003 per annum % per annum % Discount rate 5.6 6.0 Rate of future pay increases 3.8 4.0 Rate of future pension increases 2.25 2.5 The accumulated benet obligation at 31 March 2003 was 28551 million 2002  27127 million.
United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 133 VIII US GAAP developments In July 2001 the Financial Accounting Standards Board FASB issued SFAS No.
143 Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations which is applicable to nancial years commencing after 15 June 2002.
SFAS No. incurred if it is possible to make a reasonable estimate of the fair value.
The associated asset retirement costs are required to be capitalised as part of the carrying value of the long lived asset.
The adoption of SFAS No.
143 is not expected to have a material impact on the consolidated nancial statements.
In July 2002 the FASB issued SFAS No.
146 Accounting for Costs Associated with Exit or Disposal Activities which is applicable to disposals initialised after 31 December 2002.
The Statement requires costs associated with exit or disposal activities to be recognised when the costs are incurred rather than at the date of the commitment to an exit or disposal plan.
Accordingly we have reected the impact of SFAS No.
146 in the 2003 nancial year.
SFAS No.
146 may apply to future activities which are not currently envisaged and accordingly it is not possible to assess the impact of SFAS No.
146 on any such activities at this time.
In December 2002 the FASB issued SFAS No.
148 Accounting for Stock Based Compensation  Transition and Disclosure  an amendment of FASB Statement No.
123 which is applicable to nancial years beginning after 15 December 2002.
The Statement permits two additional transition methods for an entity voluntarily adopting fair value based accounting for stock based compensation.
It also amends the disclosure requirements to require prominent disclosure about the effects on reported net income of an entitys accounting policy decisions with respect to stock based employee compensation.
This Statement does not have a signicant impact on the consolidated nancial statements as SFAS No.
123 continues to be satised for disclosure purposes only.
In April 2003 the FASB issued SFAS No 149 Amendment of Statement 133 on Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities.
This Statement amends and claries nancial accounting and reporting for derivative instruments including certain derivative instruments embedded in other contracts collectively referred to as derivatives and for hedging activities under SFAS No.
133 Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging
BT is currently evaluating the impact of this change.
In November 2002 the FASB issued FASB Interpretation No.
FIN 45 Guarantors Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others.
FIN 45 requires that certain guarantees must be recognised at fair value.
FIN 45 also requires disclosure of detailed information about each guarantee or group of guarantees.
The disclosure requirements are effective for nancial statements ending after 15 December 2002.
The recognition and measurement provisions of FIN 45 are applicable to guarantees issued or modied after 31 December 2002.
FIN 45 could have an impact on the future results of BT depending on guarantees issued however at this time the adoption of this statement did not have a material impact on BTs consolidated nancial statements.
In January 2003 the FASB issued FIN 46 Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities  an Interpretation of Accounting Research Bulletin ARB No.
FIN 46 requires the primary beneciary to consolidate a variable interest entity VIE if it has a variable interest that will absorb a majority of the entitys expected losses if they occur receive a majority of the entitys expected residual returns if they occur or both.
FIN 46 applies immediately to VIEs created after 31 January 2003 and to VIEs in which the entity obtains an interest after that date.
This statement is not expected to have a material impact on BTs consolidated nancial statements.
In November 2002 the Emerging Issues Task Force EITF reached a consensus on EITF 0021 Revenue Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables.
The consensus addresses how to account for arrangements that may involve multiple revenuegenerating activities for example the delivery or performance of multiple products services andor rights to use assets.
In applying this guidance separate contracts with the same party entered into at or near the same time will be presumed to be a package and the consideration will be measured and allocated to the separate units based on their relative fair values.
This consensus guidance will be applicable to agreements entered into after 15 June 2003.
BT is currently evaluating the impact of this new pronouncement.
In January 2003 the EITF reached a consensus on EITF 0218 Accounting for Subsequent Investments in an Investee after Suspension of Equity Method Loss Recognition.
This consensus states that if the additional investment in whole or in part represents the funding of prior losses the investor should recognise previously suspended losses.
When appropriate to recognise prior losses the amount recognised would be limited to the amount of the additional investment determined to represent the funding of prior losses.
The consensus is effective for additional investments made after 5 February 2003.
This consensus is not expected to have a material impact on BTs consolidated nancial statements.
United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 134 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 BT Group plc is the parent company of the group.
Brief details of its principal operating subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates at 31 March 2003 all of which were unlisted unless otherwise stated were as follows
Group interest in allotted capital
Subsidiary undertakings British Telecommunications plc Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary UK BT Pty Limited de Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary 100% preference
BT Cableships Limited Cableship owner 100% ordinary International BT Communications Management Limited Telecommunication services provider 100% ordinary UK BT Hong Kong Limited Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary 100% preference Hong Kong BT Fleet Limited Fleet management company 100% ordinary UK BT Global Networks Limited International telecommunication network systems provider 100% ordinary UK BT Holdings Limited Investment holding company 100% ordinary UK BT Ignite GmbH and Co OHG Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Germany BT Nederland NV df Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Netherlands BT Americas Inc.
Communication related services and products provider 100% common USA BT Property Limited Property holding company 100% ordinary UK BT Subsea Cables Limited Cable maintenance and repair 100% ordinary UK BT Ignite Espana SAU Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Spain BT Limited dh International telecommunication network systems provider 100% ordinary International BT US Investments LLC Investment holding company 100% ordinary USA Communication Networking Services
Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary UK Communications Global Network Services Limited Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Bermuda Esat Telecommunications Limited Telecommunication services provider 100% ordinary Ireland Farland BV cd Provider of transborder bre network across BTs partners in Europe 100% ordinary International Syntegra Limited Systems integration and application development 100% ordinary UK Syntegra Groep BV Systems integration and application development 100% common Netherlands Syntegra SA Systems integration and application development 100% ordinary France Syntegra USA Inc.
Systems integration and electronic business outsourcing services 100% common International The group comprises a large number of companies and it is not practical to include all of them in this list.
The list therefore only includes those companies that have a more signicant impact on the prot or assets of the group.
The proportion of voting rights held corresponds to the aggregate interest percentage held by the holding company and subsidiary undertakings.
All overseas undertakings are incorporated in their country of operations.
Subsidiary undertakings operating internationally are all incorporated in England and Wales except Farland BV and Syntegra USA Inc which are incorporated in the Netherlands and USA respectively.
Held through intermediate holding company.
In May 2003 BT Australasia Pty Limited changed its name to BT Pty Limited.
In December 2002 BT Ignite Nederland BV was merged into BT Ignite Nederland Holding NV.
In the same month BT Ignite Nederland Holding NV changed its name to BT Nederland NV.
In December 2002 BT North Americas Inc. changed its name to BT Americas Inc.
In April 2003 BT Worldwide Limited changed its name to BT Limited.
Share capital b billions m millions Activity Issued
Country of operations Joint Ventures Albacom SpA Communication related services and products provider e417m 45.5%
LG Telecom Mobile cellular telephone system provider and operator Won 1386b 16.59% Republic of South Korea Issued share capital comprises ordinary or common shares unless otherwise stated.
All investments are held through intermediate holding companies.
All overseas companies are incorporated in their country of operations.
Held through a BT subsidiary 50.5% BT owned.
Economic holding is 23%.
Subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 135 Year ended 31 March 2003 Unaudited
Continuing and total activities 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Total turnover 4998 5094 5124 4966 20182 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 411 433 423 188 1455 Group turnover 4587 4661 4701 4778 18727 Other operating income Group operating prot 56tel2572 Groups share of operating prot of associates and joint ventures Total operating prot 61tel2901 Prot loss on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 70 4 99 1526 1691 Prot on sale of property xed assets 3314 11 Amounts written off investments  7   7 Net interest payable 300 295 285 559 1439 Prot on ordinary activities before taxation 384 489 567 1717 3157 Tax on prot on ordinary activities 107 165 116 71 459 Prot on ordinary activities after taxation 277 324 451 1646 2698 Minority interests 2 9 6 5 12 Prot for the nancial period 275 315 445 1651 2686 Basic earnings per share 3.2p 3.7p 5.2p 19.1p 31.2p Diluted earnings per share 3.2p 3.6p 5.1p 19.0p 31.0p Prot before goodwill amortisation exceptional items and taxation 32tel1829 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2.5p 3.7p 4.1p 3.9p 14.2p Diluted earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2.5p 3.7p 4.1p 3.9p 14.1p Quarterly analysis of turnover and profit 136 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Year ended 31 March 2002 Unaudited
Continuing activities 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Total turnover 5434 5487 5383 5511 21815 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 1101 1087 929 932 4049 Trading between group and principal joint venture 16tel681 Group turnover 4498 4557 4657 4735 18447 Other operating income Group operating prot loss 650 534 693 1923 46 Groups share of operating loss of associates and joint ventures 70 816 174 383 1443 Total operating prot loss 580 282 519 2306 1489 Prot loss on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 127 2 165 57 21 Prot on sale of property xed assets 5 7 1072 5 1089 Amounts written off investments  535   535 Net interest payable 446 352 480 301 1579 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation 266 1160 946 2545 2493 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 102 117 124 42 385 Prot loss on ordinary activities after taxation 164 1277 822 2587 2878 Minority interests  1  9 10 Prot loss for the nancial period 164 1278 822 2596 2888 Basic earnings loss per share 2.2p 15.0p 9.6p 30.2p 34.8p Diluted earnings loss per share 2.2p 15.0p 9.5p 30.2p 34.8p Prot before goodwill amortisation exceptional items and taxation 20tel1273 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 1.3p 2.4p 2.6p 2.6p 8.8p Diluted earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 1.2p 2.4p 2.6p 2.6p 8.8p Year ended 31 March 2002 Unaudited
Total Group 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Total turnover 7054 6261 5816 5511 24642 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 1765 1114 953 932 4764 Trading between group and principal joint venture 16tel681 Group turnover 5454 5304 5066 4735 20559 Other operating income Group operating prot loss 500 344 600 1923 479 Groups share of operating loss of associates and joint ventures 10 814 174 383 1381 Total operating prot loss 490 470 426 2306 1860 Prot on sale of xed assets investments and group undertakings 4484 11 163 57 4389 Prot on sale of property xed assets 5 7 1072 5 1089 Amounts written off investments  535   535 Net interest payable 474 362 485 301 1622 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation 4505 1349 850 2545 1461 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 145 127 129 42 443 Prot loss on ordinary activities after taxation 4360 1476 721 2587 1018 Minority interests 13 1  9 23 Prot loss for the nancial period 4347 1477 721 2596 995 Basic earnings loss per share 57.9p 17.3p 8.4p 30.2p 12.0p Diluted earnings loss per share 57.4p 17.3p 8.3p 30.2p 11.9p Prot before goodwill amortisation exceptional items and taxation 18tel1113 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 0.3p 1.1p 1.9p 2.6p 6.1p Diluted earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 0.3p 1.1p 1.8p 2.6p 6.0p Quarterly analysis of turnover and profit BT Annual Report and Form 20Fteltel 2003 Financial ratios Basic earnings per share on continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items  pence 30.3 29.5 19.3 8.8 14.2 Basic earnings loss per share on continuing activities  pence 40.5 29.2 20.7 34.8 31.2 Basic earnings loss per share  pence 41.1 27.6 25.7 12.0 31.2 Return on capital employed % de de Interest cover The ratio is based on prot before tax goodwill amortisation and interest on longterm borrowings to average capital employed.
Capital employed is represented by total assets excluding goodwill less current liabilities excluding corporate taxes and dividends payable and provisions other than those for deferred taxation.
Yearend gures are used in the computation of the average except in the case of shortterm investments and borrowings where average daily balances are used in their place.
The number of times net interest payable is covered by total operating prot before goodwill amortisation.
Interest cover based on continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was 2.6 times 2002  1.9 times.
Return on capital employed is based upon the continuing activities.
Return on capital employed on continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was 15.7%.
Expenditure on research and development Total expenditure 268 345 364tel Expenditure on tangible xed assets Plant and equipment Transmission equipment 1070 1239 1655 1373 1277 Exchange equipment 41tel228 Other network equipment 55tel466 Computers and ofce equipment 36tel281 Motor vehicles and other 22tel162 Land and buildings 20tel40 2826 3147 3860 3110 2454 Decrease increase in engineering stores 15 13 3 10 9 Total continuing activities 2811 3160 3857 3100 2445 Total discontinued activities 458 520 1129 808 Total expenditure on tangible xed assets 3269 3680 4986 3908 2445 Decrease increase in creditors 49 112 230 161 135 Cash outow on purchase of tangible xed assets 3220 3568 4756 4069 2580 Financial statistics have been restated where necessary to provide consistency with the presentation of the 2003 nancial year gures.
Financial statistics years ended 31 March 138 BT Annual Report and Form 20Fteltel Call growth % growth in UK xednetwork call volumes minutes over the previous year Growth is estimated by reference to growth in absolute call minutes.
UK exchange line connections Business 000 7982 8450 8910 9030 9062 % growth over previous year 6.1 5.9 5.4 1.3 0.4 Residential 000 20067 20040 19970 20027 20201 % growth over previous year 0.3 0.1 0.3 0.3 0.9 Service providers 000  % growth over previous year   22.2 20.0 61.0 Total exchange line connections 000 28049 28580 28950 29113 29353 % growth over previous year 1.4 1.9 1.3 0.6 0.8tel 2002 2003 People employed Continuing activities 000 115.0 120.8 116.8 108.6 104.7 Discontinued activities 000 9.7 16.0 20.2 Operational statistics years ended 31 March BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 139 The business of BT is affected by a number of factors not all of which are wholly within BTs control.
Although many of the factors inuencing BTs performance are macro economic and likely to affect the performance of businesses generally some aspects of BTs business make it particularly sensitive to certain areas of business risk.
This section highlights some of those specic areas.
However it does not purport to be an extensive analysis of the factors affecting the business and some risks may be unknown to us and other risks currently believed to be immaterial could turn out to be material.
All of these could materially adversely affect our business turnover prots assets liquidity and capital resources.
They should also be considered in connection with the forward looking statements in this document and the cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 142 of this document.
If BTs activities are subject to signicant price controls its market share competitive position and future protability may be affected Most of BTs xed network activities in the UK are subject to signicant regulatory controls.
The controls regulate among other things the prices BT may charge for many of its services and the extent to which it has to provide services to its competitors.
In recent years the effect of these controls has been to cause BT to reduce its prices.
BT cannot assure its shareholders that the regulatory authorities will not increase the severity of the price controls nor extend the services to which controls apply including any new services that BT may offer in the future nor extend the services which it has to provide its competitors.
These controls may adversely affect BTs market share the severity of competition and its future protability.
Further details on the regulatory framework in which BT operates can be found in Business Review  regulation competition and prices on page 18 of this document.
BT faces strong competition in UK xed network services BT continues to have a signicant market share in some aspects of UK xed network services.
In particular in the 2003 nancial year we estimate we had a market share of 73% of consumer calls and 45% of business calls in the UK and approximately 81% of exchange lines in the UK were in the BT network as at 31 March 2003.
Regulators have promoted competition in this area by allowing BTs competitors to site equipment in or adjacent to its exchanges local loop unbundling and to make it easier for BTs customers to route some or all of their calls over competitors networks carrier preselection and by the introduction of a wholesale access product.
Reduction in BTs market share in the xed network may lead to a fall in BTs turnover and an adverse effect on protability.
Unlike its competitors BT continues to be obliged by the current regulatory regime to serve customers in the United Kingdom whether or not such provision of service is economic and the two competitive measures described above may have the effect of accelerating the diversion of its more protable existing customers without it being able to reduce its costs commensurately.
These changes in the regulatory environment and ensuing increased competition on its xed network may cause adverse effects on its business results of operations nancial condition and prospects.
BTs business is dependent on the ability to exploit technological advances quickly and successfully BT operates in an industry with a recent history of fast technological changes.
It expects that new products and technologies will emerge and that existing products and technologies will develop further.
BT needs to continually develop its services and products to exploit those next generation technologies.
However BT cannot predict the actual effect of these technological changes on its business or on its ability to provide competitive services.
For example presently there is evidence of substitution by customers using mobile phones for daytoday voice calls in place of making such calls over the xed network.
Additionally some calls are now being routed over the internet in place of the traditional switched network.
If these trends accelerate BTs xed network assets may be used uneconomically and its investment in these assets may not be recovered through prots on xednetwork calls and line rentals.
Impairment writedowns may be incurred and margins may decline if xed costs cannot be reduced in line with falling turnover.
BT has targeted signicant growth in new business areas such as broadband technology.
In view of the likely level of competition and uncertainties regarding the level of economic activity there can be no certainty that BT will meet these growth targets with a consequential impact on future turnover and protability.
BTs businesses may be adversely affected if their networks or systems experience any signicant failures or interruptions BTs businesses are dependent on their ability to transfer substantial volumes of data speedily and without interruption.
Any signicant failure or interruption of such data transfer due to factors outside their control could have a material adverse effect on the businesses and their results from operations.
BT has a business continuity strategy designed to deal with such catastrophic events including major terrorist action industrial action extreme virus attack hurricane or ooding that may impact the ability to maintain an effective service to customers.
Any such strategy can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material loss and there can be no assurance that material adverse events will not occur.
Declining investment returns may result in the funding cost of the dened benet pension scheme becoming a signicant burden on the nancial resources of BT The dened benet pension scheme the BT Pension Scheme BTPS was closed to new members on 31 March 2001 and has been replaced by a dened contribution scheme BTRP.
The latest full triennial actuarial valuation of the BTPS was completed as at 31 December 2002.
As a result the schedule of contributions has been agreed with the scheme trustees under which BT will make normal contributions of 12.2% of pensionable pay and annual deciency payments of 232 million.
This will apply until the next triennial actuarial valuation is completed as at 31 December 2005.
The results of future scheme valuations will be impacted by the future investment market performance interest rates and the general trend towards longer life expectancy all of which are outside the control of BT.
In the event that investment returns decline the cash funding cost to BT may increase and may have a signicant effect on the nancial resources of BT.
Risk factors 140 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Additional information for shareholders BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 141 The additional information is divided into the following sections 142 Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 142 Background 143 Listings 143 Share and ADS prices 143 Capital gains tax CGT Rights issue Demerger of mmO 144 Analysis of shareholdings 144 Dividends 145 Dividend mandate 145 Dividend investment plan 145 Global Invest Direct 146 Total shareholder return 146 Results announcements 146 Individual savings accounts ISAs 146 ShareGift 146 Unclaimed Assets Register 147 Exchange rates 147 Memorandum and Articles of Association
Articles
150 Material contracts
Yell
Demerger agreement Separation agreement Property sale and leaseback Concert Unwind Agreement
152 Taxation US Holders Taxation of dividends Taxation of capital gains US information reporting and backup withholding UK stamp duty UK inheritance and gift taxes in connection with ordinary shares andor ADSs 154 Exchange controls and other limitations affecting security holders 154 Documents on display 154 Publications 155 Electronic communication 155 Shareholder communication Private shareholders Institutional investors and analysts Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements Certain statements in this annual report are forwardlooking and are made in reliance on the safe harbour provisions of the US Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
These statements relate to analyses and other information which are based on forecasts of future results and estimates of amounts not yet determinable.
These statements include without limitation those concerning BTs strategy and its ability to achieve it BTs debt reduction plans growth of and opportunities available in the communications industry and BTs positioning to take advantage of those opportunities expectations regarding competition market shares prices and growth expectations regarding the convergence of technologies BTs network development and expansion plans plans for the launch of new products and services network performance and quality the impact of regulatory initiatives on operations including the regulation of the UK xed wholesale and retail businesses BTs possible or assumed future results of operations andor those of its associates and joint ventures BTs future dividend policy capital expenditure and investment plans adequacy of capital nancing plans demand for and access to broadband and the promotion of broadband by thirdparty service providers and those preceded by followed by or that include the words believes expects anticipates intends or similar expressions.
Although BT believes that the expectations reected in these forwardlooking statements are reasonable it can give no assurance that these expectations will prove to have been correct.
Because these statements involve risks and uncertainties actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forwardlooking statements.
Factors that could cause differences between actual results and those implied by the forwardlooking statements include but are not limited to material adverse changes in economic conditions in the markets served by BT and its lines of business future regulatory actions and conditions in its operating areas including competition from others in the UK and other international communications markets selection by BT and its lines of business of the appropriate trading and marketing models for its products and services technological innovations including the cost of developing new products and the need to increase expenditures for improving the quality of service the anticipated benets and advantages of new technologies not being realised developments in the convergence of technologies prolonged adverse weather conditions resulting in a material increase in overtime staff or other costs the timing of entry and protability of BT and its lines of business in certain communications markets signicant changes in market shares for BT and its principal products and services uctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates to the extent that BT chooses to sell assets or minority interests in its subsidiaries prevailing market levels for such sales and general nancial market conditions affecting BTs performance.
Certain of these factors are discussed in more detail elsewhere in this annual report including without limitation in Risk factors.
Background
Telephone services in almost all of the UK were until 1981 provided by the Post Ofce which was a government department until 1969 when it was established as a state public corporation.
In 1981 the postal and telecommunications services of the Post Ofce became the responsibility of two separate corporations with British Telecommunications  under the trading name of British Telecom  taking over the telecommunications business.
As a result of the Telecommunications Act 1984 British Telecommunications plc was incorporated in England and Wales under the Companies Acts 1948 to 1981 on 1 April 1984 as a public limited company wholly owned by the UK Government.
The transfer of property rights and liabilities of the corporation to British Telecommunications plc was made on 6 August 1984.
In November 1984 the UK Government offered 3012 million ordinary shares 50.2% of the total issued ordinary shares to the public.
The share sale was fully subscribed.
British Telecom shares made their debut on the London Stock Exchange on 3 December 1984.
From April 1991 British Telecommunications plc traded as BT.
In December 1991 the UK Government sold over half its remaining shares in BT retaining a holding of about 22%.
It sold this residual holding in July 1993.
Subsequently in September 1997 the UK Government redeemed at par a special rights redeemable preference share to which certain special rights attached.
In 1985 Cellnet was launched as a joint venture between British Telecom and Securicor which held 40% of the company.
BT acquired full control of Cellnet now O UK  part of mmO plc by acquiring Securicors minority holding in November 1999.
In January 2000 BT and ATandT established Concert as a 5050 joint venture serving customers around the world and transferred their transborder assets and operations to Concert.
On 1 April 2002 BT completed the unwind of Concert which involved the return of Concerts businesses customer accounts and networks to the two parent companies.
BT Group was formed when the mmO business comprising what had been BTs mobile activities in the UK the Netherlands Germany and the Republic of Ireland was demerged on 19 November 2001.
British
Telecommunications plcs shares ceased trading on the London New York and Tokyo stock exchanges on 16 November 2001.
BT Group plcs shares commenced trading on the London and New York stock exchanges on 19 November 2001.
BT Group was incorporated in England and Wales on 30 March 2001 as Newgate Telecommunications Limited with the registered number .
The company changed its name to BT Group plc on 11 September Additional information for shareholders 142 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 2001.
Following the demerger of mmO in November 2001 the continuing activities of BT were transferred to BT Group.
BT Groups registered ofce address is 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ.
Listings
The principal listing of BT Groups ordinary shares is on the London Stock Exchange.
American Depositary Shares ADSs each representing 10 ordinary shares have been issued by JPMorgan Chase Bank as Depositary for the American Depositary Receipts ADRs evidencing the ADSs and are listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
ADSs also trade but are not listed on the London Stock Exchange.
Trading on the New York Stock Exchange is under the symbol BTY.
Share and ADS prices Pence per ordinary share US per
High pence
High
Low
Years ended 31 March Year ended 31 March 2002 1 July  30 September 2001 389.08 253.01 53.86 37.73 1 October  31 December 2001 292.84 242.27 42.25 35.00 1 January  31 March 2002 285.00 215.75 40.36 30.60 Year ended 31 March 2003 1 July  30 September 2002 255.00 154.00 39.62 24.80 1 October  31 December 2002 219.00 154.00 35.19 24.30 1 January  31 March 2003 209.00 141.00 33.65 23.16
November 2002 219.00 181.00 35.28 28.26 December 2002 212.50 186.50 33.53 29.25 February 2003 184.25 152.50 30.40 23.95 The pre19 November 2001 prices shown have been adjusted for the rights issue and demerger that occurred in the 2002 nancial year.
The prices are the highest and lowest closing middle market prices for BT ordinary shares as derived from the Daily Ofcial List of the London Stock Exchange and the highest and lowest sales prices of ADSs as reported on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape.
Fluctuations in the exchange rate between the pound sterling and the US dollar affect the dollar equivalent of the pound sterling price of the companys ordinary shares on the London Stock Exchange and as a result are likely to affect the market price of the ADSs on the New York Stock Exchange.
Capital gains tax CGT The rights issue in June 2001 and the demerger of mmO in November 2001 adjusted the value for capital gains tax purposes of BT shares.
Rights issue An explanatory note on the effects of the rights issue on the CGT position relating to BT shareholdings is available from the Shareholder Helpline see page 155.
Additional information for shareholders BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 143 Demerger of mmO capital gains tax calculation The conrmed ofcial opening prices for BT Group and mmO shares on 19 November 2001 following the demerger were 285.75p and 82.75p respectively.
This means that of the total combined value of 368.50p 77.544% is attributable to BT Group and 22.456% to mmO Accordingly for CGT calculations the base cost of your BT Group shares and mmO shares is calculated by multiplying the acquisition cost of your BT shareholding by 77.544% and 22.456% respectively.
Analysis of shareholdings Ordinary shares of 5p each
Number of holdings
Number of shares held millions
1600  9999 182742 11.1 516 6.0 10000  99999 5281 0.3 111 1.3 100000  999999 1153 0.1 428 4.9 5000000 and above abcd Total 1654530 100.0 8671 100.0 32 million shares were held in trust by Ilford Trustees Jersey Limited for allocation to employees under the employee share schemes.
Under the BT Employee Share Ownership Scheme and the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan 15 million and 12 million shares respectively were held in trust on behalf of 115757 and 89529 participants respectively who were benecially entitled to the shares.
137 million shares were held in the corporate nominee BT Group EasyShare on behalf of 122628 benecial owners.
185 million shares were represented by ADSs.
Analysis by size of holding is not available for this holding.
16 million shares were held in trust by The Royal Bank of Scotland Trust Company Jersey Limited for allocation to employees under the employee share schemes.
14.5% of the shares were in 1618274 individual holdings of which 142206 were joint holdings and 85.5% of the shares were in 36256 institutional holdings.
So far as the company is aware the company is not directly or indirectly owned or controlled by another corporation or by the UK Government or any other foreign government or by any other natural or legal person severally or jointly.
There are no arrangements known to the company the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change in control of the company.
At 15 May 2003 there were 8670849554 ordinary shares outstanding.
At the same date approximately 18.5 million ADSs equivalent to 185.2 million ordinary shares or approximately 2.1% of the total number of ordinary shares outstanding on that date were outstanding and were held by 2346 record holders of ADRs.
At 31 March 2003 there were 3460 shareholders with a US address on the register of shareholders.
Dividends
Since shortly after its incorporation in 1984 British Telecommunications plc paid interim dividends annually in February and nal dividends in September.
However as part of BTs debt reduction and restructuring plans neither a nal dividend for the year ended 31 March 2001 nor an interim dividend for the year ended 31 March 2002 was paid to shareholders.
A nal dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2002 was paid on 9 September 2002 to shareholders on the register on 9 August 2002 and an interim dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2003 was paid on 10 February 2003 to shareholders on the register on 31 December 2002.
The dividends paid or payable on BT shares and ADSs for the last ve years are shown in the following table.
The dividends on the ordinary shares exclude the associated tax credit.
The amounts shown are not those that were actually paid to holders of ADSs.
For the tax treatment of dividends paid on or after 6 April 1999 see Taxation of dividends below.
The dividends on the ADSs paid before 5 April 1999 include the associated UK tax credit available to certain benecial owners who are resident in the United States or Canada for tax purposes but before deduction of UK withholding taxes.
Dividends have been translated from pounds sterling into US dollars using exchange rates prevailing on the date the ordinary dividends were paid.
Additional information for shareholders 144 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Per ordinary share Per ADS Per ADS Years ended 31 March
Final pence
Interim
Final
Total
Interim
US
Final
US
Total
US
Qualifying holders of ADSs on record as of 8 August 2003 are entitled to receive the nal dividend which will be paid on 15 September 2003 subject to approval at the annual general meeting.
The US dollar amount of the nal dividend of 42.5 pence per ADS to be paid to holders of ADSs will be based on the exchange rate in effect on 8 September 2003 the date of payment to holders of ordinary shares.
As dividends paid by the company are in pounds sterling exchange rate uctuations will affect the US dollar amounts received by holders of ADSs on conversion by the Depositary of such cash dividends.
Dividend mandate Any shareholder wishing dividends to be paid directly into a bank or building society account should contact the Registrar for a dividend mandate form.
Dividends paid in this way will be paid through the Bankers Automated Clearing System BACS.
Alternatively a form may be downloaded from the internet at siteinvestorcentre.
Dividend investment plan The dividend investment plan replaced the share dividend plan for shareholders following the 1999 interim dividend.
Under the dividend investment plan cash from participants dividends is used to buy further BT Group shares in the market.
Shareholders could elect to receive additional shares in lieu of a cash dividend for the following dividends Date paid Price per share pence 1999 nal 20 September 1999 970.1 2000 interim 14 February 2000 991.5 2000 nal 18 September 2000 809.6 2001 interim 12 February 2001 621.8 2002 nal 9 September 2002 191.19 2003 interim 10 February 2003 178.23 Global Invest Direct Details of the direct purchase plan run by the ADR Depositary JPMorgan Chase Bank Global Invest Direct including reinvestment of dividends are available from JPMorgan Chase Bank on 1tel toll free within the USA or 1tel from outside the USA or on written request to the ADR Depositary.
Additional information for shareholders BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 145 Total shareholder return Total shareholder return TSR is the measure of the returns that a company has provided for its shareholders reecting share price movements and assuming reinvestment of dividends.
It is therefore a good indicator of a companys overall performance.
Over the last ve years as shown in the TSR chart below BT initially performed very strongly but like many stocks in the telecoms media and technology TMT sector suffered falls in its share price during the decline of the past three years.
BTs TSR as adjusted for the rights issue and demerger over the last ve years was negative 63% compared to a FTSE 100 TSR fall of negative 32%.
Substantially all of the veyear negative FTSE performance has occurred over the past year negative 29% whereas BTs TSR in the last 12 months was negative 43%.
In the period between the demerger on 19 November 2001 and 31 March 2003 BTs share price was roughly in line with the European telecommunications sector after outperforming for most of the period.
BT and the European telecommunications sector have both underperformed the FTSE 100 index by around 10% as shown in the share price performance chart over the 16 month period.
BT
FTSE 100 5tel250 0203 0102 0001 9900 9899 1 April 1998  100.
Source Datastream The graph shows our TSR performance adjusted for the rights issue and demerger of our mobile business in the 2002 financial year relative to the FTSE 100.
Source Bloomberg The graph shows relative price performance of BT and European Telco Sector using the FTSE 100 as a base.
BTs total shareholder return TSR performance over five financial years to 31 March 2003 BT and European Telco Sector Performance vs FTSE 100 since Demerger
European Telco Sector
Mar
Mar
Results announcements Expected announcements of results 1st quarter 31 July 2003 2nd quarter and half year 13 November 2003 3rd quarter and nine months February 2004 4th quarter and full year May 2004 2004 annual report and accounts published June 2004 Individual savings accounts ISAs Information about investing in BT Group shares through an ISA may be obtained from Halifax Share Dealing Limited Trinity Road Halifax W. orkshire HX1 2RG telephonetel.
ISAs are also offered by other organisations.
ShareGift
The Orr Mackintosh Foundation operates a charity share donation scheme for shareholders with small parcels of shares whose value makes it uneconomic to sell them.
Details of the scheme are available from ShareGift at www. haregift. rg or telephonetel or can be obtained from the Shareholder Helpline.
Unclaimed Assets Register BT is among a growing number of companies who subscribe to the Unclaimed Assets Register which provides a search facility for nancial assets such as shareholdings and dividends which have become separated from their owners.
The Register donates a proportion of its public search fees to charity via ShareGift.
For further information on the Unclaimed Assets Register visit site or telephonetel.
Additional information for shareholders 146 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Exchange rates BT publishes its consolidated nancial statements expressed in pounds sterling.
The following tables detail certain information concerning the exchange rates between pounds sterling and US dollars based on the noon buying rate in New York City for cable transfers in pounds sterling as certied for customs purposes by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York the Noon Buying Rate.
Years ended 31 Marchtel 2002 2003
Month
November
December
January
February
March
April
The average of the Noon Buying Rates in effect on the last day of each month during the relevant period.
On 16 May 2003 the most recent practicable date for this annual report the Noon Buying Rate was US1.63 to 1.00.
Memorandum and Articles of Association The following is a summary of the principal provisions of BTs memorandum and articles of association Memorandum and Articles a copy of which has been led with the Registrar of Companies.
Memorandum
The Memorandum provides that its principal objects are among other things to carry on any business of running operating managing and supplying telecommunication systems and systems of any kind for conveying receiving storing processing or transmitting sounds visual images signals messages and communications of any kind.
Articles
In the following description of the rights attaching to the shares in the company a holder of shares and a shareholder is in either case the person entered on the companys register of members as the holder of the relevant shares.
Shareholders can choose whether their shares are to be evidenced by share certicates i. in certicated form or held in electronic i. system in the UK.
Subject to the restrictions described below on a show of hands every shareholder present in person or by proxy at any general meeting has one vote and on a poll every shareholder present in person or by proxy has one vote for each share which they hold.
Voting at any meeting of shareholders is by a show of hands unless a poll is demanded by the chairman of the meeting or by at least ve shareholders at the meeting who are entitled to vote or their proxies or by one or more shareholders at the meeting who are entitled to vote or their proxies and who have between them at least 10% of the total votes of all shareholders who have the right to vote at the meeting.
No person is unless the Board decide otherwise entitled to attend or vote at any general meeting or to exercise any other right conferred by being a shareholder if he or any person appearing to be interested in those shares has been sent a notice under section 212 of the Companies Act 1985 which confers upon public companies the power to require information with respect to interests in their voting shares and he or any interested person has failed to supply to the company the information requested within 14 days after delivery of that notice.
These restrictions end seven days after the earlier of the date the shareholder complies with the request satisfactorily or the company receives notice that there has been an approved transfer of the shares.
Whenever the share capital of the company is split into different classes of shares the special rights attached to any of those classes can be varied or withdrawn either i with the sanction of an extraordinary resolution passed at a separate meeting of the holders of the shares of that class or ii with the consent in writing of the holders of at least 75% in nominal value of the issued shares of that class.
At any separate meeting the necessary quorum is two persons holding or representing by proxy not less than onethird in nominal amount of the issued shares of the class in question but at any adjourned meeting any person holding shares of the class or his proxy is a quorum.
Additional information for shareholders BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 147 The company can issue new shares and attach any rights and restrictions to them as long as this is not restricted by special rights previously given to holders of any existing shares.
Subject to this the rights of new shares can take priority over the rights of existing shares or existing shares can take priority over them or the new shares and the existing shares can rank equally.
The company may by ordinary resolution i consolidate and divide all or any of its share capital into shares of a larger amount ii divide all or part of its share capital into shares of a smaller amount iii cancel any shares which have not at the date of the ordinary resolution been taken or agreed to be taken by any person and reduce the amount of its share capital by the amount of the shares cancelled and iv increase its share capital.
The company may also i buy back its own shares and ii by special resolution reduce its share capital any capital redemption reserve and any share premium account.
The companys shareholders can declare dividends by passing an ordinary resolution provided that no dividend can exceed the amount recommended by the directors.
Dividends must be paid out of prots available for distribution.
If the directors consider that the prots of the company justify such payments they can pay interim dividends on any class of shares of the amounts and on the dates and for the periods they decide.
Fixed dividends will be paid on any class of shares on the dates stated for the payments of those dividends.
The directors can offer ordinary shareholders the right to choose to receive new ordinary shares which are credited as fully paid instead of some or all of their cash dividend.
Before they can do this the companys shareholders must have passed an ordinary resolution authorising the directors to make this offer.
Any dividend which has not been claimed for 10 years after it was declared or became due for payment will be forfeited and will belong to the company unless the directors decide otherwise.
If the company is wound up whether the liquidation is voluntary under supervision of the court or by the court the liquidator can with the authority of an extraordinary resolution passed by the shareholders divide among the shareholders all or any part of the assets of the company.
This applies whether the assets consist of property of one kind or different kinds.
For this purpose the liquidator can place whatever value the liquidator considers fair on any property and decide how the division is carried out between shareholders or different groups of shareholders.
The liquidator can also with the same authority transfer any assets to trustees upon any trusts for the benet of shareholders which the liquidator decides.
The liquidation of the company can then be nalised and the company dissolved.
No past or present shareholder can be compelled to accept any shares or other property under the Articles which could give them a liability.
Certicated shares of the company may be transferred in writing either by an instrument of transfer in the usual standard form or in another form approved by the Board.
The transfer form must be signed or made effective by or on behalf of the person making the transfer.
The person making the transfer will be treated as continuing to be the holder of the shares transferred until the name of the person to whom the shares are being transferred is entered in the register of members of the company.
The Board may refuse to register any transfer of any share held in certicated form and which is in favour of more than four joint holders or and unless the transfer form to be registered is properly stamped to show payment of any applicable stamp duty and delivered to the companys registered ofce or any other place the Board decide.
The transfer must have with it the share certicate for the shares to be transferred any other evidence which the Board ask for to prove that the person wanting to make the transfer is entitled to do this and if the transfer form is executed by another person on behalf of the person making the transfer evidence of the authority of that person to do so.
Transfers of uncerticated shares must be carried out using a relevant system as dened in the Uncerticated Securities Regulations 1995 the Regulations.
The Board can refuse to register a transfer of an uncerticated share in the circumstances stated in the Regulations.
If the Board decide not to register a transfer of a share they must notify the person to whom that share was to be transferred no later than two months after the company receives the transfer or instruction from the operator of the relevant system.
The Board can decide to suspend the registration of transfers for up to 30 days a year by closing the register of shareholders.
The register must not be closed without the consent of the operator of a relevant system as dened in the Regulations in the case of uncerticated shares.
Additional information for shareholders 148 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 g Untraced shareholders BT may sell any shares after advertising its intention and waiting for three months if the shares have been in issue for at least 10 years during that period at least three dividends have become payable on them and have not been claimed and BT has not heard from the shareholder or any person entitled to the dividends by transmission.
The net sale proceeds belong to BT but it must pay those proceeds to the former shareholder or the person entitled to them by transmission if that shareholder or that other person asks for them.
Every year the company must hold an annual general meeting.
The Board can call an extraordinary general meeting at any time and under general law must call one on a shareholders requisition.
The only limitation imposed by the Articles on the rights of nonresident or foreign shareholders is that a shareholder whose registered address is outside the UK and who wishes to receive notices of meetings of shareholders or documents from BT must give the company an address within the UK to which they may be sent.
Directors remuneration Excluding remuneration referred to below each director will be paid such fees for his services as the Board decide not exceeding 50000 a year and increasing by the percentage increase of the UK Retail Prices Index as dened by Section  Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 for any 12month period beginning 1 April 1999 or an anniversary of that date.
The company may by ordinary resolution decide on a higher sum.
This resolution can increase the fee paid to all or any directors either permanently or for a particular period.
The directors may be paid their expenses properly incurred in connection with the business of the company.
The Board can award extra fees to a director who holds an executive position acts as chairman or deputy chairman serves on a Board committee at the request of the Board or performs any other services which the Board consider extend beyond the ordinary duties of a director.
The directors may grant pensions or other benets to among others any director or former director or persons connected with them.
However BT can only provide these benets to any director or former director who has not been an employee or held any other ofce or executive position in the company or any of its subsidiary undertakings or to relations or dependants of or people connected to those directors or former directors if the shareholders approve this by passing an ordinary resolution.
Directors votes A director need not be a shareholder but a director who is not a shareholder can still attend and speak at shareholders meetings.
Unless the Articles say otherwise a director cannot vote on a resolution about a contract in which the director has a material interest this will also apply to interests of a person connected with the director.
The director can vote if the interest is only an interest in BT shares debentures or other securities.
A director can however vote and be counted in a quorum in respect of certain matters in which he is interested as set out in the Articles.
Subject to the relevant legislation the shareholders can by passing an ordinary resolution suspend or relax among other things the provisions relating to the interest of a director in any contract or arrangement or relating to a directors right to vote and be counted in a quorum on resolutions in which he is interested to any extent or ratify any particular contract carried out in breach of those provisions.
Directors interests If the legislation allows and the director has disclosed the nature and extent of the interest to the Board the director can i have any kind of interest in a contract with or involving BT or in which BT has an interest or with or involving another company in which BT has an interest ii have any kind of interest in a company in which BT has an interest including holding a position in that company or being a shareholder of that company iii hold a position other than auditor in BT or another company in which BT has an interest on terms and conditions decided by the Board and iv alone or through some rm with which the director is associated do paid professional work other than as auditor for BT or another company in which BT has an interest on terms and conditions decided by the Board.
A director does not have to hand over to BT any benet received or prot made as a result of anything permitted to be done under the Articles.
When a director knows that they are interested in a contract with BT they must tell the other directors.
Additional information for shareholders BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 149 Retirement of directors Provisions of the legislation which read with the Articles would prevent a person from being or becoming a director because that person has reached the age of 70 do not apply to the company.
At every annual general meeting any director who was elected or last reelected a director at or before the annual general meeting held in the third year before the current year shall retire by rotation.
Any director appointed by the directors automatically retires at the next following annual general meeting.
A retiring director is eligible for reelection.
Directors borrowing powers To the extent that the legislation and the Articles allow the Board can exercise all the powers of the company to borrow money to mortgage or charge its business property and assets present and future and to issue debentures and other securities and give security either outright or as collateral security for any debt liability or obligation of the company or another person.
The Board must limit the borrowings of the company and exercise all the companys voting and other rights or powers of control exercisable by the company in relation to its subsidiary undertakings so as to ensure that the aggregate amount of all borrowings by the group outstanding net of amounts borrowed intragroup among other things at any time does not exceed 35 billion.
Material contracts The following contracts not being contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business have been entered into in the two years preceding the date of this document by BT or another member of the group and are or may be material to the group or have been entered into by BT or another member of the group and contain a provision under which a member of the group has an obligation or entitlement which is or may be material to BT or such other member of the group.
Airtel
A sale and purchase agreement dated 2 May 2001 between BT Netherlands Holdings BV a subsidiary of BT and Vodafone under which the BT subsidiary agreed to sell its entire interest in Airtel Mo vil S. to Vodafone.
The sale was completed on 29 June 2001 for a consideration of 1.1 billion paid in Euros.
Yell
On 25 May 2001 the following agreements were entered into under which BT agreed to sell its classied advertising directory businesses in the UK and the USA i umbrella agreement between Yell Ltd BT Holdings Ltd Yellow Pages BV Marchprobe Ltd Castaim Ltd Yasmin Two US Inc. iii UK business sale agreement between Yell Ltd Castaim Ltd and Yasmin Two US Inc. iv US share sale agreement between Yellow Pages BV and Yasmin Two US Inc. agreed to sell the share capital of Yellow Book USA Inc. to Yasmin Two US Inc.
The umbrella agreement sets out the common terms which apply to the UK share sale agreement the UK business sale agreement and the US share sale agreement.
The umbrella agreement contains covenants restricting any member of the group from carrying on a competing printed classied directories business for twelve months from completion.
The share sale and business agreements contain standard warranties and indemnities in favour of Marchprobe Ltd Castaim Ltd and Yasmin Two US Inc.
The warranties expired on 30 June 2002.
As part of the consideration under the UK business sale agreement Castaim Ltd also assumed responsibility for certain liabilities and obligations of the Yell business.
The sale of Yell was completed on 22 June 2001 for a consideration of 2.14 billion comprising i 2 million as consideration for the issued shares of Yellow Pages Sales Ltd ii 1288 million in cash plus 100 million in interest bearing vendor loan notes and 100 million in deferred consideration subject to reduction on ascertainment of the net assets as consideration for the assets of Yell Ltd iii 1 as consideration for the US intellectual property rights and iv 650 million as consideration for the issued shares of Yellow Book USA Inc. amending agreement.
Following completion Yell Ltd agreed a net asset adjustment with Castaim Ltd in respect of the assets of Yell Ltd and Yellow Pages BV agreed a net asset adjustment with Yasmin Two US Inc.
USA Inc which together resulted in the total purchase consideration received being reduced by approximately 140 million.
Additional information for shareholders 150 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Demerger Agreement On 18 September 2001 BT Group plc British Telecommunications plc and mmO plc entered into a demerger agreement the Demerger Agreement which set out the obligations of the parties in implementing the steps to achieve the demerger of mmO the Demerger.
Under this agreement mmO agreed to transfer BT Group Investments to BT Group plc and in exchange for that transfer BT Group agreed to allot and issue BT Group shares to the mmO shareholders in satisfaction of the Demerger dividend being the dividend declared by mmO of an amount equal to the book value of its shareholding in BT Group Investments so that each mmO shareholder at the Demerger record time was entitled to receive one BT Group share for each mmO share then held.
No party to the Demerger Agreement gave any representation warranty or indemnity to the others and no party had any right to rescind the agreement.
Separation Agreement On 18 September 2001 British Telecommunications plc BT Group plc mmO plc and O Limited entered into a separation agreement the Separation Agreement relating to the Demerger.
Under the Separation Agreement it was agreed that mmO would have net debt excluding trading balances of approximately 500 million on 19 November 2001 the Demerger Effective Date including loan indebtedness to BT Group.
BT Group and mmO also agreed to allocate certain assets and liabilities and rights and obligations in each case relating to the mmO business between their respective groups and agreed subject to certain limited exceptions to indemnify each other against certain actual and contingent liabilities to the extent arising directly or indirectly out of their respective businesses.
Furthermore BT Group and mmO agreed to indemnify one another against certain liabilities arising from certain incomplete false or misleading information provided by either of BT Group or mmO or their respective groups for inclusion in public documents.
These indemnities apply indenitely and are not subject to any nancial limit.
Interkomslicenceobligations.
The Separation Agreement sets out the parties agreement for the separation of the pensions arrangements of the BT Group and the mmO Group and also sets out an informal nonbinding dispute resolution procedure which BT Group and mmO have agreed shall be applied to resolve key disputes which may arise between them and their respective groups in connection with their continuing relationship and the Demerger.
Under the Separation Agreement BT Group and mmO agreed that certain costs of the Demerger would be apportioned between them as they may agree in writing.
Under a separate arrangement BT Group and mmO agreed that mmO would pay the remaining amount of approximately US20 million in respect of the 1500000 nonvoting shares in Esat Digifone Limited now called Communications Ireland acquired in April 2000.
Property Sale and Leaseback On 13 December 2001 BT sold to Telereal Group Limited Telereal a substantial part of BTs property portfolio together with the BT property division.
Around 6700 properties comprising ofces telephone exchanges vehicle depots warehouses call centres and computer centres were transferred.
The transaction also included the transfer of approximately 350 employees from BT to Land Securities Trillium Telecom.
Telereal will be responsible for providing accommodation and estates management services to BT.
In return we pay Telereal around 190 million of annual rental increasing at 3% a year for use of the freeholds.
In addition BT has transferred the economic risk on a large portion of its leased properties to Telereal in return for an annual rental commencing at approximately 90 million per annum.
BT will have the exibility to vacate approximately 35% by rental value of the estate over the contract term at no extra cost.
Telereal dened above is a 5050 joint venture between Land Securities Trillium Limited a whollyowned subsidiary of Land Securities plc and William Pears Family Holdings Limited.
The transaction raised approximately 2.38 billion for BT.
Concert Unwind Agreement On 15 October 2001 ATandT BT and Concert entered into binding agreements to terminate the Concert joint venture.
The termination was completed on 1 April 2002 whereupon Concert ceased to exist as a joint venture.
In connection with the termination the assets liabilities contracts customers and other operational items were allocated between BT and ATandT with appropriate true up payment mechanisms to reect the allocation of assets.
The assets and liabilities were allocated between ATandT and BT with the majority of items originally contributed by each of ATandT and BT in connection with the formation of the Concert joint venture being returned to the relevant parent.
Following termination of the joint venture Concert BV was renamed BT Global Networks Holdings Netherlands BV.
Additional information for shareholders BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 151 BT has entered into a number of ongoing commercial agreements with ATandT in order to allow it to continue its global operations and offer telecommunication services in various geographic regions where BT may no longer have infrastructure as a result of the transfer of certain assets to ATandT.
In connection with the termination of the Concert joint venture ATandT has acquired BTs minority interest in ATandT Canada and BT no longer has any interest or obligation in relation to ATandT Canada.
Cegetel
On 5 December 2002 Vivendi Universal Vivendi served a notice exercising its preemption rights under the Shareholders Agreement in respect of Cegetel Groupe SA Cegetel to acquire BTs entire shareholding a 26% interest  in Cegetel from Cegetel Holdings I BV Sarl Cegetel Holdings a BT group company for e4.0 billion 2.6 billion in cash.
This preemption right became exercisable as a result of Cegetel Holdings having entered into a share purchase agreement for the sale of its shareholding in Cegetel to Vodafone AG for e4.0 billion in cash in October 2002.
Vivendi paid e2.7 billion of the consideration to Cegetel Holdings on 17 January 2003 and the transaction was completed when Vivendi paid the balance of e1.3 billion on 22 January 2003.
Taxation US Holders This is a summary only of the principal US federal income tax and UK tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs by US Holders as dened below who hold their ordinary shares or ADSs as capital assets.
It does not address all aspects of US federal income taxation and does not address aspects that may be relevant to persons who are subject to special provisions of US federal income tax law including US expatriates insurance companies taxexempt organisations nancial institutions securities brokerdealers persons subject to alternative minimum tax investors that actually or constructively own 10% or more of our outstanding share capital persons holding their shares or ADSs as part of a straddle hedging transaction or conversion transaction persons who acquired their shares or ADSs pursuant to the exercise of options or similar derivative securities or otherwise as compensation or persons whose functional currency is not the US dollar amongst others.
Those holders may be subject to US federal income tax consequences different from those set forth below.
For purposes of this summary a US Holder is a benecial owner of ordinary shares or ADSs that for US federal income tax purposes is an individual citizen or resident of the United States a corporation or certain other entities created or organised in or under the laws of the United States or any state thereof an estate whose income is subject to US federal income taxation regardless of its source or a trust if a US court can exercise primary supervision over the administration of the trust and one or more US persons are authorised to control all substantial decisions of the trust.
If a partnership holds ordinary shares or ADSs the tax treatment of a partner generally will depend upon the status of the partner and the activities of the partnership.
If a US Holder is a partner in a partnership that holds ordinary shares or ADSs such Holder is urged to consult its own tax adviser regarding the specic tax consequences of owning and disposing of the ordinary shares or ADSs.
In particular this summary is based on i current UK tax law and UK Inland Revenue practice and US law and US Internal Revenue Service IRS practice including the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended the Code Treasury regulations rulings judicial decisions and administrative practice all as currently in effect ii the United KingdomUnited States Income Tax Convention that entered into force on 25 April 1980 as in effect on 1 January 2003 the 1980 Convention and iii the United KingdomUnited States Convention relating to estate and gift taxes as in effect on the date of this Annual Report all of which are subject to change or changes in interpretation possibly with retroactive effect.
US Holders should be aware that a new United KingdomUnited States Income Tax Convention entered into force on 31 March 2003 the New Convention and generally will have effect in respect of dividends paid on or after 1 May 2003.
However a US Holder entitled to benets under the 1980 Convention may elect to have the provisions of the 1980 Convention continue for an additional twelve months if the election to apply the 1980 Convention would result in greater benets to the Holder.
If a US Holder were to make an effective election the discussion below with respect to dividend payments made pursuant to the 1980 Convention would continue to apply to dividends paid by BT prior to 1 May 2004.
The discussion below notes instances where the relevant provisions of the New Convention will produce a materially different result for a US Holder.
US Holders should note that certain articles in the New Convention limit or restrict the ability of a US Holder to claim benets under the New Convention and that similar provisions were not contained in the 1980 Convention.
US Holders should consult their own tax advisors as to the applicability of the Conventions and the consequences under UK US federal state and local and other laws of the ownership and disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs.
Taxation of dividends For dividends paid on or before 5 April 1999 US Holders were generally entitled to receive the cash dividend plus a Treaty payment from the Inland Revenue of one quarter of the dividend subject to a UK withholding tax of 15% of the aggregate amount paid.
As an example for illustration purposes only a US Holder who was entitled to a dividend of 80 was also entitled to a Treaty payment of 20 reduced by the withholding tax of 15% on Additional information for shareholders 152 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 the gross amount of 100 i.
15 leaving a net cash payment of 85.
The full dividend plus the full Treaty payment including the UK tax withheld was taxable income for US purposes and the UK tax withheld generally was available as a US credit or deduction.
For dividends paid on or after 6 April 1999 and subject to the 1980 Convention as described above the Treaty payment reduces to one ninth of the dividend i. one tenth of the gross payment.
As a result of the UK withholding tax which cannot exceed the amount of the hypothetical Treaty payment US Holders will no longer receive any Treaty payment.
In the above example the cash dividend would be 80 and the hypothetical Treaty payment would be 8.89 one ninth of 80.
However since the UK withholding tax 15% of 88.89 would exceed the amount of the hypothetical Treaty payment no Treaty payment will be made and the US Holder will receive only the cash dividend here 80.
A US holder will be taxable in the US on the full dividend and full hypothetical Treaty payment 88.89 and will be treated as having paid a foreign tax equal to the hypothetical Treaty payment here 8.89.
The foreign tax deemed paid generally will be available as a US credit or deduction.
A US Holder could elect to receive a foreign tax credit or deduction with respect to any UK withholding tax on IRS Form 8833 Treaty Based Return Position Disclosure Under Section 6114 or 7701b.
A US Holder will be denied a foreign tax credit and instead allowed a deduction for the hypothetical Treaty payment unless the US Holder has held the shares upon which the dividend was received for at least 16 days during the 30day holding period beginning on the date which is 15 days before the exdividend date.
Any days during which a US Holder has a substantially diminished risk of loss on the shares are not counted toward meeting the 16day holding period requirement.
Also a US Holder that is under an obligation to make related payments with respect to the shares or substantially similar or related property is not entitled to claim a foreign tax credit with respect to a foreign tax imposed on a dividend.
For purposes of calculating the foreign tax credit dividends paid on the ordinary shares or ADSs will be treated as income from sources outside the United States and generally will constitute passive income or for certain holders nancial services income.
The rules relating to the determination of the foreign tax credit are very complex.
US Holders who do not elect to claim a credit with respect to any foreign taxes paid in a given taxable year may instead claim a deduction for foreign taxes paid.
A deduction does not reduce US federal income tax on a dollar for dollar basis like a tax credit.
The deduction however is not subject to the limitations described above.
There will be no hypothetical Treaty payment and no notional UK withholding tax applied to a dividend payment made under the New Convention.
Therefore it will not be possible for US Holders to claim a foreign tax credit in respect of any dividend payment made by BT on or after 1 May 2003 or 1 May 2004 in the case of a Holder who effectively elects to extend the applicability of the 1980 Convention as described above.
The UK does not currently apply a withholding tax on dividends under its internal tax laws.
For US federal income tax purposes a distribution including any additional dividend income arising from a foreign tax credit claim as described above will be treated as ordinary dividend income to the extent paid out of our current or accumulated earnings and prots as determined for US tax purposes based on the US dollar value of the distribution calculated by reference to the spot rate in effect on the date the distribution is actually or constructively received by a US Holder of ordinary shares or by the Depositary in the case of ADSs.
Distributions by us in excess of our current and accumulated earnings and prots will be treated rst as a taxfree return of capital to the extent of the US Holders basis in the ordinary shares or ADSs and thereafter as capital gain.
Dividends paid by us will not be eligible for the US dividends received deduction.
US Holders should consult their own tax advisors to determine whether the US Holder is eligible for benets under the 1980 Convention and the New Convention whether and to what extent a foreign tax credit will be available with respect to dividends received from BT whether it may be advisable in light of the Holders particular circumstances to elect to have the provisions of the 1980 Convention continue in force until 1 May 2004 and the treatment of any foreign currency gain or loss on any pounds sterling received with respect to ordinary shares that are not converted into US dollars on the date the pounds sterling are actually or constructively received.
Taxation of capital gains Unless a US resident carries on a trade through a branch or agency in the UK and the disposal of ordinary shares andor ADSs is related to the activities of that trade UK capital gains tax is not charged on US residents who dispose of ordinary shares andor ADSs.
For US federal income tax purposes a US Holder generally will recognise capital gain or loss on the sale or other disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs in an amount equal to the difference between the US dollar value of the amount realised on the disposition and the US Holders adjusted tax basis determined in US dollars in the ordinary shares or ADSs.
Such gain or loss generally will be US source gain or loss and will be treated as longterm capital gain or loss if the ordinary shares have been held for more than one year at the time of disposition.
The deductibility of capital losses is subject to signicant limitations.
Capital gains of an individual US Holder are subject to US federal income tax at preferential rates if specied holdings periods are met.
Additional information for shareholders BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 153 US information reporting and backup withholding Dividends paid on and proceeds received from the sale or disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs may be subject to information reporting to the IRS and backup withholding at a current rate of 30%.
Certain exempt recipients such as corporations are not subject to these information reporting requirements.
Backup withholding will not apply however to a Holder who provides a correct taxpayer identication number or certicate of foreign status and makes any other required certication or who is otherwise exempt.
US persons who are required to establish their exempt status generally must furnish IRS Form W9 Request for Taxpayer Identication Number and
NonUS Holders generally will not be subject to US information reporting or backup withholding.
However such Holders may be required to provide certication of nonUS status in connection with payments received in the United States or through certain USrelated nancial intermediaries.
Amounts withheld as backup withholding may be credited against a Holders US federal income tax liability.
A Holder may obtain a refund of any excess amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules by ling the appropriate claim for refund with the IRS and furnishing any required information.
UK stamp duty A transfer of an ordinary share will generally be subject to UK stamp duty or UK stamp duty reserve tax at 0.5% of the amount or value of any consideration provided.
A transfer of an ordinary share into a clearance service or American depository system gives rise to a 1.5% charge of either the amount of the consideration provided or the value of the share issued.
No UK stamp duty will be payable on the transfer of an ADS assuming it is not registered in the UK provided that the transfer documents are executed and always retained outside the UK.
UK inheritance and gift taxes in connection with ordinary shares andor ADSs Where an individual holder who is not a UK national of ordinary shares andor ADSs falls within the scope of the UKUS Estate and Gift Tax Convention USdomiciled holders of ordinary shares andor ADSs will not generally be subject to UK inheritance tax on a gift of ordinary shares andor ADSs if the gift is subject to US federal gift tax.
Similarly ordinary shares andor ADSs passing on the death of a USdomiciled shareholder who is not a UK national will not generally be subject to UK inheritance tax if the estate is subject to US estate tax.
The rules and scope of domicile are complex and action should not be taken without advice specic to the individuals circumstances.
Exchange controls and other limitations affecting security holders There are currently no government laws decrees or regulations in the United Kingdom that restrict the export or import of capital including but not limited to UK foreign exchange control restrictions or that affect the remittances of dividends or other payments to nonresident holders of the companys ordinary shares except as otherwise described in Taxation US Holders above and except in respect of the government of or any resident of Iraq or any person treated as so resident.
There are no limitations under the laws of the United Kingdom restricting the right of nonresidents to hold or to vote shares in the company.
Documents on display All reports and other information that BT les with the US Securities and Exchange Commission may be inspected at the SECs public reference facilities at Room 1200 450 Fifth Street Washington DC USA.
These reports may be accessed via the SECs website at www. ec. ov.
Publications
BT produces a series of reports on the companys nancial economic social and environmental performance.
Most of these reports which are available to shareholders on request can be accessed on the internet at siteinvestorcentre.
More detailed disclosures on BTs implementation of social ethical and environmental policies and procedures are available online through our fully and independently veried social and environment report at sitebetterworld.
Document Publication date Annual Review including summary nancial statement June Annual Report and Form 20F June Quarterly results releases July November February and May Current Cost Financial Statements for the Businesses and Activities and Statement of Standard Services as required by Oftel December Social and Environment Report June Statement of Business Practice September 2002 For printed copies when available contact the Shareholder Helpline on Freefonetel or alternatively contact the Registrar in the UK at the address on page 155.
Additional information for shareholders 154 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Electronic communication Shareholders can now choose to receive their shareholder documents electronically rather than by post.
Shareholders may elect to receive documents in this way by going to sitesignup and following the online instructions or by calling the Shareholder Helpline.
Shareholder communication BT is committed to communicating openly with each of its stakeholder audiences in the manner most appropriate to their requirements.
All investors can visit our Investor Centre at siteinvestorcentre for additional information regarding quarterly results and major announcements.
An electronic copy of this document is available at siteannualreport.
Private shareholders If private shareholders have any enquiries about their shareholding they should contact the Registrar the address can be found below.
Lloyds TSB Registrars maintain BT Groups share register and the separate BT Group EasyShare and BT Employee Share Ownership Scheme registers.
They also provide a Shareholder Helpline service on Freefonetel.
Institutional investors and analysts Institutional investors and equity research analysts may contact Investor Relations on Tel 020 7356 5065 Fax 020 7356 5270 email email Industry analysts may contact Tel 020 7356 5378 Fax 020 7356 6630 email email Shareholder Helpline Tel Freefonetel
Textphone Freefonetel From outside the UK Tel 44tel Fax tel71 Textphone 44tel email email The Registrar Lloyds TSB Registrars The Causeway Worthing West Sussex BN99 6DA United Kingdom
ADR Depositary JPMorgan Chase Bank JPMorgan Service Centre
Box 43013 Providence RI 029403013 United States Tel 1tel toll free or 1tel from outside the USA email email Website site General enquiries BT Group plc BT Centre 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ United Kingdom Tel 020 7356 5000 Fax 020 7356 5520 From overseas Tel 44tel Fax 44tel A full list of BT contacts and an electronic feedback facility is available at sitetalk.
Additional information for shareholders BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 155 Term used in UK annual report US equivalent or denition Accounts Financial statements Advance corporation tax ACT No direct US equivalent.
Tax payable on cash dividends treated as advance payments on the companys UK income tax due Associates Equity investees Capital allowances Tax depreciation Capital redemption reserve Other additional capital Creditors Accounts payable and accrued liabilities Creditors amounts falling due within one year Current liabilities Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year Longterm liabilities Debtors amounts falling due after more than one year Other noncurrent assets Employee share schemes Employee stock benet plans Employment costs Payroll costs Finance lease Capital lease Financial year Fiscal year Fixed asset investments Noncurrent investments Freehold Ownership with absolute rights in perpetuity Gearing Leverage Inland calls Local and longdistance calls Interests in associates and joint ventures Securities of equity investees Investment in own shares Treasury shares Loans to associates and joint ventures Indebtedness of equity investees not current Net asset value Book value Operating prot Net operating income Other debtors Other current assets Own work capitalised Costs of groups employees engaged in the construction of plant and equipment for internal use Prot Income Prot and loss account statement Income statement Prot and loss account under capital and reserves in balance sheet Retained earnings Prot for the nancial year Net income Prot on sale of xed assets Gain on disposal of noncurrent assets Provision for doubtful debts Allowance for bad and doubtful accounts receivable Provisions Longterm liabilities other than debt and specic accounts payable Recognised gains and losses statement Comprehensive income Redundancy charges Early release scheme expenses Reserves Shareholders equity other than paidup capital Share based payment Stock compensation Share premium account Additional paidin capital or paidin surplus not distributable Shareholders funds Shareholders equity Stocks Inventories Tangible xed assets Property plant and equipment Trade debtors Accounts receivable net Turnover Revenues 156 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Glossary of terms and US equivalents The information in this document that is referred to in the following table shall be deemed to be led with the Securities and Exchange Commission for all purposes Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 1 Identity of directors senior management and advisors Not applicable 2 Offer statistics and expected timetable Not applicable 3 Key information 3A Selected nancial data Five year nancial summary 2627 Additional information for shareholders Exchange rates 147 3B Capitalisation and indebtedness Not applicable 3C Reasons for the offer and use of proceeds Not applicable 3D Risk factors Risk factors 140 4 Information on the company 4A History and development of the company Additional information for shareholders Background 142143
Business review
Introduction 8 Restructuring 9 Demerger of mmO Acquisitions and disposals 910 Concert 10
Financial review
Capital expenditure 44 4B Business overview Business review 823 Our commitment to society 2425
Financial review
Geographical information 4647 Financial statistics 138 Operational statistics 139 Notes to the nancial statements People employed 117 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 142 4C Organisational structure Business review Introduction 8 Subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates 135 4D Property plant and equipment Business review Property 10
Financial review
Prot on sale of property xed assets 3940 5 Operating and nancial review and prospects 5A Operating results Financial review 2849 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 142 5B Liquidity and capital resources Financial review 2849 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 142 Notes to the nancial statements Loans and other borrowings 108109 Financial commitments contingent liabilities and subsequent events 111 Financial instruments and risk management 121125 5C Research and development patents and licences Business review Research and development and IT support 1617 Financial statistics 138 5D Trend information Financial review 2849 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 142 6 Directors senior management and employees 6A Directors and senior management Board of directors and Operating Committee 5051 Cross reference to Form 20F BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 157 Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 6B Compensation Report on directors remuneration 5872 Notes to the nancial statements Pension costs 112116 Directors 116 6C Board practices Board of directors and Operating Committee 5051 Report of the directors Directors 52 Corporate governance 5357 Report on directors remuneration 5872 Statement of directors responsibility 73 6D Employees Business review Lines of business 10 Our people 1718 Notes to the nancial statements People employed 117 Operational statistics 139 6E Share ownership Report on directors remuneration 5872 Notes to the nancial statements Employee share schemes 117120 7 Major shareholders and related party transactions 7A Major shareholders Report of the directors Substantial shareholdings 52 Additional information for shareholders Analysis of shareholdings 144 7B Related party transactions Report of the directors Interest of management in certain transactions 52 Report on directors remuneration 5872 Notes to the nancial statements Related party transactions 111 7C Interests of experts and counsel Not applicable 8 Financial information 8A Consolidated statements and other nancial information See item 18 below.
Business review
Legal proceedings 23 Additional information for shareholders Dividends 144145 8B Signicant changes Financial review Capital resources 43 Notes to the nancial statements Financial commitments contingent liabilities and subsequent events 111 9 The offer and listing 9A Offer and listing details Additional information for shareholders Share and ADS prices 143 9B Plan of distribution Not applicable 9C Markets Additional information for shareholders Listings 143 9D Selling shareholders Not applicable 9E Dilution Not applicable 9F Expenses of the issue Not applicable 10 Additional information 10A Share capital Not applicable 10B Memorandum and articles of association Additional information for shareholders Background 142143 Memorandum and Articles of Association 147150 10C Material contracts Additional information for shareholders Material contracts 150152 10D Exchange controls Additional information for shareholders Exchange controls and other limitations affecting security holders 154 10E Taxation Additional information for shareholders Taxation US Holders 152154 Cross reference to Form 20F 158 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 10F Dividends and paying agents Not applicable 10G Statement by experts Not applicable 10H Documents on display Additional information for shareholders Documents on display 154 10I Subsidiary information Not applicable 11 Quantitative and qualitative Financial review disclosures about market risk Treasury policy Foreign currency and interest rate exposure Notes to the nancial statements Financial instruments and risk management 121125 12 Description of securities other than equity securities Not applicable 13 Defaults dividend arrearages and delinquencies Not applicable 14 Material modications to the rights of security holders and use of proceeds Not applicable 15 Controls and procedures Corporate governance 5357 16 Reserved 17 Financial statements Not applicable 18 Financial statements Report of the independent auditors 74 Accounting policies 7678 Consolidated nancial statements 75126 United States generally accepted accounting principles 127134 Quarterly analysis of turnover and prot 136137 Cross reference to Form 20F BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 159 Index 160 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 Accounting and presentation changes 85 Accounting policies 4748 7678 Additional information for shareholders 141155 Auditors remuneration 121 Auditors report to shareholders 74 Background 142143 Balance sheet 27 45 84 126 Broadband 1 2 5 6 7 8 9 11 12 1415 3233 34 51 BT Deferred Bonus Plan 59 71 107 119120 BT Exact 1617 BT Executive Share Plan 6061 107 119120 BT Global Services 6 1516 3435 86 BT Ignite 15 BT Incentive Share Plan 60 107 119120 BT Openworld 9 12 13 86 BT Retention Share Plan 60 107 119120 BT Retail 1113 3133 86 BT Wholesale 6 1315 3334 86 Business practice statement of 56 Business review 823 Call volume growth 32 139 Capital expenditure 3 7 27 31 33 34 35 44 83 87 Capital gains tax 143 Cash ow statement 27 42 83 Cautionary statement 142 Chairmans message 45 Chief Executives statement 67 Commitment to society 2425 Community 24 25 Competition and the UK economy 46 Concert global venture 9 10 16 28 30 37 38 9192 99100 142 151152 Contact details 155 Contingent liabilities 111 Corporate governance 5357 Corporate identity 7 8 Creditors 52 84 109 Cross reference to Form 20F 157159 Customer satisfaction 2 6 9 14 Debtors 77 84 107 Demerger 9 28 33 37 44 60 80 85 8687 9193 97 Depreciation 31 36 77 8687 9193 105 Disposals 4 5 910 28 3839 9495 Directors 5051 Emoluments 116 Interests in shares 6364 6871 Proposed for election or reelection at AGM 52 Remuneration report on 5872 Report 52 Responsibility statement 73 Disclosure committee 5657 Dividend investment plan 145 Dividends 3 4 10 26 41 7981 97 109 110 126 144145 148 Earnings loss per share 3 4 26 29 30 41 7981 9798 Economic and Monetary Union 48 Electronic communication 155 Employee share schemes 117120 Employees 1718 33 35 117 139 Environment 24 25 46 154 Exchange controls 154 Exchange lines 1 11 32 46 139 140 Financial calendar 154 Financial commitments 111 Financial headlines 3 Financial instruments 78 121125 Financial ratios 138 Financial review 2849 Financial statistics 138 Financing 4142 Fiveyear nancial summary 2627 Foreign currencies 43 76 9193 122 125 Going concern 43 73 Goodwill 26 29 30 76 9193 104 106 128 Glossary of terms and US equivalents 156 Group strategy 89 Intangible assets 76 77 84 9193 104 128 Interest 26 29 40 76 7981 83 95 108 122 Internal control and risk management 55 Investments 27 39 77 84 9495 106107 108 Joint ventures and associates 26 3738 86 87 89 90 94 101102 106107 111 135 Legal proceedings 23 111 Licence 1823 Listings 143 Loans and other borrowings 27 84 108109 Management Council 53 54 55 Management of liquid resources 83 99 Material contracts 150152 Memorandum and Articles of Association 147150 Minority interests 26 27 29 7981 84 97 131 mmO Mobile communications 9 12 New wave 4 1113 32 Other operating income 26 29 35 7981 90 Operating Committee 50 51 5354 59 72 Operating costs 3 26 29 3537 7981 9193 Operating prot loss 3 26 29 30 37 38 7981 Operational statistics 139 Optical bre 13 Pensions 4 10 17 4546 56 7778 9193 112116 128 132133 140 Price control 18 2123 46 Prot loss after tax 3 26 29 7981 Prot loss before tax 3 26 29 4041 7981 Prot and loss account 26 29 7981 Provisions for liabilities and charges 27 84 109 Publications 154 Quarterly analysis of turnover and prot 136137 Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds 110 Reconciliation of operating prot loss to operating cash ows 99 Redundancy costs 77 9193 Regulation competition and prices 18 46 Research and development 1617 76 9193 138 Restructuring 9 10 28 3839 85 142143 Return on capital employed 45 138 Rights issue 9 28 110 119 Risk factors 140 Risk management 121125 SarbanesOxley Act 54 55 5657 Segmental analysis 8689 Share and ADS prices 143 Share capital 27 84 110 126 Share option schemes 110 117120 Shareholder communication 155 Shareholdings analysis 144 Staff costs 34 36 9193 Statement of total recognised gains and losses 82 Stocks 77 84 Strategy statement 2 Subsidiary undertakings 76 77 9495 99103 111 135 Substantial shareholdings 52 Suppliers payment policy 52 Tangible xed assets 77 84 105 Taxation US Holders 152154 Total shareholder return 60 64 68 69 70 120 146 Treasury policy 43 Turnover 3 10 26 29 30 76 7981 8690 US GAAP 27 4849 127134 Viag Interkom 10 28 44 91 93 101 Yell 10 28 85 94 103 150 Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 annual report BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2003 BT Group plc Registered ofce 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ Registered in England and Wales No.
Produced by BT Group Designed by Paufey Typeset by Greenaways Printed in England by Pindar plc Printed on paper which meets international environmental standards.
