Annual
Reportand
Form20
Filename 01.3d Time 143227 Date 200506 Checksum tel BT is one of the worlds leading providers of communications solutions and services operating in 170 countries.
Our principal activities include networked IT services local national and international telecommunications services and highervalue broadband and internet products and services.
In the UK we serve around 20 million business and residential customers as well as providing network services to other operators.
CONTENTS
2 Financial headlines 3 Chairmans message 4 Chief Executives statement 6 Operating and nancial review 6 Business review 22 Selected nancial data 26 Financial review 40 Board of directors and Operating Committee 42 Report of the directors 48 Report of the Audit Committee 49 Report of the Nominating Committee 50 Report on directors remuneration 62 Statement of directors responsibility 63 Report of the independent auditors 64 Consolidated nancial statements 123 Financial statements for BT Group plc 127 Subsidiary undertakings and associate 128 Quarterly analysis of revenue and prot 129 Financial statistics 131 Operational statistics 132 Additional information for shareholders 144 Cross reference to Form 20F 147 Index BT Group plc is a public limited company registered in England and Wales and listed on the London and New York stock exchanges.
It was incorporated in England and Wales on 30 March 2001 as Newgate Telecommunications Limited with the registered number .
Its registered ofce address is 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ.
The company changed its name to BT Group plc on 11 September 2001.
Following the demerger of O2 in November 2001 the continuing activities of BT were transferred to BT Group plc.
British Telecommunications plc is a whollyowned subsidiary of BT Group plc and encompasses virtually all the businesses and assets of the BT group.
The successor to the statutory corporation British Telecommunications it was incorporated in England and Wales as a public limited company wholly owned by the UK Government as a result of the Telecommunications Act 1984.
Between November 1984 and July 1993 the UK Government sold all of its shareholding in British Telecommunications plc in three public offerings.
This is the annual report for the year ended 31 March 2006.
It complies with UK regulations and is the annual report on Form 20F for the US Securities and Exchange Commission to meet US regulations.
This annual report has been sent to shareholders who have elected to receive a copy.
A separate annual review and notice of meeting including summary nancial statements for the year ended 31 March 2006 has been issued to all shareholders.
In this annual report references to BT Group BT the group the company we or our are to BT Group plc which includes the continuing activities of British Telecommunications plc and its subsidiaries and lines of business or any of them as the context may require.
References to the nancial year are to the year ended 31 March of each year eg the 2006 nancial year refers to the year ended 31 March 2006.
Unless otherwise stated all nonnancial statistics are at 31 March 2006.
Please see cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 133.
For the purposes of US reporting requirements applicable to first time adopters of IFRS BT hereby incorporates by reference from its Annual report on Form 20F for 2005 the five year financial summary on pages 23 to 24 thereof the discussion of the 2005 financial year on pages 26 to 143 in the Financial review section thereof and the Financial statements and supporting notes on pages 72 to 122 thereof.
A number of measures quoted in this Annual Report are nonGAAP measures.
The directors believe these measures provide a more meaningful analysis of the trading results of the group and are consistent with the way financial performance is measured by management.
These include EBITDA and profit before specific items earnings per share before specific items net debt and free cash flow.
The rationale for using nonGAAP measures and reconciliations to the most directly comparable IFRS indicator are provided on pages 27 65 83 and 84.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 1 Filename 01.3d Time 143229 Date 200506 Checksum tel s Revenue of 19514 million up 6% s New wave revenue of 6282 million up 38% s Prot before taxation and specic items of 2177 million up 5% s Earnings per share before specic items of 19.5 pence up 8% s Net debt reduced from 7.9 billion to 7.5 billion s Dividends of 11.9 pence per share for the year up 14% Year ended 31 March In  million unless otherwise stated 2006 2005 Revenue 19514 18429 Operating prot 2495 2992 Prot before taxation 2040 2354 Prot for the year 1548 1829 Basic earnings per share 18.4p 21.5p Specic items charge credit Prot for the year before specic items 1644 1539 Basic earnings per share before specic items Net cash inow from operating activities 5387 5574 Capital expenditure on property plant and equipment and software 3142 3011 Dividends per share The nancial information above is discussed in the Financial review on pages 26 to 39 together with the reasons for focusing on the results before specic items.
The consolidated nancial statements are on pages 64 to 122.
Revenue years ended 31 March From continuing activities Net debt m as at 31 March Basic earnings per share before specific items pence years ended 31 March From continuing activities The group adopted International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS with effect from 1 April 2005.
The comparative data for the year ended 31 March 2005 has been restated accordingly.
IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation IAS 32 and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement IAS 39 were adopted with effect from 1 April 2005 and the comparative data does not reflect the effect of these standards.
Amounts in the years prior to the year ended 31 March 2005 are presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United Kingdom UK GAAP.
Information prepared under IFRS is not directly comparable with that prepared under UK GAAP.
For the purposes of US reporting requirements applicable to first time adopters of IFRS BT hereby incorporates by reference from its Annual report on Form 20F for 2005 the five year financial summary on pages 23 to 24 thereof the discussion of the 2005 financial year on pages 26 to 143 in the Financial review section thereof and the Financial statements and supporting notes on pages 72 to 122 thereof.
A number of measures quoted in this Annual Report are nonGAAP measures.
The directors believe these measures provide a more meaningful analysis of the trading results of the group and are consistent with the way financial performance is measured by management.
These include EBITDA and profit before specific items earnings per share before specific items net debt and free cash flow.
The rationale for using nonGAAP measures and reconciliations to the most directly comparable IFRS indicator are provided on pages 28 65 83 and 84.
Dividends per share represents the dividend proposed in respect of the relevant financial year.
Amounts presented in respect of the years ended 31 March 2004 2003 and 2002 are prepared in accordance with UK GAAP.
UK GAAP is not directly comparable with IFRS.
FINANCIAL HEADLINES BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Financial headlines 2 Filename 01.3d Time 143239 Date 200506
The news on dividends is again positive.
Your Board is recommending a fullyear dividend of 11.9 pence per share a pay out ratio of 61% of earnings before specic items compared with 57% last year.
We continue our progressive dividend policy and expect our pay out ratio to rise to around twothirds of earnings in the 2008 nancial year.
We operated our share buy back programme again in the 2006 nancial year.
This is being funded from cash generated over and above that required for servicing our debt which remains below 8 billion.
BUSINESS PROGRESS We continued to implement our strategy of growth through business transformation.
Your Board has given its backing to targeted acquisitions that will help us conrm our status as a leading player in the global networked IT services market.
In the 2006 nancial year we acquired Atlanet in Italy as part of a major deal with Fiat Cara Group in Ireland and Total Network Solutions in the UK.
And in the UK we now have almost eight million broadband lines over which we are able to offer customers exciting nextgeneration voice and entertainment services.
New wave revenue grew by 38% to 6.3 billion and accounted for around onethird of our total business.
REGULATION
We believe that a fair and exible regulatory regime is vital for our industry for ensuring that we can meet customers growing needs and for encouraging investment.
We were pleased that following its strategic review of telecommunications Ofcom accepted the set of legallybinding Undertakings that BT proposed in order to transform the regulatory landscape in the
We believe that the impact of these Undertakings will be to focus regulation where it remains necessary at the same time as stimulating deregulation wherever possible.
PENSIONS
BT stands fully behind its pension promise to pensioners and members of the BT Pension Scheme BTPS.
The scheme is wellmanaged and its assets have grown very signicantly in recent years from 23 billion at the end of 2002 to more than 35 billion currently.
The accounting decit has almost halved in the last year alone.
With the Trustees of the BTPS we are continuing discussions on the triennial funding valuation of the scheme.
In particular we aim to review recent pensions legislation and guidelines and examine the implications and extent of the Crown Guarantee given on privatisation in 1984.
The Crown Guarantee which applies to liabilities assumed by BT in 1984 and only in the event of insolvency is an extra layer of security for BT pensioners.
THE BOARD There were a number of changes to your Board during the year.
I would like to welcome Matti Alahuhta and Phil Hodkinson as nonexecutive directors.
Matti has been President of Kone Corporation since January 2005 and was previously at Nokia Phil is Group Finance Director of HBOS.
Both bring a wide range of commercial and senior management experience to your company.
I would also like to thank Lou Hughes who stepped down as a nonexecutive director on 31 March 2006 for his excellent contribution over more than six years.
Im pleased that his experience is not lost to us he has joined our Americas Advisory Board.
OUR WIDER RESPONSIBILITIES Our aim as a communications company is to operate in a socially responsible and sustainable way and to ensure that we help everyone benet from improved communications and enhanced connectivity.
Im very proud of the fact that for the fth year in a row BT was the highest placed telecommunications company in the Dow Jones Sustainability
Climate change has been moving inexorably up the social and corporate agendas for a number of years now.
Although telecommunications technology is environmentally friendly BT is one of the largest companies in the UK and one of the largest consumers of electricity.
Our operations inevitably have an impact on the environment and we take the job of managing that impact seriously.
We are now for example meeting almost all our UK electricity needs from environmentally friendly sources including wind generation solar wave and hydroelectric schemes.
LOOKING FORWARD I am very grateful to our shareholders and our customers for their continued loyalty and the condence that they have shown in BTs programme of transformation.
Id like to thank our employees for making that programme happen.
Your company is well set for continued success in the years ahead.
Our performance underpins our condence that we can continue to grow revenue EBITDA earnings per share and dividends over the coming year and accelerate the strategic transformation of the business.
Sir Christopher Bland
17 May 2006 Our results for the 2006 nancial year were excellent.
Earnings per share before specic items grew by 8% to 19.5 pence.
We continued to invest signicantly in technologies and systems designed to transform our customers experience at the same time as generating free cash ow of 1.6 billion.
CHAIRMANS MESSAGE Chairmans message BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 3 Filename 01.3d Time 143247 Date 200506 Checksum tel HELPING CUSTOMERS THRIVE IN A CHANGING WORLD We enjoy the fantastic privilege of serving around 20 million customers in 170 countries around the world.
Their needs and expectations are constantly changing so too is the market in which we operate and the technology at our disposal.
Thats why an ability to embrace and thrive on change  developing new products and services new ways of working and new ways of interacting with our customers  is essential to what we do at BT.
When so much is changing companies have to be crystal clear about what they stand for.
BT has a strong and trusted brand widely recognised around the world by shareholders customers suppliers and employees.
The brand captures the essence of BT and tells existing and new customers what they can expect from us.
We have summed this up in a new vision and mission.
Our vision is to be dedicated to helping customers thrive in a changing world.
And theres not a wasted word in there.
Dedication to our customers is what will differentiate us in an intensely competitive environment.
Helping these customers to thrive means enabling them to do the things they want to do when they want to do them and at the right price.
It means helping them to recognise that a changing world is a world of opportunity and new experiences.
And it means helping them to seize those opportunities.
Our mission is to be the leader in delivering converged networked services.
Thats the yardstick by which well measure our success.
Convergence is at the heart of everything we do for customers.
We believe that this combination of absolute commitment to understanding our customers and to exploring the possibilities of convergence blurring the distinctions between networks and services IT and communications xed and mobile telecommunications and visual services is extremely powerful.
Of course customers are not interested in vision and mission statements.
What they are interested in however are services that get the job done and that are hasslefree.
THE RIGHT REGULATORY CLIMATE We operate in a regulated industry and the right regulatory climate is also essential if our customers are to thrive.
The regulatory climate is not however just something that happens to us we are helping to shape regulatory thinking.
In response to Ofcoms strategic review of telecommunications in the UK we proposed a series of Undertakings which we believe will result in a fair and exible regulatory regime deregulation where possible and the growth of competition through equivalence.
Above all they bring greater regulatory certainty.
These Undertakings which Ofcom accepted are in our view fundamental to meeting customers needs and to enabling us and other service providers to invest in the future with condence.
A big part of meeting these Undertakings was the creation of
This line of business manages our access and backhaul networks and the associated portfolio of products and services.
We have established an Equality of Access Board with a majority of independent members to oversee compliance.
Service providers are beneting from lower prices for both connection and rental thanks to the success of products such as wholesale line rental and local loop unbundling.
BT is committed to meeting its obligations and we have made good progress so far  though much remains to be done.
OUR STRATEGY Like our brand our strategy for protable growth and transformation is subject to continuous review.
There are four parts to our strategy s to pursue protable growth in new wave markets s to maximise the return from our traditional business s to transform our networks systems and services for the twentyrst century s to create longterm partnerships with our customers.
NEW WAVE GROWTH Around one third of BTs revenue in the 2006 nancial year was from new wave activities  thats up from effectively nothing a few years ago.
By new wave activities we mean networked IT services broadband and mobility.
In short order BT has established itself as a key player in the global networked IT services market with a strong track record of winning and delivering big complex contracts for large corporations and other organisations.
Major wins such as the contract with Fiat in Italy and the revised agreement with the Department for Work and Pensions in the UK conrmed our credentials.
The total value of our networked IT services order intake in the year was 5.4 billion.
Having hit our target of ve million broadband lines in April 2005 a year ahead of schedule weve boosted that number by more than 50% in the past nancial year.
For the majority of customers access to broadband is now a given.
But broadband is more than just another technology it enables broader richer more compelling experiences.
Our
We are delivering speeds of up to 8Mbits and launching innovative consumer broadband products and services.
One of these BT Vision scheduled for launch in the autumn is broadband TV and will bring a new dimension to home entertainment as customers choose from a huge range of ondemand lm music and TV programming as well as interactive services.
BT is a mobile virtual network operator in both the business and consumer markets with more than 340000 connections.
In a convergent world we aim to offer customers the best of xed and the best of mobile.
We launched BT Fusion the worlds rst service enabling customers to switch seamlessly Your company is ambitious.
We are much more than a lines and calls business.
Our aim is to make life easier simpler cheaper and more fullling for all our customers.
We will continue to do this by providing our business customers large and small with productivity improvements and competitive edge in their markets.
We will ensure consumers enjoy a joinedup communications experience enabling them to communicate anywhere anytime using whatever device they choose.
CHIEF EXECUTIVES STATEMENT BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Chief Executives statement 4 Filename 01.3d Time 143250 Date 200506 between xed and mobile lines depending on where they are.
And in the wholesale market we are one of the rst companies in Europe to offer a broadcast digital TV and radio service via mobile handsets BT Movio.
MAXIMISE THE RETURN FROM OUR TRADITIONAL BUSINESS The number of xedvoice calls is no longer the best guide to the success of a telecommunications company as we encourage our customers to take up nonvoice and subscriptionbased packages.
At 31 March 2006 67% of call revenue in the consumer market was under contract.
We continue to develop and enhance our traditional services to make them more attractive to customers as the success of BT Together and BT Privacy has demonstrated.
In our traditional markets as in the rest of our business we are committed to working smarter  avoiding the costs of failure and duplication  and ever more cost effectively through using the internet.
For example over two million customers now receive ebills.
TRANSFORM OUR NETWORKS SYSTEMS AND SERVICES FOR THE TWENTYFIRST CENTURY Our twentyrst century network 21CN programme is further evidence of our ambitions.
It is a massive investment in the UKs infrastructure and in the UKs continued competitiveness in world markets.
Based on IP technology it is designed to ensure that the delivery of the next generation of converged services is rapid and cost efcient.
CREATE LONGTERM PARTNERSHIPS WITH OUR CUSTOMERS We never take our customers for granted.
Nothing is more important than building successful innovative mutually rewarding relationships with them.
In recent years we have focused in particular on driving down levels of customer dissatisfaction.
The emphasis now is increasingly on improving customer satisfaction.
In the 2006 nancial year we achieved a 3% increase in the number of customers reporting that they are very satised or extremely satised with the services they receive from BT.
Because the quality of service we offer customers is key to their satisfaction levels much of our investment in training and development is directed towards developing a truly customer centric culture in BT.
OUR PEOPLE BT is a people business not a technology business.
Recruiting developing rewarding and retaining the right people is critical.
Another must do is celebrating the power of diversity ensuring that our people reect the customers we serve.
A people business only really res on all cylinders when its top team is on top of its game which is why we have rigorously dened the capabilities we expect of leaders in this business and developed programmes to help them become even more customer focused.
Achieving our ambitions depends as much on the quality and commitment of our people as on worldclass products and services on technology and on a clear strategy.
People understand how technology can add value to their customers lives and people deliver strategies.
People not only know what a business stands for but they also embody its values.
Id like to thank BT people for their commitment imagination and dedication to our customers.
In my view they are truly inspirational.
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive 17 May 2006 Chief Executives statement BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 5 Filename 02.3d Time 143315 Date 200506
BUSINESS REVIEW
The Business review is divided into the following sections 7 Introduction to the Business review 7 Our customers 8 Our strategy 8 Outlook 8 Pursue protable growth in new wave markets 11 Maximise the return from our traditional business 12 Transform our networks systems and services for the twentyrst century 12 Create longterm partnerships with our customers 13 Acquisitions and disposals 13 Regulation competition and prices 16 Relationship with HM Government 17 Legal proceedings 17 Resources 19 Our commitment to society 20 Group risk factors Please see Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 133.
OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 6 Filename 02.3d Time 143316 Date 200506 Checksum tel INTRODUCTION TO THE BUSINESS REVIEW BT Group plc is one of the worlds leading providers of communications solutions and services operating in 170 countries.
Our vision is for BT to be dedicated to helping customers thrive in a changing world.
Our mission is to be the leader in delivering converged networked services.
We are committed to increasing shareholder value by transforming the customer experience through service excellence by the effective management of our powerful brand and by leveraging our large scale networks and our existing customer base.
We aim to nd new and mutuallyrewarding ways of engaging with around 20 million customers to capitalise on the possibilities of convergence to offer global reach combined with the service values associated with local delivery and to continue to provide innovative services and solutions.
Our principal activities include networked IT services local national and international telecommunications services and broadband and internet products and services.
We have ISO 9001 certication the international quality management system standard for most of our operations in the UK and worldwide.
We are committed to enhancing our positive impact on society through leadership in CSR corporate social responsibility and our policy is to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity in all our operations in line with our published statement of business practice  The Way We
How BT operates BT consists principally of four lines of business BT Global Services Openreach BT Retail and BT Wholesale.
Openreach was established on 21 January 2006 in response to Ofcoms strategic review of telecommunications.
It operates the physical as opposed to the electronic assets of the local access and backhaul networks and provides the services which use these networks to communications providers both internally and externally.
See Regulation competition and prices For nancial reporting purposes Openreach remained part of BT Wholesale until the end of the 2006 nancial year.
It will be reported as a separate line of business in the 2007 nancial year.
Openreach BT Retail and BT Wholesale operate almost entirely within the UK where BT is the UKs largest communications service provider by market share to the residential and business markets supplying a wide range of communications products and services including voice data internet and multimedia services and offering a comprehensive range of managed and packaged communications solutions.
In the 2006 nancial year 87% of our revenue was derived from operations within the UK.
BT Global Services addresses the networked IT services needs of multisite organisations both in the UK and internationally.
OUR CUSTOMERS Revenue by customer segment year ended 31 March 2006
Consumer
Wholesale
UK and global carrier Major corporate 27% 12% 35% 26% Major corporate customers Our core target market is 10000 multisite organisations including major companies with signicant global requirements together with large organisations in target local markets.
We aim to provide them with networked IT services and a complete range of managed solutions.
In the 2006 nancial year major corporate revenue increased by 16% to 6880 million with new wave revenue increasing by 35% and traditional revenue declining by 4%.
The increase in new wave revenue for major corporate customers globally was driven by networked IT services broadband and mobility.
New wave revenue accounted for 59% of our total revenue in the major corporate market compared with 51% in the 2005 nancial year.
The continued migration of our customers from traditional voice and data services to networked IT services enables us to build closer highvalue relationships with these customers enabling them to manage their businesses more effectively and gain competitive advantage in their markets.
Such relationships will we believe deliver longterm protable revenue more than offsetting the decline in our traditional business revenue.
As well as local national and international communications services and highervalue broadband and internet products and services we offer a comprehensive portfolio of networked IT services focused on messaging and conferencing CRM customer relationship management convergence outsourcing and security.
We also offer consultancy services to help organisations understand network performance operate their networks and applications efciently and transform their businesses to gain advantage in the digital networked economy.
Our extensive global communications network and strong partnerships enable us to serve customers in the key commercial centres around the world using a combination of direct sales and services capabilities and strategic partners.
Business customers At 31 March 2006 in the UK we had around 1.5 million business customers with more than eight million exchange lines.
In the SME small and mediumsized enterprises market typically companies with up to 500 employees our strategy is to provide customers with tailored IT and communications products and services that enable them to manage their businesses more simply and efciently.
In the 2006 nancial year 23% of revenue was from new wave activities compared with 19% in the 2005 nancial year.
However we face challenging market conditions and overall in the SME market during the 2006 nancial year revenue reduced by 5% to 2324 million primarily reecting the impact of CPS carrier preselection and WLR wholesale line rental.
In April 2006site plc one of the UKs leading internet retailers of IT and technology products.
SME and consumer customers.
Consumer customers At 31 March 2006 we had over 18 million UK consumer customers with around 20 million residential customer lines exchange line connections.
In the 2006 nancial year consumer revenue declined by 5% to 5296 million primarily reecting the impact of CPS WLR and regulatory price reductions in mobile termination rates.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 7 Filename 02.3d Time 143318 Date 200506
In the consumer market we aim to provide customers with a range of services that help them communicate more effectively be entertained and manage their lives.
By increasing revenue from broadband mobility and internet services we intend to reduce further our dependence on revenue and prot from traditional xedline voice services.
We also aim to maximise the returns from our traditional business and defend market share vigorously through service offerings backed by innovative marketing and excellent quality of service.
Consumer new wave revenue grew by 55% from 412 million in the 2005 nancial year to 638 million in the 2006 nancial year driven principally by broadband.
Residential broadband customers increased by 52% to more than two million.
Wholesale customers In the UK wholesale market we provide network services and solutions to over 700 communications companies including xed and mobile network operators ISPs internet service providers and other service providers.
We interconnect with more than 150 other operators as well as carrying transit trafc between telecommunications operators.
In the 2006 nancial year external revenue from our wholesale activities increased by 13% to 4996 million.
In the UK external revenue from our wholesale activities was 4226 million in the 2006 nancial year compared with 3820 million in the 2005 nancial year.
New wave revenue was 1033 million up 56% on the 2005 nancial year.
This increase was driven by the success of broadband as well as a strong emphasis on building innovative network solutions that help our wholesale customers grow their businesses and reduce their costs.
We have a long and successful tradition of delivering networkbased connectivity to the carrier and intermediate telecommunications markets throughout the UK and have developed valueenhancing services and solutions.
We have a number of agreements with service providers and mobile operators to upgrade their IP capability.
In addition we have used our expertise and geographic reach to provide bespoke data housing solutions.
In our global carrier business revenue was 691 million in the 2006 nancial year compared with 565 million in the 2005 nancial year.
This strong growth was mainly driven by revenue from Albacom which we acquired in February 2005.
Our global carrier business customers include other xedline telecommunications operators mobile operators and selected ISPs outside the UK.
OUR STRATEGY Our strategy is to s pursue protable growth in new wave markets s maximise the return from our traditional business s transform our networks systems and services for the twenty rst century s create longterm partnerships with our customers.
The successful delivery of this strategy depends on the commitment of all BT people and our continued ability to manage their development and reward them.
The key performance indicators against which we measure the success of our strategy are earnings per share before specic items see Earnings per share in the Financial review on page 35 free cash ow see Financing in the Financial review on page 36 and customer satisfaction see Create long term partnerships with our customers.
Grow new wave
Longterm partnerships with our customers
21CN
Our performance underpins our condence that we can continue to grow revenue EBITDA earnings per share and dividends over the coming year.
Revenue growth will continue to be fuelled by new wave services the EBITDA improvement will be driven by the continued growth in BT Retails protability and an acceleration through the year of the EBITDA growth in BT Global Services.
We are condent in our ability to improve shareholder returns and accelerate the strategic transformation of the business.
See Group risk factors on page 20 and 21 PURSUE PROFITABLE GROWTH IN NEW WAVE MARKETS In the 2006 nancial year 32% of our revenue was from new wave activities  networked IT services broadband and mobility.
Build on our networked IT services capability Our strategy in the networked IT services market is to reinforce BTs position as a global player capable of competing with the worlds best in selected markets.
Our portfolio of services includes IP infrastructure CRM security applications managed mobility hosting and outsourcing.
In recent years we have developed a track record of winning and delivering complex largescale networked IT services contracts for large business customers and other organisations including the public and government sectors around the world.
We have shown that we have the experience and expertise to help our customers succeed in a world in which business applications are increasingly being networked and networks are seen as increasingly vital to productivity and competitive advantage.
We are for example playing a prominent role in the NHS National Programme for IT delivering s the national broadband network N3  we successfully installed more than 14000 connections on the N3 ahead of schedule s the spine transactional and messaging database  which now has about 200000 registered users s the London local service provider IT systems  we deployed the rst patient administration system specically designed for the NHS National Programme.
In March 2005 we announced that BT had won a contract worth up to 1.5 billion over eight and half years to provide and manage secure data networks for Reuters products and services worldwide.
In accordance with the contract the parties have tested a number of Reuters products over the BT IPenabled MPLS multiprotocol label switching network and have started its migration process in a number of countries.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 8 Filename 02.3d Time 143319 Date 200506 Checksum tel In May 2006 we were awarded a threeyear extension  worth around an additional 270 million  to the existing contract to deliver Unilevers voice data and mobile services around the world until 2012.
The original contract announced in November 2002 and with an estimated value of 670 million over seven years was the rst comprehensive global telecommunications outsourcing contract won by BT and is one of our largest and most signicant global deals.
In the 2006 nancial year we secured networked IT services orders in the UK and internationally worth 5.4 billion including a number of major contracts s in June 2005 we signed a contract worth approximately E175 million over a sevenyear period with leading global brewer InBev for the outsourcing of its communications infrastructure  data and voice  around the world s in July 2005 we signed a twoyear contract to manage Microsofts OneCall call centre routing initiative.
Under the agreement we will design build deploy and manage a solution to unify the majority of Microsofts contact centres around the world into a single networked contact centre environment s in December 2005 we reached agreement with the Department for Work and Pensions DWP on the simplication of the contracts that the Department inherited when it was created from the former Department of Social Security and the Department for Education and
Under the agreement we will supply services based on modern reliable IP communications that take advantage of our 21CN programme to deliver consistent and exible services which will we believe lead to substantial efciencies and new capabilities for the DWP and its clients s in February 2006 we completed an agreement to become Fiats supplier of global telecommunications services in 40 countries in a deal worth approximately E450 million over almost ve years.
See also Acquisitions and disposals in the 2006 nancial year BT is listed in the leader quadrant in the Gartner Magic Quadrants for Global and panEuropean NSPs network service providers and in 2005 was listed for the rst time in the leader quadrant for Asia Pacic NSPs.
Gartners reports evaluate the NSPs operating in the various regions for their completeness of vision and ability to execute and BT was consistently ranked in the top ve.
The NSPs that score well are those that go the extra mile to deliver superior service quality through their pan regional networks local service and support and service level commitments.
Networked IT services revenue for the 2006 nancial year was 4065 million a rise of 33% on the 2005 nancial year.
Deliver on broadband In the 2006 nancial year we continued our drive to enhance the awareness availability and attractiveness of broadband.
As at 31 March 2006 in the highly competitive retail market our market share of consumer and business DSL digital subscriber line and LLU local loop unbundling broadband connections in the UK was 33% 2.6 million connections.
Broadband for wholesale customers In early April 2005 we reached our target of ve million broadband lines one year ahead of schedule.
At 31 March 2006 we had 7.9 million lines including those provided via BT Retail and LLU.
In total 5501 exchanges had been upgraded by 31 March 2006 making broadband available to 99.7% of the UKs homes and businesses.
We continue to look for commercially viable ways of bringing broadband to those customers for whom availability remains an issue.
We are for example exploring the feasibility of installing broadband equipment at locations closer to the customer than the BT exchange as well as the possibility of delivering broadband over existing bre cables.
Both trials will run until summer 2006.
As a demonstration of our commitment to delivering higher speed broadband to UK consumers 59% of wholesale broadband lines were 2Mbits at 31 March 2006 compared with 17% a year earlier.
Having conducted trials of broadband speeds of up to 8Mbits in association with a number of service providers we launched BT ADSL asymmetric digital subscriber line Max and BT ADSL Max Premium broadband services nationally with effect from 31 March 2006.
By upgrading more than 5300 exchanges across the UK to support this service we are providing the UK market with a stable highspeed broadband service across the widest national footprint in the world.
Although the broadband speed that can be supported on an individual line is governed by a wide range of physical factors our trials suggest that 78% of BT phone lines should support rates of at least 4Mbits.
In addition we have enhanced broadband line stability to ensure that customers can run more bandwidthhungry applications including video gaming and music downloads at the same time as sendingreceiving emails and surng the internet.
Broadband for consumers We offer a family of broadband packages designed to meet the diverse needs of our customers simply and cost effectively in a highly competitive market.
In October 2005 in partnership with Yahoo we simplied our broadband packages into four options each of which offers new and existing customers a premium Yahoo broadband experience enhanced security features and the option of cheap internet telephony.
We are helping to dene nextgeneration television  which is being made possible by the convergence of digital broadcast TV and broadband technology.
During the 2006 nancial year we put in place a number of the key building blocks designed to enable us to launch the BT Vision broadband TV service in autumn 2006.
Microsoft will help to provide the software platform over which BT Vision will run and the set top boxes will be provided by Philips Europes largest electronics company.
The service aims to combine access to digital terrestrial channels an extensive videoondemand library catchup TV and a range of interactive services offering customers choice convenience and control over their home entertainment.
Other
We have signed content deals with BBC Worldwide Paramount Warner Music Group Endemol iconcerts Eagle Rock Cartoon Network National Geographic Channel HIT Entertainment and Nelvana.
We are also playing a lead role in the development of internet telephony or VolP voice over IP.
International calls made with BT Communicator  which enables customers to make voice calls over the internet using a PC or laptop  are proving cheaper than those offered by many other suppliers.
BT
Communicator comes with Yahoo Messenger which provides Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 9 Filename 02.3d Time 143320 Date 200506 emails and texts.
BT Broadband Talk enables customers to make and receive broadband calls using an ordinary phone.
We aim to introduce an enhanced VoIP offering featuring high denition sound quality in June 2006.
Broadband for business customers Broadband is increasingly critical to the success of small and medium businesses and BT Business Broadband remained the leading internet service provider for SMEs in the UK.
At the end of the 2006 nancial year we had 453000 BT Business Broadband customers.
We recognise that businesses need solutions that combine fast and reliable access with superior support and a range of business applications and services.
Many of these customers opt for such valueadded services as the Internet Security Pack and the Internet Business Pack.
In October 2005 as part of our drive to encourage broadband takeup in the SME market we launched our most comprehensive broadband package for business to date offering reduced prices increased value and higher levels of support than were previously available including support for LAN local area network and IT equipment that customers connect to their broadband line.
At 31 March 2006 we were providing remote support for 24000 PCs for SME customers.
Customer feedback has been extremely positive with an average 99% satisfaction level.
In the 2006 nancial year we invested in platforms that will enable us to offer a wider range of services using Microsofts Connected Services Framework.
BT Business Email was the rst service to be launched on this platform and provides anywhere access to critical business information supported by advanced security and collaboration features and there were 12000 users of this service at 31 March 2006.
In January 2006 we launched BT Business Broadband Voice our rst at top internet telephone or VoIP call package for broadband customers.
Create convergent mobility solutions In a convergent world individuals and businesses increasingly need to connect and communicate whenever and wherever they happen to be using whatever devices they choose.
Our aim is to offer all our customers the right combination of the quality reliability cost advantages and bandwidth associated with xedline communications and the convenience personalisation and exibility associated with mobile communications.
BT is both an MVNO mobile virtual network operator and a service provider in the business and consumer mobility markets.
At 31 March 2006 BT Mobile had over 340000 GSM and BT Fusion business and consumer connections.
BT Openzone is one of the leading providers of WiFi services in the UK and Ireland.
We operate our own network of highquality sites and offer more wholesale and roaming connections than any other UK WiFi network operator.
Recently awarded the Brainheart European WiFi award in recognition of its contribution to the growth of the European WiFi industry BT Openzone offers customers a highspeed wireless broadband connection over which they can access the internet to work talk or play.
We have already built BT Openzone networks in Westminster and Cardiff and we have announced our intention to WiFi enable a further ten cities by the end of the 2007 nancial year.
At 31 March 2006 our BT Openzone customers had access to around 8400 hotspots throughout the UK and Ireland and more than 30000 globally.
Revenue in the mobility market in the 2006 nancial year was 292 million an increase of 42% on the 2005 nancial year.
Mobility for consumers In the consumer mobility market our strategy is to build a foundation for the delivery of xedmobile convergent solutions.
BT Fusion launched in June 2005 is the worlds rst intelligent mobile service that switches calls to a BT broadband line when the user is at home offering customers the convenience of mobile in combination with the cost and quality advantages of a xedline phone.
BT Fusion brings with it a range of mobile services including text and picture messaging.
Users can connect PCs laptops games consoles printers and broadband wirelessly via the BT Hub that comes with BT
At 31 March 2006 there were 24000 consumer BT Fusion connections.
In July 2005 the 3G network we built and operate for 3 in the Republic of Ireland was launched.
The contract with 3 requires the development of 700 new radio sites to achieve its coverage targets.
At 31 March 2006 the network for advanced 3G services covered more than 70% of the population of the Republic of Ireland.
BT Ireland is building on its success in this market to offer wholesale services to other mobile operators in
In November 2005 we joined forces with Nintendo to provide WiFi access to users of Nintendos DS wireless games console a move which will enable users to play games around the world for free and will we believe bring WiFi to a mass market.
Mobility for business and major corporate customers Our strategy is to integrate traditional xed mobile and IP services to offer a single communications solution to our customers  both through commercial packaging and through the exploitation of technological convergence.
In addition we provide a range of managed mobile services to UK and global customers who either outsource their mobile communications entirely or rely on BT to provide specic managed services.
During the 2006 nancial year we launched a number of new services designed to integrate customersxed and mobile communications services including s BT Business Plan with Mobile launched in March 2006 offers small and medium businesses one bill an annual 5% discount on combined xed and mobile calls capped rates on xedline calls and preferential rates on mobiletomobile and mobiletotheofce calls.
The package also includes BT Billing Analyst which helps businesses to monitor and control their call spend s in February 2006 we launched a version of BT Fusion for SMEs enabling them to benet from the convenience of a mobile phone while enjoying rates similar to those for xed lines.
Mobility for wholesale customers In the 2006 nancial year we saw continued growth in the UK wholesale mobile arena  increasing the volume and value of wirelessoriginated trafc over our network.
In February 2006 we announced that Virgin Mobile will be the rst operator to sign up to the BT Movio broadcast digital TV and radio service making it the rst mobile operator in BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 10 Filename 02.3d Time 143320 Date 200506
Europe to offer its customers digital TV and radio content on a mobile device using broadcast technology.
We have also developed a strategic relationship with Microsoft to enable a secure and efcient environment for delivering broadcast services on a mobile handset.
Microsofts
Windows Media technologies will enable BT Movio to deliver highquality audio and video content over a DAB digital audio broadcast network using minimal bandwidth.
The BT Movio service also incorporates Windows Media DRM digital rights management technology to ensure secure delivery of premium video and music content.
BT Movio is the rst wholesale mobile broadcast TV offering of its kind in Europe and we plan to make it available to all mobile operators in the UK.
In June 2005 selected mobile phone users in Cardiff became the rst in the UK to benet from our innovative new mobile delivery system Microconnect Distributed Antenna  part of our growing portfolio of lowpower mobile coverage solutions for mobile operators designed to minimise the visual impact of masts and cabinets in city centres and heritage sites.
3 became the rst mobile operator in the UK to take advantage of the system that enables operators to share small antennas and in December 2005 Selfridges London store became the rst in the UK to use the Microconnect InBuilding service.
MAXIMISE THE RETURN FROM OUR TRADITIONAL BUSINESS We face continued challenges in our traditional markets as a result of regulatory intervention competition and a shift in our customers buying patterns as we provide them with higher specication highvalue new wave products.
Total xedtoxed voice call minutes in the UK market as a whole declined by 3% in the 2006 nancial year.
This was driven by customers making use of alternatives such as mobile calls email instant messaging corporate IPVPNs internet protocol virtual private networks and VoIP continuing the trends of recent years.
However the call minutes measure is becoming less important to BT as customers increasingly opt to sign up for pricing packages and take other nonPSTN public switched telephone network services.
Traditional services for consumers We continued to develop the services we have traditionally offered in order to make them more attractive to consumers.
Examples included s at 31 March 2006 more than two million customers had signed up for BT Together Options 2 and 3 and 67% of consumer call revenue was under contract s at 31 March 2006 3.7 million customers had signed up for BT Privacy a caller display service which enables customers to preview incoming call numbers and lter out unwanted calls.
All BT Privacy customers are automatically added to the Telephone Preference Service register which lters out most unsolicited marketing calls s between January and April 2006 actor Tom Baker was the voice of BT Text the texttospeech service that enables users to send and receive texts on their home landline phones.
BT Text volumes increased by 94% in the 2006 nancial year.
At 31 March 2006 268000 BT customers were registered on the service and around 1.2 million text messages were being sent to landlines every week s since autumn 2005 over one million customers have registered to have their Friends and Family calling circle automatically updated to ensure that the numbers they dial most frequently attract maximum discounts s we manage around 64000 public payphones including more than 800 multimedia kiosks and more than 1000 textphones throughout the UK.
We remain committed to ensuring that public payphones are available in communities throughout the UK.
Future growth opportunities will focus on maximising returns from existing sites and capabilities including hosting WiFi services and mobile antennas.
Traditional services for business and major corporate customers We continued to enhance BT Business Plan.
From June 2005 for example we cut the cost of calls for business customers by reducing the cap on landlinetomobile calls lasting less than one hour from 30 pence to 25 pence.
At 31 March 2006 BT Business Plan had over 513000 locations up 15% on the 2005 nancial year.
Our BT Local Business initiative helped to secure BTs position as a key player in the SME market.
At the end of the 2006 nancial year BT Local Business was active in 83 locations around the country managing 1.2 billion of annual billed revenue.
Traditional services for wholesale customers We continued to sell a wide range of capacity and callbased products and services including regulated interconnect services access products such as WLR and LLU and new nonregulated products and services.
During the year the sale of WLR services continued to grow reaching a total of 2.9 million lines by 31 March 2006.
Rental charges for consumer lines were reduced by 50 pence a month from 1 August 2005 and a further 35 pence from 1 March 2006.
The monthly charge for business lines was reduced by 78.3 pence from 1 March 2006.
WLR and LLU products will be reported within Openreach for the 2007 nancial year.
Transforming our costs We remain focused on nancial discipline and on delivering efciency programmes that will generate sustainable cost savings.
We continue to benchmark ourselves against the best in the industry and aim to achieve savings of at least 400 million in each of the next three years.
In the 2006 nancial year efciency programmes delivered savings of over 400 million enabling us to invest in growing our new wave activities.
A key area of focus has been enhancing the ways in which customers can deal with BT simultaneously saving costs and improving customer service.
Programmes have targeted the cost of failure by for example minimising the number of times a customer call is transferred before resolution and reducing the amount of call waiting time through better call routing.
2006 nancial year and we now have approximately 2.3 million customers receiving ebills  half a million of whom do not receive a paper bill.
We have also been reducing the complexity of our systems and processes and intend for example to transform our billing function  rationalising more than 90 systems and at the same time improving the endtoend customer experience.
Other programmes relate to innovative procurement and sourcing.
Our IT team for example has moved to global sourcing and 90day delivery cycles and implemented hot housing principles  bringing customers and suppliers together in an intense design session at the beginning of a project reducing risks and driving up benets.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 11 Filename 02.3d Time 143320 Date 200506 Checksum tel We continue to look at ways of streamlining our organisation and eliminating duplication.
The integration during the 2006 nancial year of the BT team serving major corporate customers in BT Global Services previously part of BT Retail should enable more effective account management for our global customers.
We also continued to reduce overheads such as accommodation using buildings more efciently and introducing exible working practices.
In the 2006 nancial year we vacated around 135 buildings and installed an additional 250 exible workstations which can be shared by multiple users.
A number of other programmes are underway including structural changes in our network management and planning divisions.
Some of these are related to our 21CN initiative and will we believe help achieve the signicant reduction in operational and capital expenditure that we expect from this programme in the next few years.
TRANSFORM OUR NETWORKS SYSTEMS AND SERVICES FOR THE TWENTYFIRST CENTURY Our UK network today BT has the most comprehensive communications network in the UK with around 5600 exchanges 680 local and 103 trunk processor units more than 121 million kilometres of copper wire and more than eight million kilometres of optical bre and the most extensive IP backbone network in the UK.
The network services we provide include frame relay ATM asynchronous transfer mode and IPVPN.
Our global reach today We have one of the broadest IPenabled networks in Europe and our networkbased services extend to and across North and South America and the Asia Pacic region.
As at 31 March 2006 our agship MPLS network service provided coverage and support to over 90 countries from more than 1200 points of presence.
Our MPLS revenue grew by 34% during the 2006 nancial year exceeding 400 million.
Global customer service is provided via service and network management centres around the world 24 hours a day seven days a week.
Twentyrst century network We believe that our 21CN programme is the most ambitious business transformation programme in the global telecommunications industry today and one of the largest ever investments by a private company in the UKs infrastructure.
An endtoend nextgeneration IP network 21CN is designed to consolidate BTs complex network and systems infrastructure to ensure that the delivery of the next generation of converged services is fast efcient and highly cost effective.
In the 2006 nancial year for example we developed the rst new 21CN services based on reusable capabilities.
Rather than being productspecic reusable capabilities form the basis for a range of products and applications enhancing the customer experience by reducing product development and launch times and proving more cost effective for BT.
In April 2005 we announced the preferred suppliers that will help us build the 21CN.
Following one of the largest procurement programmes ever undertaken in the communications industry formal contractual agreements were reached with all eight  Alcatel Ciena Cisco Ericsson Fujitsu Huawei Lucent and Siemens.
The rst equipment orders have been placed under these contracts.
Following extensive technical trials in the 2006 nancial year including successfully carrying more than six million voice calls over a trial IP network  we developed a comprehensive national migration and rollout plan which is currently subject to industry consultation.
As the rst stage of the mass migration of customers to 21CN we will be rolling out the new network to business and residential customers in Cardiff and the surrounding area including many served by other telephone and internet service providers and mobile operators.
We anticipate that the full national roll out of 21CN will be substantially complete by 2010.
We are committed to building open transparent and inclusive relationships with the rest of the industry and launched Consult21 in the 2005 nancial year in order to promote a shared understanding of the 21CN vision and the progress we are making towards it.
Since then many of our wholesale customers have contributed to what is now the largest voluntary industry consultation programme of its kind anywhere in the communications world today.
What 21CN will mean for customers 21CN will mean the ability to customise personalise and change in real time services based on the convergence of voice mobility video data and content.
Ultimately it is expected to support the introduction of many more new services than are currently available offering greater customer choice.
Corporate and public sector customers will be able to work more efciently with suppliers structure their internal processes enhance customer service and drive down costs by deploying integrated networked IT solutions across their entire supply chains.
CREATE LONGTERM PARTNERSHIPS WITH OUR CUSTOMERS We believe that our relationships with our customers are key in a market going through major transformation.
Understanding customers needs and responding to them exibly comprehensively and with insight is critical in helping to differentiate us from our competitors.
That is why we aim to put the customer at the heart of everything we do strengthening that relationship and building trust and delivering what we promise.
This will encourage customers to move from shortterm contracts based on individual transactions to longer term arrangements under which they sign up for packages of services.
Keeping a relentless focus on improving customer satisfaction is also key to these longterm partnerships.
In the 2006 nancial year our aim was to increase the number of customers who are very satised and extremely satised with the service they receive from BT by 5% while ensuring that we maintained the reductions achieved in previous years in levels of customer dissatisfaction.
For the 2006 nancial year the average score for customers very satised and extremely satised was 3% higher than in the 2005 nancial year although the customer dissatisfaction score was slightly worse than in the 2005 nancial year.
The 2006 nancial year was particularly challenging for the delivery of customer satisfaction because many of our new wave products and services require complex customer interactions.
During the year we recruited a further 900 engineers to ensure that we could meet customer demand.
We recognise that the quality of service we offer customers is key to driving up customer satisfaction levels and much of our training and development activity remains focused on removing any barriers to the delivery of excellent customer service and a BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 12 Filename 02.3d Time 143320 Date 200506 Checksum tel highquality customer experience.
Our core people engagement initiative the my customer programme aims to enable all BT people to deliver great customer service through teamwork.
In the 2006 nancial year my customer included s a back to the oor event for 1100 senior managers s more than 4500 BT people participating in customer satisfaction improvement programmes s the introduction of a customer connected programme for BT people who do not interact with customers directly but who nevertheless play a critical role in delivering customer satisfaction.
ACQUISITIONS AND DISPOSALS Acquisitions and disposals prior to the 2006 nancial year The BT of today was largely created by a radical restructuring of the company in the 2002 nancial year.
This restructuring involved the UKs largestever rights issue raising 5.9 billion the demerger of O2 comprising BTs whollyowned mobile assets in Europe the disposal of signicant noncore businesses and assets the unwind of Concert our joint venture with ATandT and the creation of customerfocused lines of business.
In the 2005 nancial year we acquired Infonet one of the worlds leading providers of international managed voice and data network services for 520 million including acquisition costs.
Excluding Infonets net cash balance the net value of the deal was 315 million.
We also acquired the 74% of Albacom that we did not already own for a total acquisition cost of 131 million.
Albacom provides data transmission voice and internet services to the Italian business communications market.
In October 2004 there was an IPO initial public offering of the Singapore telecommunications and media company StarHub in which BT held an 11.9% stake.
We disposed of our entire holding through the IPO for net proceeds of 77 million.
In December 2004 we completed the sale of our 15.8% stake in Eutelsat to GS Capital Partners  an investment partnership afliated with Goldman Sachs  for net proceeds of 356 million.
Acquisitions and disposals in the 2006 nancial year A number of acquisitions and disposals were completed in the year including s in April 2005 we completed the acquisition of Radianz the leading nancial services extranet provider from Reuters for a total consideration of 143 million.
The purchase of Radianz is another vital step in our transformation into a global provider of networked IT services s between July and September 2005 the conditions enabling BT to redeem the exchangeable bond over our shares in LG Telecom were fullled.
As a result virtually all the bondholders exercised their right to convert their bonds into LG Telecom shares enabling us to dispose of all our shares.
The transaction gave rise to a bond redemption gain of 27 million s in February 2006 we acquired Atlanet a Fiat subsidiary providing domestic telecommunications services to Fiat and other nonFiat business customers throughout Italy for approximately E80 million further reinforcing our position in the Italian market.
We also completed a number of smaller acquisitions in the 2006 nancial year including CW Business Solutions Cable and Wirelesss retail operation in Spain SkyNet Systems an independent LAN solutions provider focused on the education health local government and media markets Total Network Solutions a provider of business solutions to UK corporate public sector and service provider customers and Cara Group a provider of communications solutions to business and public sector clients in the island of Ireland.
REGULATION COMPETITION AND PRICES BT operates in an increasingly competitive and dynamic commercial environment both in the UK and around the world.
The 2006 nancial year saw the most signicant change to the UK regulatory regime since BT was privatised when in response to Ofcoms strategic review of telecommunications we proposed a number of legallybinding Undertakings under the Enterprise Act 2002 the Enterprise Act.
These Undertakings were accepted by Ofcom and came into force in September 2005.
See BTs Undertakings under the Enterprise Act The Undertakings are intended to deliver clarity and certainty to the UK telecommunications industry leading to regulation being focused on the deepest point in the network at which competition is feasible and rolled back elsewhere.
This is mainly being achieved through the creation of a new Openreach line of business to manage our access and backhaul networks and their associated portfolio of Openreach products and services.
Apart from any exceptions agreed with Ofcom these products and services are to be made available in exactly the same way to all communications providers who wish to use them  including BT itself  under the same timescales terms and conditions  including price  and using the same processes with the same information available to all.
By offering services equivalently BT anticipates deregulation and the benets this will bring to consumers and others in the marketplace as part of enhancing the competitive process.
Regulation in the UK Our policy is to comply fully with the regulatory framework in which we operate.
For example we are committed to meeting the obligations imposed under the Communications Act 2003 the Communications Act and BTs Undertakings to Ofcom under the Enterprise Act and complying with generally applicable legislation such as the Competition Act 1998 the Competition Act while competing fairly and vigorously within the rules.
We continue to work closely with compliance professionals in the telecommunications and other regulated industries in the UK and the EU European Union to establish best practice.
We publish an annual compliance report which does not form part of this report at httpsiteSocietyandenvironmentindex.
Ofcom
The Ofce of Communications Ofcom was set up under the Ofce of Communications Act 2002 to provide a single seamless approach to regulating the entire communications market.
Its functions were dened by the Communications Act.
In carrying out its functions its principal duty is to further the interests of citizens in relation to communications matters and secondly to further the interests of consumers in relevant markets where appropriate by promoting competition.
In performing its duties it must have regard to a number of matters including the desirability of promoting competition and the use of effective selfregulation encouraging investment and innovation and encouraging the availability and use of high speed data services including broadband.
Regulation takes the form of sets of conditions mostly laid down by Ofcom and directions made by it under these conditions.
Some conditions apply to all providers of electronic communications networks and services others apply to Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 13 Filename 02.3d Time 143320 Date 200506 power.
Other general obligations are set out in the Communications Act.
Conditions applying to all providers of electronic communications networks or services General Conditions The General Conditions made by Ofcom under the Communications Act generally apply to all providers of electronic communications networks or services.
Although these conditions are concerned primarily with consumer protection they also address issues such as general access and interconnection obligations standards emergency planning and numbering.
A separate condition regulates the provision of premium rate services.
Electronic Communications Code conditions The Electronic Communications Code applies to communications providers authorised to carry out streetworks and similar activities for network provision.
Its application is subject to conditions made by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.
Other general obligations Other obligations contained in the Communications Act include s the payment of administrative charges broadly the equivalent of licence fees under the old framework s the provision of information to Ofcom when required.
Conditions applying to BT specically Universal service obligation conditions BT is the designated supplier of universal service for the UK excluding the Hull area where Kingston Communications is the designated provider.
The services covered by the USO are dened in an order issued by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.
Our
Additional conditions relate to issues such as schemes for consumers with special social needs and the provision of public payphone services.
Ofcom intends to review the cost and benet of the USO in 2007 and if it considers the net cost of the USO to be an undue burden it could look at alternative ways of funding it.
Signicant market power conditions Ofcom is required by the European Commission EC to dene analyse and regularly review markets and to determine whether any communications provider has SMP which is aligned with the competition law concept of dominance.
Economic regulation can only be imposed following a market review and a nding of SMP.
Where Ofcom nds that a provider has SMP in a market it must impose such additional SMP conditions as it considers appropriate as specied in the Communications Act.
These may include obligations to meet reasonable requests to supply certain services to other communications providers not to discriminate unduly and to notify price changes and obligations relating to regulatory accounting.
In some cases extra obligations such as price controls have also been imposed.
Following a number of market reviews by Ofcom BT has been deemed to have SMP in certain xed telecommunications markets including the markets for xed narrowband retail services xed narrowband wholesale exchange lines call origination and conveyance wholesale broadband access and wholesale local access.
Enforcement under the Communications Act Where a breach of a condition is not remedied following preliminary notication by Ofcom Ofcom may take legally enforceable action under the Communications Act andor impose a penalty of up to 10% of relevant revenue.
In addition a person who suffers loss or damage as a result of a breach may with Ofcoms consent sue for damages.
In the case of serious and repeated contraventions Ofcom may restrict or suspend the providers entitlement to provide networks or services.
The Communications Act provides for appeals against regulatory decisions including appeals on the merits to the Competition Appeals Tribunal.
BTs Undertakings under the Enterprise Act The key Undertakings given by BT are to s establish a new access services division to operate BTs local access and backhaul networks and to provide services over those networks to the UK communications industry on the basis of equivalence  we established Openreach for this purpose on 21 January 2006 s deliver equivalence of input for key wholesale products and increased transparency for others s introduce new rules on access to and sharing of certain restricted information  in particular the commercial information of Openreach and BT Wholesale s restrict the exercise of inuence by other parts of BT on the commercial policy of both Openreach and parts of BT
Undertakings s create an Equality of Access Board EAB to monitor report and advise on BTs compliance with the Undertakings and the code of practice.
The EAB was established on 1 November 2005.
The EAB Annual Report 2006 which does not form part of this report is available online at siteeabreport.
The Undertakings include a number of things to be achieved by specied dates.
As at 31 March 2006 we had achieved all the milestones required by that date and we are working hard to ensure future milestones are achieved.
Enforcement under the Enterprise Act In the case of a breach of the Undertakings Ofcom has the right to seek an injunction through the courts.
However the Undertakings set out a process for Ofcom to issue a direction which we would normally expect it to do rather than instigate court proceedings.
A third party who suffers loss from the breach may take action in the courts against BT for damages.
Whether or not it took enforcement action Ofcom would be able to refer BT to the Competition Commission.
See
Enterprise ActBTs recourse against an Ofcom decision in relation to the Undertakings would be an application for judicial review.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 14 Filename 02.3d Time 143321 Date 200506
Competition
Competition and the UK economy The growth of mobile telephony over the past decade has been a major factor in shaping the UKs telecommunications landscape.
Mobile now accounts for around 30% of total UK voice minutes.
BTs share of the UK voice market including mobile is estimated to have fallen by about 3% in the 2006 nancial year to approximately 37%.
The mobile and xedline markets are currently treated as separate and regulated differently.
We anticipate that competition in the UK xed telecommunications market will intensify as a result of the Undertakings as services are provided equivalently and the takeup of Openreach products increases.
BTs share of the residential xedvoice calls market declined to an estimated 58% for the 2006 nancial year compared with estimates of 64% and 70% for the 2005 and 2004 nancial years respectively.
CPS carrier preselection has been one of the contributors to the loss of share in the xedvoice market.
We estimate that BT had 41% of the market for business xedvoice calls in the 2006 nancial year compared with estimates of 42% and 44% in the 2005 and 2004 nancial years respectively.
We also estimate that BT supplied around 74% of exchange lines in the UK at the end of the 2006 nancial year compared with 79% and 82% in the 2005 and 2004 nancial years respectively with cable operators being the primary alternative providers.
Current and future wholesale line rental arrangements will enable BTs xedline customers to move PSTN lines to other operators which are expected to be the source of more competition in the future.
Since 2000 we have been required to provide LLU local loop unbundling which enables other operators to use the lines connecting BTs local exchanges to our customers and to install equipment in our exchanges.
There are two types of unbundled line s a fully unbundled line gives other operators the exclusive use of the copper line s a shared access line only gives other operators the use of the highfrequency channel used for broadband.
The line will also be used by the customers xedline voice provider.
Takeup of LLU a key Openreach product continued during the 2006 nancial year with the total number of unbundled lines exceeding 350000 at 31 March 2006.
We anticipate a substantial increase in the number of unbundled lines in the 2007 nancial year.
Communications providers beneted from lower prices for both connection and rental resulting from cost studies carried out by Ofcom during the period.
Competition law In addition to communications industryspecic regulation BT is subject to the competition law provisions of the Competition Act in the UK and of the European Community Treaty.
Breach of UK or EU rules could lead to nes of up to 10% of a companys worldwide revenue in its previous nancial year andor claims for damages in national courts.
A company may also be ordered to cease an infringing activity.
In 2004 Ofcom launched an investigation into allegations that BT had abused a dominant position in relation to its pricing of consumer broadband products.
Ofcom sent BT two statements of objection to which we responded arguing that our pricing does not amount to an abuse of dominance.
Ofcom
Enterprise Act The Enterprise Act aims to give more independence to the competition authorities reform insolvency and bankruptcy laws and tackle trading practices that harm consumers.
Under the Act it is a criminal offence punishable by imprisonment andor a ne to engage in cartel activity.
In addition where companies infringe UK or EU competition law their directors can be disqualied from being involved in managing a company for a maximum period of 15 years.
The Enterprise Act also gives the Ofce of Fair Trading power to refer issues relating to the possible restriction of competition in particular markets for investigation by the UKs Competition Commission.
In relation to communications markets this power is exercisable by Ofcom.
Pricing regulation Fixed network Our xed network services in the UK are subject to price controls  formulated by Ofcom  at the retail and network levels.
Lower network charges benet both BTs retail businesses and other communications providers.
Retail price controls We are subject to retail price controls covering publicswitched telephony call charges and exchange line rentals.
The price control is based on a formula calculated by reference to the UK RPI Retail Prices Index and a factor known as X.
For services covered by the controls average prices cannot increase in each year beginning 1 August by more than the annual change in RPI minus X.
The retail price control applies to services used by the 80% of our residential customers with the lowest bills.
The value of X changed in December 2005 from RPI to zero giving BT a small increase in pricing freedom up to the end of the current control period on 31 July 2006.
Ofcom is consulting on whether a new retail price control will be required after July 2006.
In addition BT has given an assurance that we will adhere to a RPI  0% price cap until 30 June 2006 for retail analogue private circuits and 8 Mbits digital private circuits.
Network charge control We operate under interconnection agreements with most other operators.
Our charges for a range of interconnect services are controlled by Ofcom under the NCC network charge control regime.
These controls are designed to ensure that our charges are reasonably derived from costs plus an appropriate return on capital employed.
Depending on the degree of competition charges are capcontrolled each year by RPI minus X for services Ofcom considers unlikely to become competitive in the near future and safeguard capcontrolled ie no increases above RPI for services likely to become competitive.
The current NCC period began on 1 October 2005 and will last until 30 September 2009.
For the current charge control Ofcom has determined different levels of X for services covered by the control.
These range from RPI11.5% to RPI0.75%.
At the same time Ofcom determined that BT no longer had SMP in the markets for intertandem transit and conveyance.
BT must notify Ofcom and other operators if it intends to amend existing charges or offer new services.
Number portability Number portability charges are covered by an RPI minus X formula with X set at 5% until 31 July 2006 when the price control lapses.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 15 Filename 02.3d Time 143321 Date 200506 Checksum tel Wholesale access charge reductions As part of the strategic review and to encourage competition BT agreed that our wholesale access residential price would be reduced in two stages.
The rst was a reduction of 50 pence a month 1.50 per quarter implemented on 1 August 2005.
The second reduction followed the publication of Ofcoms statement on setting and reviewing charge ceilings for WLR wholesale line rental on 24 January 2006.
From 1 March 2006 our rates have been as follows s residential analogue lines new line installation  88 transfer  2 a line and annual line rental  100.68 s business analogue lines new line installation  88 transfer  2 a line and annual line rental  110.
Partial private circuit charge control PPCs partial private circuits are leased lines that BT sells to other network operators.
On 1 October 2004 Ofcom introduced a PPC charge control to replace the annual determinations previously carried out by Oftel.
The control is a fouryear threepart RPIX formula s low bandwidth RPI4% s high bandwidth RPI6.5% s equipment RPI8.9%.
Additionally as part of our Undertakings we have agreed to make a new form of wholesale private circuit services available via Openreach subject to demand from other communications providers.
These are TILLAP traditional interface leased lines access product and TILLBP traditional interface leased lines backhaul product.
NonUK regulation BT must comply with the regulatory regimes in the countries in which we operate and this can have a material impact on our business.
European Union The degree to which European Commission directives relating to electronic communications have been implemented varies from country to country.
Although the general move towards the new regime continues in some countries this is happening more slowly than for example in the UK.
BT does not have universal service obligations outside the UK although in certain member states we may be required to contribute towards an industry fund to pay for the cost of meeting universal service obligations in those countries.
The European Commission is formally investigating the way the UK Government has set BTs property rates and those paid by Kingston Communications.
The Commission is examining whether the Government has complied with European Community Treaty rules on state aid in assessing BTs rates.
BTs rates were set by the Valuation Ofce after lengthy discussions based on well established principles in a transparent process.
In our view any allegation of state aid is groundless and we are condent that the Government will demonstrate the fairness of the UK ratings system.
A nding against the UK Government could result in BT having to repay any state aid we may be determined to have received.
Rest of the world The vast majority of the markets in which we operate around the world are regulated and in most of these we have to meet certain conditions and obtain licences or other authorisations.
The degree to which these markets are liberalised varies widely.
Our ability to compete fully in some countries is therefore constrained.
We continue to press incumbent operators and their national regulatory authorities around the world including the EU for costrelated access to their networks where appropriate.
Other signicant changes and issues Regulatory valuation of copperbased local access network In August 2005 Ofcom reduced the current cost regulatory asset value of the copperbased local access network.
This valuation is used only for regulatory purposes.
Ofcom estimated that the net current cost carrying value of these assets for regulatory purposes at the end of the 2006 nancial year will be reduced by about 879 million.
It also extended the periods over which certain access network assets will be written off from the 2007 nancial year onwards.
Ofcom estimated that the combined effect of reducing net current cost regulatory asset value and extending asset lives would reduce costs used for regulatory price setting relating to BTs copper access lines by about 300 million in a full year excluding the impact of any change to the allowed return on capital employed.
These changes were reected in revised prices for wholesale line rental and unbundled local loops announced in late 2005.
Cost of capital In August 2005 Ofcom determined what it believed were appropriate rates for BTs cost of capital for regulated products and services.
This rate is used only as a reference against the regulatory current cost values of BTs regulated products.
The overall rate for BTs cost of capital was assessed as 10.9% on a pretax nominal basis compared with a rate of 13.5% set in 2001.
The reduction was a result of lower interest rates a change in Ofcoms assessment of the premium associated with investment in shares and a revised view of BTs overall risk prole compared with the market as a whole.
This overall rate was split by Ofcom into a lower rate of 10% for local access services ie those now managed by Openreach and a higher rate of 11.4% for the rest of BT.
The local access rate was reected in the revised wholesale prices proposed in 2005 by BT for both unbundled local loop and wholesale line rental products.
IPStream and Datastream In June 2005 we reached agreement with Ofcom that rental prices for IPStream and Datastream  the most popular wholesale ADSL broadband access products currently used by service providers  will not reduce until there are 1.5 million unbundled lines in the UK with certain exceptions.
Funds for liabilities Under the terms of the Electronic Communications Code an electronic communications provider with apparatus on or in the public highway is required to make nancial provision to cover any damage caused by work it carries out and for the removal of its network in the event of liquidation or bankruptcy.
The conditions require the company to provide Ofcom annually with a certicate that in the opinion of its board of directors it has fullled its obligations to ensure the availability of the required funds.
This has been done by BT.
RELATIONSHIP WITH HM GOVERNMENT The UK Government collectively is our largest customer but the provision of services to any one of its departments or agencies does not comprise a material proportion of our revenue.
Except as described below the commercial BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 16 Filename 02.3d Time 143321 Date 200506 Checksum tel relationship between BT as a supplier and the UK Government as customer has been on a normal customer and supplier basis.
We can however be required by law to do certain things and provide certain services for the UK Government.
General conditions made under the Communications Act require all providers of public telephone networks andor publicly available telephone services including BT at the request of and in consultation with the authorities to make and if necessary implement plans for the provision or restoration of services in connection with disasters.
The Civil Contingencies Act 2004 contains provisions enabling obligations to be imposed on providers of public electronic communications networks including BT in connection with civil contingency planning.
In addition the Secretary of State has statutory powers to require us to take certain actions in the interest of national security and international relations.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS BT does not believe that there are any pending legal proceedings which would have a material adverse effect on the nancial position or operations of the group.
There have been criminal proceedings in Italy against 21 defendants including a former BT employee in connection with the Italian UMTS universal mobile telecommunications system auction.
Blu in which BT held a minority interest participated in that auction process.
On 20 July 2005 the former BT employee was found not culpable of the fraud charge brought by the Rome Public Prosecutor.
All the other defendants were also acquitted.
The Public Prosecutor is in the process of appealing the courts decision.
If the appeal is successful BT could be held liable with others for any damages.
The company has concluded that it would not be appropriate to make a provision in respect of any such claim.
RESOURCES
Corporate reputation and brand strength BT has a strong integrated brand that is widely recognised both in the UK and around the world.
Our brand helps to shape our relationships with all our stakeholders including shareholders customers suppliers and employees.
It is vital that they all have a clear understanding of what BT stands for and that all their interactions with us contribute to a consistently positive image of BT.
As a vital asset the BT brand needs to be developed protected and managed with the same rigour that we bring to other assets both tangible and intangible.
And as the world and the markets in which we operate change so our brand needs to reect this becoming more condent dynamic and forward looking.
Towards the end of the 2006 nancial year we completed a thorough review of our brand as a result of which we developed a new vision and mission.
Our vision for BT is to be dedicated to helping customers thrive in a changing world.
Our mission is to be the leader in delivering converged networked services.
By ensuring that the services we offer customers are consistently focused on meeting their needs straightforward and easy to use we will help those customers succeed in their business and personal lives.
The review concluded that the BT brand values remained t for purpose.
Consequently they are unchanged s trustworthy  we do what we say we will s helpful  we work as one team s inspiring  we create new possibilities s straightforward  we make things clear s heart  we believe in what we do.
During the 2007 nancial year we will be delivering a comprehensive communications plan to ensure that all stakeholders understand the implications of our new vision mission and brand positioning.
Motivating our people and living the BT values Our commitment to meeting our customers needs presents the 104400 people employed by BT at 31 March 2006 with opportunities to develop innovative solutions generate new business drive efciencies and experience personal growth.
Our aim is to create a team of highperforming engaged and motivated people who can make a difference for customers shareholders the company and themselves.
Only by living our values will we deliver our strategy keep our promises to our customers seize new opportunities in new markets and maximise the return from our traditional business.
Motivating leaders The quality of leadership in BT is key to the successful delivery of our strategy for transformation and growth.
We are focused on ensuring that leaders at all levels understand what is expected of them have access to appropriate development opportunities and are able to benchmark their performance against that of their peers.
We have for example rigorously dened the capabilities we expect our leaders to exhibit and have introduced a 360 degree feedback tool to help them measure their performance.
Engaging and motivating our people Our annual employee attitude survey was conducted most recently in February 2006 and attracted a more than 75% response rate 80000 responses.
The survey generates around 5000 feedback reports for managers and their teams across the business helping to promote effective team working.
Employees are kept informed about our business through a wide range of communications channels including our online news service bimonthly newspaper regular email bulletins and senior management webchats and webcast briengs.
We have a record of stable industrial relations and enjoy generally constructive relationships with recognised unions in the UK and works councils elsewhere in Europe.
In the UK we recognise two main trade unions  the Communication Workers Union and Connect.
We hold regular meetings between management employee trade union representatives and other groups of employees in order to ensure that their views are taken into account in any decisions affecting employees interests.
We also operate a panEuropean works council the
Our Chief Executive and other senior executives have regular meetings with the BTECC and other employee representatives.
Rewarding and recognising achievement We continued to provide our employees with opportunities to acquire a stake in the company.
Under the BT Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP BT can provide free shares to employees and employees can buy shares in BT from their pretax salaries.
In the 2006 nancial year 22 million was allocated to provide free shares to employees under the ESIP.
Employees outside the UK receive a cash payment equivalent to the value of the shares.
This allocation of prots was linked to the achievement of corporate performance measures determined by the Board.
In addition employees can buy shares at a discount under our savingsrelated share option plan.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 17 Filename 02.3d Time 143321 Date 200506 Checksum tel More than 98% of eligible employees participate in one or more of these plans.
Pensions
Most of our employees are members of the BT Pension Scheme a dened benet scheme or the BT Retirement Plan a money purchase scheme both of which are controlled by independent trustees.
The BT Pension Scheme was closed to new members on 31 March 2001.
The majority of new employees are eligible to join the BT Retirement Plan.
See Pensions in the Financial review Health and safety The health and safety of our people is of paramount importance and we are implementing a groupwide initiative to reduce levels of accidents and ill health amongst our workforce.
We have reduced the number of accidents leading to absence from work from 8.6 cases in every million working hours in 2001 to 2.8 cases in every million working hours at 31 March 2006.
Specic initiatives addressed lifting and working at heights and we continued to enhance our occupational road risk programme.
In the 2006 nancial year we ran major initiatives on lifestyle change focusing on exercise diet and giving up smoking.
Learning now and for the future We believe that people particularly at the start of their careers will increasingly want to work for companies that commit to the longterm development of their employees.
Our successful companywide reaccreditation to Investors in People in February 2005 rst achieved in 1998 demonstrates our continuing commitment to the effective alignment of our communications training and development with our business strategy.
We have created a learning governance model to ensure our learning and development objectives and practice align with the key strategic objectives of the business.
Senior representatives from all parts of BT sit on the Learning Executive Council and senior learning and development representatives form the Learning Council.
Both bodies provide strategic and operational guidance for the whole of BT to ensure that all learning and development activity is coordinated across all lines of business.
In March 2006 we upgraded BT Academy our webbased corporate learning portal to a new platform and renamed it Route2Learn R2L.
R2L  a groupwide system  is evidence of our continuing investment in lifelong learning and education for all BT people.
Providing all BT employees with an extensive range of learning programmes and facilities it is one of the largest corporate learning management systems in Europe.
In the 2006 nancial year the BT Academy Learning System delivered over 250000 online and nearly 38000 instructorled course completions.
Embedding exibility and diversity The changing nature of the markets in which we operate our focus on cost leadership and our investment in new services have impacted the shape of our permanent workforce.
During the 2006 nancial year in the UK more than 6600 2005  3903 people joined BT natural attrition was running at 3% 2005  2.6% and 2169 2005  2685 people left BT under our voluntary paid leaver package.
We are committed to helping our people optimise their worklife balance.
At the end of March 2006 for example around 11000 people were working from home.
We continue to create a working environment that actively supports all our employees  regardless of gender race sexual orientation religionbeliefs disability or age.
Research and development The GCTO Group Chief Technology Ofce sets and drives the open innovation and technology strategy for BT.
GCTO includes a global technology intelligence scouting unit teams focused on innovative new wave service opportunities an innovation strategy and media team strategic technology analysis units a network and systems architecture team and worldclass research and venturing facilities in Adastral Park England Malaysia and the USA.
In the 2006 nancial year we invested 727 million in research and development RandD to support our drive for innovation.
This investment comprised capitalised software development costs of 401 million and RandD operating costs of 326 million.
This compares with 522 million in the 2005 nancial year which comprised 265 million of capitalised software development costs and 257 million of RandD operating costs.
In addition the 2006 nancial year includes an amortisation charge of 160 million 2005  95 million in respect of capitalised software development costs.
This increase in RandD underpins our increased focus on developing innovative products and services for a converged networked world.
We continue to focus our innovation work on key areas which support our business and technology strategies ling patent applications for 141 new inventions in the 2006 nancial year and maintaining a total worldwide portfolio of 7700 patents and applications.
We have successfully launched eight innovative independent startup companies through the corporate venturing partnership unit New Venture Partners in which we are a limited partner.
These startups generate value by launching innovative solutions as hightechnology businesses in the global marketplace.
IT support Our dedicated IT professionals have a strong track record in the development and delivery of systems and solutions and in managing a secure and resilient infrastructure.
Over the past year we continued to enhance our approach to systems development through our One IT programme which aims to deliver yearonyear reductions in base costs.
Our
Our IT strategy is about speed of response and the focusing of resources in selected areas  at the end of the 2006 nancial year there were fewer IT systems running in BT than at the beginning of the year.
At its heart is the radical rationalisation of our systems portfolio strict adherence to 90day delivery cycles and an intense focus on improving the customer experience.
Property
At 31 March 2006 we occupied approximately 6500 properties in the UK and approximately 1500 properties around the world.
The majority of these UK properties are owned by  and leased back from  the Telereal Group which is part of the William Pears Group.
These properties mainly house exchange equipment and are needed as part of our continuing activities.
Other general BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 18 Filename 02.3d Time 143321 Date 200506 Checksum tel purpose properties consist chieyofofces depots and computer centres.
We anticipate that our changing working patterns will continue to reduce property costs.
OUR COMMITMENT TO SOCIETY Corporate social responsibility Managing social ethical and environmental issues in a way that grows shareholder value and helps BT and our customers be more sustainable is very important to us.
The Dow Jones Sustainability Indexes rank companies for their success in managing social ethical and environmental factors for competitive advantage.
During the 2006 nancial year BT was ranked as the top telecommunications company in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index for the fth year in a row.
We also hold the Queens Award for Enterprise in recognition of our contribution to sustainable development and we were ranked equal 4th in Business in the Communitys 2005 Corporate Responsibility Index.
This section of the report together with the broad statement on social environmental and ethical matters included in the Report of the directors provides information in response to the Association of British Insurers disclosure guidelines on social responsibility.
More detailed disclosures on BTs implementation of social ethical and environmental policies and procedures are available online in our independentlyveried Social and Environmental Report 2006 which has been prepared in accordance with the 2002 Global Reporting Initiative GRI sustainability reporting guidelines and assured against the AA1000 Assurance
CSR governance The Board reviews our CSR strategy performance and risks annually and is kept informed of new developments that may impact on its duties.
A Board committee  the Community Support Committee oversees community charitable and arts expenditure and the strategy for maximising our contribution to society.
The committee chaired by Sir Christopher Bland consists of representatives from BT businesses three nonexecutive directors and two independent members who have a reputation for excellence in this eld.
An executive committee the Corporate Social Responsibility Steering Group oversees the implementation of our CSR strategy and programme.
This includes risk assessment target and objective setting and public accountability.
BT also takes advice from an independent panel of CSR experts.
During the 2006 nancial year our CSR strategy was substantially revised and updated to focus on three principal issues  climate change sustainable economic growth and an inclusive society.
Embedding CSR into our commercial operations remains an important part of our strategy.
As part of this process we have carried out a number of health checks in our commercial operations to identify specic social environmental and ethical risks and opportunities.
We have important relationships with a wide range of stakeholders around the globe including employees customers and suppliers and engage with them in a number of different ways.
As part of our CSR performance measurement we have 12 CSR KPIs key performance indicators which cover our relationships with our stakeholders as well as our environmental performance and our contribution to digital inclusion and business integrity.
Details of our performance against these are published in our annual social and environmental report.
Our CSR team coordinates and monitors CSR performance identies potential issues and opportunities that could affect the business and supports BTs commercial activities.
Social environmental and ethical risks During the 2006 nancial year we further developed our knowledge and understanding of our CSR risks.
In the context of CSR our most signicant risks continue to be s breach of the code of business ethics s climate change s diversity s health and safety s outsourcing s privacy s supply chain working conditions.
Each of these risks has an owner and mitigation strategy in place more detail on these risks can be found in our online social and environmental report.
These risks are not regarded as material in relation to the BT group and consequently are not included in Group risk factors.
CSR business opportunities We have measured the link between customer satisfaction and CSR performance for a number of years and our current customer satisfaction models indicate a positive correlation.
Customers who believe that BT takes its responsibility to society and the community seriously are more than twice as likely as other customers to be very or extremely satised with BT.
Longterm sustainability trends are creating market opportunities for us  the use for example of teleconferencing and exible working to reduce the need to travel and provide more exible lifestyles.
Increasingly BT has to address social and environmental matters when bidding for business.
In the 2006 nancial year bids to the value of 1.3 billion required us to demonstrate expertise in managing these issues.
Procurement
Through our supply chain initiative Sourcing with Human Dignity we seek to ensure that the working conditions in our supply chain meet internationally recognised human rights standards and to investigate potential social and environmental shortcomings.
We monitor and set published targets for our relationships with suppliers in the 2006 nancial year for example 89% of suppliers were satised with their working relationship with us.
Environment
During the 2006 nancial year we achieved recertication under the revised ISO 14001 standard  the international standard for environmental management systems  for our operations in the UK and Spain.
We requested withdrawal of our certication in Ireland pending reorganisation and will seek reaccreditation during the 2007 nancial year.
Although BT is one of the largest consumers of industrial and commercial electricity in the UK and the growth of broadband continues to increase our electricity use our electricity consumption increased by less than 1% in the 2006 nancial year.
The green energy contract we signed in the 2005 nancial year means that almost all our UK electricity needs are met from environmentally friendly sources including wind generation solar wave and hydroelectric schemes.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 19 Filename 02.3d Time 143322 Date 200506 Checksum tel The following table shows BTsCO emissions as dened in the Greenhouse Gas Protocol and therefore includes not only CO emitted directly by BT but also that emitted in the production of the electricity purchased by the Group.
CO emissionstel 2003 Total UK only  million tonnes 0.64 0.76 0.92 0.96 % below 1996 60% 53% 42% 40% Tonnes per 1m revenue During the 2006 nancial year we received an income of 3.2 million from our recycling activities offset against the 8 million we spent managing our waste contracts recycling our waste and sending waste to landll.
Wastetel 2003 Total waste tonnes 102005 110622 107303 117688 Total waste recycled tonnes 42340 37421 27626 27809 % recycled 42% 34% 26% 24% During the 2006 nancial year our commercial eet  still one of the largest in the UK  increased by 1.7% but our fuel consumption decreased by 1%.
Transporttel 2003 Number of vehicles UK only 32516 31969 32663 33979 Fuel consumption million litres 51.38 51.97 53.85 56.12 Digital inclusion Following research that showed that if not addressed the digital divide would by 2025 become even wider particularly among older and disabled people we are working with Age Concern to support their digital inclusion strategy.
This includes providing support to develop further their network of Silver Surfer clubs and providing training for volunteers and staff.
The EverybodyOnline initiative continues in a number of the most deprived communities around the UK successfully demonstrating that digital inclusion makes a positive difference.
Internationally our Lifelines India initiative helps developing world farmers access essential advice and information over a digital network.
Community investment We commit a minimum of 1% of our UK pretax prots to activities which support society.
We provided a total of 21.3 million designed to benet society in the 2006 nancial year of which 2.5 million was charitable donations.
Our community investment strategy aims to help individuals and communities make a better world through communications skills and technology.
Examples include an education programme which provides free resources for teachers pupils and parents and inschool activities with drama groups and BT volunteers both in the UK and internationally.
To date we have involved over two million pupils at more than 12000 schools.
We also helped Comic Relief Children in Need and the Disasters Emergency Committee run successful telethons which raised millions for good causes around the globe.
ChildLine a UK charity answers 2500 calls every day but many hundreds more go unanswered.
We are working with ChildLine on a campaign to ensure that every childs call for help is answered.
Our response to major world disasters included sending a specialist team to the Pakistan earthquake disaster zone to install emergency satellite telephone equipment.
Disability services Our age and disability action team promotes equal access to a wide range of products and services.
We work directly with older and disabled people and their representatives to raise awareness of BTs inclusive approach and are continuing to develop our processes to ensure that new products and services are accessible by as many disabled people as possible.
Our age and disability action website for example now includes information about broadband in British Sign Language.
BT is the rst commercial organisation to provide online information in this format opening up access for deaf people.
GROUP RISK FACTORS In common with all businesses BT is affected by a number of risk factors not all of which are wholly within our control.
Although many of the risk factors inuencing our performance are macroeconomic and likely to affect the performance of businesses generally others are particular to our operations.
This section highlights some of those particular risks but it is not intended to be an extensive analysis of all risks affecting the business.
Some risks may be unknown to us and other risks currently regarded as immaterial could turn out to be material.
All of them have the potential to impact our business revenue prots assets liquidity and capital resources adversely.
They should also be considered in connection with the statement on internal control and risk management in the Report of the directors  Internal control and risk management on page 45 the forwardlooking statements in this document and the Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 133.
Regulatory controls If our activities are subject to signicant price and other regulatory controls our market share competitive position and future protability may be affected.
Most of BTs xed network activities in the UK are subject to signicant regulatory controls.
The controls regulate among other things the prices we may charge for many of our services and the extent to which we have to provide services to our competitors.
In recent years the effect of these controls has been to cause us to reduce our prices.
We cannot assure our shareholders that the regulatory authorities will not increase the severity of the price controls nor extend the services to which controls apply including any new services that we may offer in the future nor extend the services which we have to provide to our competitors.
These controls may adversely affect our market share the severity of competition and our future protability.
In response to Ofcoms strategic review of telecommunications we proposed a number of legally binding Undertakings under the Enterprise Act 2002.
These
Undertakings were accepted by Ofcom and came into force in September 2005.
In the case of a breach of the Undertakings Ofcom has the right to seek an injunction through the courts or issue a direction.
Third parties who suffer losses as a result of the breach may also take action against BT in the courts for damages.
The timescales for achievement of a number of the milestones in the Undertakings are very challenging.
Further details on the regulatory framework in which BT operates can be found in Regulation competition and prices.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 20 Filename 02.3d Time 143322 Date 200506
Competition in UK xednetwork services We face strong competition in UK xednetwork services.
Ofcom considers that we have signicant market power in various parts of the UK xed telecommunications market.
In these areas Ofcom can enforce obligations to meet reasonable requests to supply services to other communications providers not to discriminate unduly to notify price changes and in some cases it can also impose extra obligations such as price controls.
Ofcom has promoted competition in the xednetwork area by measures including local loop unbundling carrier preselection making it easier for BT customers to route some or all of their calls over our competitors networks and the introduction of wholesale access products.
Reduction in our share of the xednetwork market may lead to a fall in our revenue and an adverse effect on protability.
Unlike our competitors we continue to be obliged by the current regulatory regime to serve customers in the UK whether or not such provision of service is economic.
There is also competition for voice and data trafc volumes between xednetwork operators and those operators offering VoIP and mobile services.
The impact of all these factors may be to accelerate the diversion of our more protable customers without being able to reduce our costs commensurately which may cause adverse effects on our business results of operations nancial condition and prospects.
Technological advances Our continued success depends on our ability to exploit new technology rapidly.
We operate in an industry with a recent history of rapid technological changes and we expect this to continue new technologies and products will emerge and existing technologies and products will develop further.
We need continually to exploit nextgeneration technologies in order to develop our existing and future services and products.
However we cannot predict the actual impact of these future technological changes on our business or our ability to provide competitive services.
For example there is evidence of substitution by customers using mobile phones for daytoday voice calls in place of making such calls over the xed network and of calls being routed over the internet in place of the traditional switched network.
If these trends accelerate our xednetwork assets may be used uneconomically and our investment in these assets may not be recovered through prots on xednetwork calls and line rentals.
The complexity of the 21CN programme may also result in delays to the delivery of expected benets.
Impairment
Transformation strategy Our strategy for transformation includes the targeting of signicant growth in new wave business areas.
This may result in changes to our products services markets and culture.
If this transformation strategy is unsuccessful there is a risk that future revenue and protability will decline.
In particular we have targeted signicant growth in new business areas such as networked IT services broadband and mobility.
In view of the likely level of competition and uncertainties regarding the level of economic activity there can be no certainty that we will meet our growth targets in these areas with a consequential impact on future revenue and protability.
Major contracts Our business may be adversely affected if we fail to perform on major contracts.
We have entered into a number of complex and highvalue networked IT services contracts with customers.
Our pricing cost and protability estimates for major contracts generally include anticipated longterm cost savings that we expect to achieve over the life of the contract.
These estimates are based on our best judgement of the efciencies we plan to deploy.
Any increased costs delays or failures to achieve the anticipated savings could make these contracts less protable or loss making adversely impacting our prot margins.
In some cases our products and services incorporate software or system requirements from other suppliers or service providers.
Our ability to meet our commitments in a timely manner may depend on the ability of these suppliers and service providers to meet their obligations.
Failure to manage and meet our commitments under these contracts may lead to a reduction in our future revenue protability and cash generation.
Networks and systems failures Our business depends on our ability to transfer substantial volumes of data speedily and without interruption.
Any signicant failure or interruption of such data transfer as a result of factors outside our control could have a material adverse effect on the business and our results from operations.
We have a business continuity strategy in place designed to deal with such catastrophic events including for example major terrorist action industrial action extreme computer virus attack hurricane or ooding.
A failure to deliver that strategy may result in a material loss and there can be no assurance that material adverse events will not occur.
Pensions
Declining investment returns and longer life expectancy may result in the cost of funding BTsdened benet pension scheme becoming a signicant burden on our nancial resources.
As a result of the triennial actuarial valuation of the BTPS at 31 December 2002 BT agreed to make annual deciency payments of 232 million.
The triennial actuarial valuation at 31 December 2005 is currently being reviewed in the context of recent regulatory developments and the impact of the Crown Guarantee granted on privatisation in 1984.
The results of future scheme valuations will be impacted by the future performance of investment markets interest and ination rates and the general trend towards longer life expectancy as well as regulatory changes all of which are outside our control.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 21 Filename 02.3d Time 143323 Date 200506 Checksum tel For the year ended 31 March 2006 the group is required to prepare its audited annual consolidated nancial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee IFRIC Interpretations as adopted by the European Union EU and those parts of the UK Companies Act 1985 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
Previously the group prepared its audited annual nancial statements under UK generally accepted accounting principles UK
The 2005 comparative nancial statements have therefore been restated as part of the rsttime adoption requirements of
As allowed by the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC rules in relation to rsttime adoption of IFRS only one year of comparative nancial statements are presented in this Annual report.
The policies set out on pages 65 to 72 of this report have been applied consistently to the 2006 and 2005 nancial years with the exception of those policies relating to nancial instruments under IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation IAS 32 and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement IAS 39 which have been applied with effect from 1 April 2005.
The selected nancial data on pages 22 to 25 is shown in accordance with IFRS for 2006 and 2005 and UK GAAP for 2005 to 2002.
The UK GAAP data should be read in conjunction with the IFRS transition adjustments in note 34 to gain an understanding of the nature of the adjustments made to UK GAAP nancial information to comply with IFRS.
IFRS differs in certain respects from accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.
The material differences between IFRS and US GAAP relevant to the group are explained on pages 114 to 121.
Summary of group income statement  IFRS Year ended 31 March Revenue 19514 18429 Other operating income 227 551 Operating costs 17246 15988 Operating prot Before specic items 2633 2693 Specic items 2495 2992 Net nance expense Finance expense 2740 2773 Finance income 2268 2174 Share of post tax prots losses of joint ventures and associates Before specic items Specic items Prot on disposal of joint venture Before specic items Specic items 1 Prot before tax Before specic items 2177 2080 Specic items 2040 2354
Before specic items Specic items Prot for the year Before specic items 1644 1539 Specic items 1548 1829 Year ended 31 March 2006 2005 Average number of shares used in basic earnings per share millions 8422 8524 Average number of shares used in diluted earnings per share millions 8537 8581 Basic earnings per share 18.4p 21.5p Diluted earnings per share 18.1p 21.3p Dividends per share Dividends per share cents bc Basic earnings per share before specic items Diluted earnings per share before specic items Earnings and profit numbers are stated throughout the commentary before specific items  see page 27 for definitions.
The directors believe these measures provide a more meaningful analysis of the trading results of the group and are consistent with the way the financial performance is measured by management.
Based on actual dividends paid andor year end exchange rate on proposed dividends Dividends per share represents the dividend proposed in respect of the relevant financial year.
Under IFRS dividends are recognised as a deduction from shareholders equity when they are paid.
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 22 Filename 02.3d Time 143324 Date 200506
Summary of group income statement  UK GAAP Year ended 31 March Total turnover Continuing activities 19031 18914 20182 21815 Discontinued activities  2827 19031 18914 20182 24642 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 408 395 1455 4764 Trading between group and principal joint venture  681 Group turnover Continuing activities 18623 18519 18727 18447 Discontinued activities  2112 18623 18519 18727 20559 Other operating income 17telOperating costs ab 16005 15826 16366 21387 Group operating prot loss Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2864 2889 2794 2593 Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 75 19 218 3059 2789 2870 2576 466 Groups share of operating loss prot of associates and joint ventures Total operating prot loss Continuing activities 2764 2836 2905 1476 Discontinued activities  371 2764 2836 2905 1847 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 358 36 1696 4389 Prot on sale of property xed assets 22 14 11 1089 Amounts written off investments  535 Net interest payable 801 941 1439 1622 Prot on ordinary activities before taxation Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2085 2013 1840 1126 Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 258 68 1333 348 2343 1945 3173 1474 Tax on prot on ordinary activities Prot on ordinary activities after taxation 1820 1406 2714 1031 Minority interests 1 8 12 23 Prot for the year 1821 1414 2702 1008 Average number of shares used in basic earnings per share millions 8524 8621 8616 8307 Basic earnings per share 21.4p 16.4p 31.4p 12.1p Diluted earnings per share 21.2p 16.3p 31.2p 12.0p Basic earnings loss per share from continuing activities 21.4p 16.4p 31.4p 34.6p Diluted earnings loss per share from continuing activities 21.2p 16.3p 31.2p 34.6p Dividends per share 10.4p 8.5p 6.5p 2.0p Dividends per share cents Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 18.1p 16.9p 14.4p 6.2p Diluted earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 18.0p 16.8p 14.3p 6.2p Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items on continuing activities 18.1p 16.9p 14.4p 9.0p Includes net exceptional costs 59 7 198 2707 Includes early leaver costs 16telc Includes exceptional costs release 25 26 150 1294 Includes exceptional costs  55 293 162 Includes exceptional tax credit 16 29 139 143 Based on actual dividends paid andor year end exchange rate on proposed dividends Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 23 Filename 02.3d Time 143325 Date 200506 Checksum tel Summary of group cash ow statement  IFRS Year ended 31 March Net cash inow from operating activities 5387 5574 Net cash inow outow from investing activities 365 1740 Net cash used in nancing activities 5278 3529 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 474 305 Cash and cash equivalents at the start of the year 1310 1005 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 1784 1310 Summary of group cash ow statement  UK GAAP Year ended 31 March Net cash ow from operating activities 5898 5389 6023 5257 Dividends from associates and joint ventures 2362 Returns on investments and servicing of nance 878 527 1506 1695 Taxation paid 332 317 434 562 Capital expenditure and nancial investment 2408 2477 2381 1354 Acquisitions and disposals 418 60 2842 5785 Equity dividends paid 784 645 367 Cash inow before management of liquid resources and nancing 1080 1366 4183 7433 Management of liquid resources 587 1123 1729 1864 Financing 1485 2445 2473 5479 Increase decrease in cash in the year 182 44 19 90 Decrease in net debt in the year resulting from cash ows 887 1222 4225 13930 Summary of group balance sheet  IFRS At 31 March Intangible assets 1641 1254 Property plant and equipment 15489 15391 Other non current assets 838 1567 17978 18212 Net current liabilities 2758 2783 Total assets less current liabilities 15220 15429 Non current loans and other borrowings 7995 7744 Retirement benet obligations 2547 4807 Other non current liabilities 3071 2783 Total assets less liabilities 1607 95 Called up share capital 432 432 Share premium account 7 3 Capital redemption reserve 2 2 Other reserves 364 762 Retained earnings decit 750 1154 Total parent shareholders equity 1555 45 Minority interests 52 50 Total equity 1607 95 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 24 Filename 02.3d Time 143325 Date 200506 Checksum tel Summary of group balance sheet  UK GAAP At 31 March Intangible xed assets 62telTangible xed assets 15916 15487 15888 16078 Fixed asset investments 115 324 457 1044 Net current liabilities assets 2165 2027 1913 757 Total assets less current liabilities 14489 18042 18476 18131 Loans and other borrowings falling due after one year 8091 12426 13456 16245 Provisions for liabilities and charges 2497 2504 2376 2324 Minority interests 50 46 63 72 Total assets less liabilities 3851 3066 2581 510 Called up share capital 43telShare premium account 3222 Capital redemption reserve 2 2 Other reserves 998 998 998 1025 Prot and loss account 2416 1632 1147 1971 Total equity shareholders funds decit 3851 3066 2581 510 Total assets 26950 26565 28119 27496 US GAAP Year ended 31 March Group operating prot loss 2437 2779 2420 2693 337 Income before taxes 1350 1576 1188 3653 1025 Net income loss Continuing activities 1063 1297 883 4134 1680 Discontinued activities   948 1063 1297 883 4134 732 Basic earnings loss per ordinary share 12.6p 15.2p 10.2p 48.0p 8.8p Diluted earnings loss per ordinary share 12.5p 15.1p 10.2p 47.7p 8.8p Basic earnings loss per ordinary share from continuing activities 12.6p 15.2p 10.2p 48.0p 20.2p Diluted earnings loss per ordinary share from continuing activities 12.5p 15.1p 10.2p 47.7p 20.2p Basic earnings per ordinary share from discontinued activities   11.4p Diluted earnings per ordinary share from discontinued activities   11.3p Average number of ADSs used in basic earnings per ADS millions 84tel831 Basic earnings loss per ADS 1.26 1.52 1.02 4.80 0.88 Diluted earnings loss per ADS 1.25 1.51 1.02 4.77 0.88 Total assets 27030 29006 28674 31131 30428 Total equity shareholders decit 158 584 1455 2258 4247 Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 25 Filename 02.3d Time 143326 Date 200506
The Financial review is divided into the following sections 27 Introduction to the Financial review 28 Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards 28 Summarised group income statement 29 Group results 31 Line of business results 31 BT Retail 32 BT Wholesale 33 BT Global Services 33 Other operating income 34 Operating costs 34 Specic items 34 Operating prot 35 Net nance expense 35 Associates and joint ventures 35 Prot before taxation 35 Taxation 35 Earnings per share 35 Dividends 36 Financing 36 Treasury policy 37 Offbalance sheet arrangements 37 Capital resources 37 Financial risk management 38 Capital expenditure 38 Acquisitions 38 Balance sheet 38 Return on capital employed 38 Pensions 38 Geographical information 38 Regulatory nancial information 39 Regulation competition and prices 39 Competition and the UK economy 39 Environment 39 Critical accounting policies 39 US GAAP 39 US GAAP developments Please see cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 133.
FINANCIAL REVIEW
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 26 Filename 02.3d Time 143326 Date 200506
INTRODUCTION TO THE FINANCIAL REVIEW The nancial results for the 2006 and 2005 nancial years reect the continued strong growth in new wave services as we drive value from transforming the business.
Our results reect the continuing transformation of our business operations and markets in an environment where the pace of change is accelerating.
We are driving the change by providing our customers with new technology and services with greater capabilities and lower cost.
The focus on delivering the strategy continued and the groups performance beneted from the growth in new wave activities such as networked IT services broadband and mobility and our continued cost efciency programmes.
Our global networked IT services business has grown and our global capabilities have been strengthened by the successful acquisitions of Infonet and Albacom in 2005 and Radianz and Atlanet in 2006.
In this Financial review the commentary is focused principally on the trading results of BT Group before specic items.
Specic items by virtue of their size or nature are excluded because they predominantly relate to corporate transactions rather than the trading activities of the group.
This is also consistent with the way that nancial performance is measured by management and we believe allows a meaningful comparison to be made of the trading results of the group during the period under review.
Specic items are therefore analysed and discussed separately from the line of business results in this Financial review because they are considered to be a reection of the corporate activity rather than the trading activity of the lines of business.
The commentary in this Financial review also discusses trading results including and excluding the impact of acquisitions.
In discussing underlying performance excluding the impact of acquisitions we exclude the results of the Albacom and Infonet acquisitions made in the 2005 nancial year.
The Radianz and Atlanet acquisitions made in the 2006 nancial year do not have a signicant impact on the group results for the year and hence are not excluded when discussing underlying performance in 2006.
The following table shows the summarised income statement which includes a reconciliation of the key performance measures before and after specic items and is discussed further in this Financial review.
The operating results by line of business are discussed in addition to the overall group results as we believe the activities and markets they serve are distinct and this analysis provides a greater degree of insight to investors.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 27 Filename 02.3d Time 143326 Date 200506 Checksum tel ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL REPORTING STANDARDS The groups consolidated nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS and IFRIC interpretations in issue as adopted by the EU effective as at 31 March 2006.
Following the announcement by the SEC to allow an exemption from the provision of a second year of comparative nancial statements BT decided to take advantage of the exemption and hence the transition date for the adoption of IFRS is 1 April 2004.
All comparative data in these statements has been restated accordingly with the exception that the group has taken the exemption allowed by IFRS 1Firsttime Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards not to restate comparatives for IAS 32 and IAS 39.
Further details can be found in note 34 to the groups consolidated nancial statements on page 111.
The parent company nancial statements of BT Group plc have been prepared in accordance with UK GAAP.
SUMMARISED GROUP INCOME STATEMENT 2006 2005 Year ended 31 March m m Revenue 19514 18429 Other operating income Operating costs 17246 15988 Operating prot Before specic items 2633 2693 Specic items 138 299 2495 2992 Net nance expense Finance expense 2740 2773 Finance income 2268 2174 Share of post tax prot losses of associates and joint ventures Before specic items 16 14 Specic items  25 Prot on disposal of joint venture Before specic items Specic items 1 Prot before taxation Before specic items 2177 2080 Specic items 137 274 2040 2354
Before specic items 533 541 Specic items 41 16 Prot for the year Before specic items 1644 1539 Specic items 96 290 1548 1829 Attributable to Equity shareholders 1547 1830 Minority interests 1 1 Basic earnings per share Before specic items 19.5p 18.1p Specic items 1.1p 3.4p Total basic earnings per share 18.4p 21.5p Includes specific items BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 28 Filename 02.3d Time 143327 Date 200506
GROUP RESULTS Whilst driving the transformation of the business the group has continued to make progress in growing earnings per share before specic items which at 19.5 pence were 8% ahead of the 2005 nancial year.
The pace of our transformation was demonstrated by the 38% growth in new wave revenue to 6282 million.
New wave revenue represented 32% of revenue in the 2006 nancial year compared to 25% in the 2005 nancial year and is mainly generated from networked IT services broadband and mobility.
In the 2006 nancial year the growth in new wave revenue of 38% more than offset the 5% decline in traditional revenue to 13232 million.
The continued decline in traditional revenue reects regulatory intervention competition price reductions and also technological changes that we are using to drive customers from traditional services to new wave services such as broadband and IPVPN.
In the 2006 and 2005 nancial years mobile operators were required to reduce their fees for terminating calls and these regulatory reductions were passed on to BT customers resulting in lower revenues.
The net effect however was prot neutral as payments to mobile operators were reduced by the same amount.
In the 2006 nancial year total revenue of 19514 million was up 7% after excluding the 227 million 2005 397 million impact of these regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates.
Total revenue increased by 6% including the effect of these reductions.
The table below analyses revenue by customer segment.
Major corporate includes the external revenue of BT Global Services major corporate customers excluding the global carrier business.
Business includes the external revenue of BT Retail from SME smaller and medium sized enterprise customers.
Consumer includes the external revenue of BT Retail from consumer customers.
Wholesale includes the external revenue of BT Wholesale and BT Global Services global carrier business.
Revenue by customer segment Major corporate 6880 5936 Business 2324 2442 Consumer 5296 5599 Wholesale 4996 4427 Other 18 25 19514 18429 Major corporate UK and international revenue increased by 16% to 6880 million in the 2006 nancial year driven by the growth in new wave revenue.
This reects the continued migration from traditional voice only services to networked IT services contracts and an increase in mobility and broadband revenue.
New wave revenue increased by 35% to 4067 million and represented 59% of all major corporate revenue compared to 51% in the 2005 nancial year.
Networked IT services contract wins in the 2006 nancial year were 5.4 billion.
We believe these wins in the 2006 nancial year combined with the 7.7 billion of contracts won in the 2005 nancial year are building the foundation for future revenue growth as we increase the level of networked IT services provided to major corporate customers.
Revenue from business smaller and medium sized enterprise customers in the 2006 nancial year reduced by 5% to 2324 million.
This decline reects the continued penetration of Carrier preselection CPS and the impact of customers switching from traditional telephony services to new wave services including broadband.
New wave revenue in this segment increased by 16% to 544 million driven mainly by the 31% growth in the number of BT Business Broadband customers to 453000 at 31 March 2006.
The expansion of the BT Business Plan portfolio continued during the year with the number of locations increasing by 15% to 513000.
This together with our 83 BT Local Businesses offset some of the decline in traditional revenue.
Consumer revenue in the 2006 nancial year was 5% lower at 5296 million.
New wave consumer revenue increased by 55% to 638 million driven by growth of broadband and mobility.
Residential broadband connections increased 52% to 2028000 at 31 March 2006.
Traditional consumer revenue declined by 10% reecting the shift towards new wave products.
The proportion of contracted revenues has been increasing.
By 31 March 2006 more than 2 million customers had signed up for BT Together Options 2 and 3 and 67% 2005  64% of consumer call revenue was under contract.
There are now 16.2 million BT Together customers on Option 1 2 and 3 packages.
The underlying 12 months rolling average revenue per customer household net of mobile termination charges of 251 in the 2006 nancial year was 1% lower than the 2005 nancial year.
Wholesale UK and global carrier revenue in the 2006 nancial year increased by 13% to 4996 million.
New wave revenue in the UK wholesale business increased by 56% driven by the continuing growth in broadband.
Global carrier revenue increased by 22% in the 2006 nancial year and reects the increase in call termination revenues outside the UK.
In the UK BT had 7.9 million wholesale broadband DSL connections including LLU lines at 31 March 2006 representing an increase of 2.9 million connections in the year.
Group operating costs before specic items increased by 7% to 17108 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Excluding acquisitions group operating costs before specic items Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 29 Filename 02.3d Time 143328 Date 200506 Checksum tel increased by 3%.
Our cost efciency programmes achieved savings of over 400 million in the 2006 nancial year which enabled us to invest in growing our new wave activities.
Total operating costs of 17246 million including specic items increased by 8%.
Staff costs in the 2006 nancial year excluding leaver costs of 133 million increased by 445 million to 4833 million due to the full year impact of the acquisitions the additional staff required to grow the networked IT services business and to service increased levels of activity in the network.
Payments to other telecommunications operators in the 2006 nancial year were 4045 million an increase of 9% mainly reecting the impact of higher volumes and the full year impact of Albacom and Infonet.
Other operating costs before specic items in the 2006 nancial year increased by 11% to 6113 million.
This reects the cost of investing in new wave activities and supporting new networked IT services contracts.
BTs share of associates and joint ventures post tax prot before specic items was 16 million in the 2006 nancial year compared with losses of 14 million in the 2005 nancial year.
During the 2005 nancial year Albacom contributed post tax losses of 22 million prior to becoming a subsidiary.
Net nance expense was 472 million for the 2006 nancial year an improvement of 127 million against the 2005 nancial year.
This improvement was due to a number of factors including the net nance income associated with the groupsdened benet pension obligation of 254 million which was 56 million higher than last year the reduction in the level of net debt and a gain on redemption of the groups US dollar convertible bond.
The above factors resulted in the group achieving a prot before specic items and taxation of 2177 million in the 2006 nancial year an increase of 5%.
The improvement in the year reects the improved performance of BT Retail and BT Wholesale lower net nance expense and an increase in the share of prots from associates and joint ventures.
The taxation expense on the prot before specic items for the 2006 nancial year was 533 million an effective rate of 24.5% compared to 26.0% in the 2005 nancial year.
The improvement in the effective tax rate reects the tax efcient investment of surplus cash and continued improvement in the tax efciency within the group.
Basic earnings per share before specic items were 19.5 pence for the 2006 nancial year an increase of 8% from 18.1 pence.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 30 Line of business summary Revenue Operating prot loss Specic items BT Retail 8452 8698 644 607 BT Wholesale 9232 9095 1992 1950 BT Global Services 8632 7488 363 411 Intragroup 6820 6877 Group totals 19514 18429 2495 2992 138 299 A reconciliation from total operating profit to profit after tax net income is given on page 73.
Filename 02.3d Time 143329 Date 200506 Checksum tel LINE OF BUSINESS RESULTS In the following commentary we discuss the operating results of the group for the 2006 and 2005 nancial years in relation to the lines of business.
There is extensive trading between the lines of business and their protability is dependent on the transfer price levels.
For regulated products and services those transfer prices are based on market prices whilst for other products and services the transfer prices are agreed between the relevant lines of business.
The table below analyses the trading relationships between each of the lines of business for the 2006 nancial year.
The majority of the internal trading is BT Wholesale selling calls access lines broadband connections and other network products to BT Retail.
This trading relationship also reects the pass through of termination charges on other telecom operator networks and the sale of wholesale broadband ISP products.
BT
Retail also trades with BT Wholesale selling apparatus operator assistance and directory enquiries services and conferencing for onward sale to other telecom operators.
BT
Global Services revenue with BT Retail mainly reects the sales of BT Global Services products in the UK.
BT Global Services trades with BT Wholesale mainly for use of the IPATM network International Direct Dial trafc settlements and certain dial IP revenue share arrangements.
BT Wholesales revenue with BT Global Services reects the use of the network infrastructure for BT Global Services products.
Internal cost recorded by
Retail
BT
Wholesale
BT Global
Other
Total
Internal revenue recorded by BT Retail  BT Wholesale 4494  512  5006 BT Global Services 551 885  45 1481 Total 5045 1068 652 55 6820 The line of business results are presented and discussed before specic items for the reasons set out above to provide a meaningful comparison of the trading results between the nancial years under review.
Specic items are discussed separately in a group context in this Financial review.
In addition to measuring nancial performance of the lines of business based on the operating prot before specic items management also measure the operating nancial performance of the lines of business based upon the EBITDA before specic items.
EBITDA is dened as the group prot loss before depreciation amortisation interest and taxation.
This is a nonGAAP measure and therefore may not be directly comparable to the EBITDA of other companies as they may dene it differently.
EBITDA excludes interest taxation depreciation and amortisation the latter two being non cash items from group operating prot and is a common measure particularly in the telecommunications sector used by investors and analysts in evaluating the operating nancial performance of companies.
EBITDA before specic items is considered to be a good measure of the groups operating performance because it reects the underlying operating cash costs by eliminating depreciation and amortisation and excludes material one off or unusual items that are predominantly related to corporate transactions.
EBITDA is not a direct measure of the groups liquidity which is shown by the groups cash ow statement and needs to be considered in the context of the groups nancial commitments.
A reconciliation of EBITDA before specic items to group operating prot loss by line of business and for the group is provided in the table across the page above.
Trends in EBITDA before specic items are discussed for each line of business in the following commentary.
BT Retail Revenue 8452 8698 Gross margin 2354 2354 Sales general and administration costs 1563 1600 EBITDA 791 754 Operating prot 644 607 Capital expenditure 153 170 BT Retails results demonstrated a continued strategic shift towards new wave products with growth in broadband networked IT services and mobility revenues.
Despite the substitution by new wave products traditional revenue was defended by changes in pricing structure and packages to benet frequent users and marketing campaigns focusing on key customer service promises.
BT Privacy a service to address the problem of unwanted calls by giving customers greater control over the calls they receive was launched on 1 July 2005 with 3.7 million customers registered by 31 March 2006.
As at 31 March 2006 16.2 million customers were on BT Together packages.
In the small and medium size SME UK business market the focus remains on placing customers on commitment packages whereby lower call prices are received for annual committed spend.
By 31 March 2006 there were 513000 Business Plan sites up 15% in the year.
Cost transformation programmes continued to successfully reduce the cost base of the traditional business allowing investment in new wave products and services.
BT Retails revenue decreased by 3% in the 2006 nancial year to 8452 million.
The growth in new wave revenue of 38% in the 2006 nancial year continued to reduce our dependence on traditional revenue the decline in which was driven by the impact of regulation and competition.
After
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 31 Operating prot loss before specic items Depreciation Amortisation of intangible assets EBITDA before specic itemsteltel 2006 2005 m m m m m m m m 64telBT Retail 1992 1950 1778 1831 124 83 3894 3864 BT Wholesale 36tel82 37 1001 961 BT Global Services
2633 2693 2635 2694 249 150 5517 5537 Group totals Filename 02.3d Time 143330 Date 200506 Checksum tel adjusting for the regulatory impact of the reduction in mobile termination rates revenue declined by 2% in the 2006 nancial year.
Revenue for the two years is summarised as follows 2006 2005 m m BT Retail revenue Traditional 7088 7712 Networked IT services 363 304 Broadband 730 502 Mobility 154 103 Other 117 77 New wave 1364 986 Total 8452 8698 Traditional revenue comprises calls made by customers on the BT xed line network in the UK analogue lines equipment sales rentals and other business voice products.
Overall
The reduction includes the effect of continued high levels of migration to broadband which is reected in a 46% fall in dial up minutes over the year a reduction of 10% in ISDN lines and general competitive pressure.
It also reects the decline in private circuits and ISDN as customers migrate to new wave products and services including broadband and IPVPN.
New wave revenue grew by 38% to 1364 million in the 2006 nancial year driven primarily by broadband mobility and networked IT services.
New wave revenue comprised 16% of BT Retails revenue in the 2006 nancial year compared to 11% in the 2005 nancial year.
Broadband revenue grew by 45% to 730 million in the 2006 nancial year.
The growth of broadband continues to accelerate with 2584000 BT Retail connections at 31 March 2006 an increase of 47% over last year.
BT Retail had net additions of 832000 broadband customers in the year a 31% share of the broadband DSL net additions.
Broadband is increasingly critical to the success of SMEs and BT Business Broadband revenue continues to grow.
Revenue from mobility services increased by 50% to 154 million in the 2006 nancial year.
During the year we launched BT Fusion the worlds rst seamless combined xed and mobile communications services on a single handset.
The consumer launch was in June 2005 and the business market launch was in February 2006.
BT Fusion has attracted over 25000 connections in the period since launch.
Networked IT services revenue increased by 19% to 363 million in the 2006 nancial year.
SMEs have become increasingly interested in the benets they can achieve by converging their voice and data into one network and BT Business Networked IT services are integrating and simplifying the way customers are unifying their organisations voice and data services.
The portfolio includes IP infrastructure  WAN LAN and IP telephony and also Data Centre Services Security Applications and outsourcing.
The total number of BT Retail lines which includes voice digital and broadband were 5% lower at 28 million at 31 March 2006 reecting the continued growth in broadband offset by the declining PSTN lines.
BT Retails gross margin percentage increased by 0.8 percentage points in the 2006 nancial year reecting improved margin management and greater efciency in managing the service provider network.
Gross margin is revenue less costs directly attributable to the provision of the products and services reected in revenue in the period.
Selling general and administration costs are those costs that are ancillary to the business processes of providing products and services and are the general business operating costs.
BT Retail analyses its costs in this manner for management purposes in common with other retail organisations and it has set target savings for selling general and administration expenses.
Cost transformation programmes in the 2006 nancial year generated selling general and administration cost savings of 206 million 37 million net of new wave investment.
These savings were driven by cost reduction programmes focused on elimination of failure channel effectiveness overheads and removal of inefciencies and duplication.
The majority of these initiatives were targeted at people related costs with signicant savings in billing IT operations and other support functions.
BT Retails EBITDA increased by 5% to 791 million in the 2006 nancial year.
This is a signicant improvement compared to last year which experienced EBITDA decline.
The benets from the investment in new products and value added services have contributed to an improved EBITDA performance in the current year.
This was also reected in the 6% improvement in operating prot to 644 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Capital expenditure for the 2006 nancial year was 153 million a decrease of 10% resulting from tight controls over expenditure.
On 28 April 2006site one of the UKs leading internet retailers of IT and technology products.
The acquisition is part of BT Retails strategy to strengthen its online sales and service capabilities particularly for business and consumer products.
BT Wholesale 2006 2005 m m Revenue 9232 9095 Gross variable prot 7031 6933 EBITDA 3894 3864 Operating prot 1992 1950 Capital expenditure 2013 1981 BT Wholesale is the line of business within BT that provides network services and solutions within the UK.
Its customers include communications companies xed and mobile network operators internet and other service providers interconnecting with BTsUK xed network.
The customer base also includes BTs lines of business BT Retail and BT Global Services.
The majority of BT Wholesales revenue is internal 2006  54% 2005  58% and mainly represents trading with BT Retail.
In the 2006 nancial year revenue totalled 9232 million an increase of 2%.
External revenue increased by 11% to 4226 million in the 2006 nancial year an increase of 15% excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates.
The increase reects particularly strong growth in new wave revenues mainly broadband.
The regulatory price reductions on mobile termination rates have no impact on protability.
External revenue from traditional products increased by 1% in the 2006 nancial year.
Excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates external traditional revenue was up 6% in the 2006 nancial year.
The increase in traditional revenue was mainly driven by growth in Partial Private Circuits PPCs and Wholesale Access.
Customers continued to migrate from lower bandwidth products to less expensive alternatives such as PPCs and broadband and this is reected in revenue from PPCs which increased by 18% to 225 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Substitution to broadband has resulted in the continued declining trend in Flat BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 32 Filename 02.3d Time 143330 Date 200506
Rate Internet Access Call Origination revenues which have more than halved to 26 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Wholesale access revenues have increased by 142 million in the 2006 nancial year as a result of increased volumes from other service providers.
New wave revenue including broadband and managed services grew by 56% to 1033 million in the 2006 nancial year.
Broadband revenues grew by 74% year on year.
Wholesale broadband connections including LLU lines increased to 7.9 million at 31 March 2006 an increase of 2.9 million compared to prior year with all connections available at up to 2 Mbits.
Internal revenue decreased by 5% to 5006 million in the 2006 nancial year.
The reduction reects both the impact of lower volumes of calls lines and private circuits and lower regulatory prices being reected in internal charges.
Gross variable prot increased by 1% to 7031 million for the 2006 nancial year reecting volume changes and changes in the mix towards more protable products.
In the 2006 nancial year network and selling general and administration costs excluding leaver costs were 3% higher at 3103 million.
Leaver costs were 34 million in the 2006 nancial year and 62 million in the 2005 nancial year.
Activity levels in the network driven by broadband and LLU volumes have increased in the 2006 nancial year.
The nancial impact of this increased activity has been mitigated by a series of cost reduction programmes focusing on efciency discretionary cost management and process improvements.
EBITDA at 3894 million in the 2006 nancial year was 1% higher.
EBITDA margins were maintained at 42% across both nancial years.
Depreciation and amortisation were at in the 2006 nancial year at 1902 million.
Operating prot at 1992 million increased by 2% in the 2006 nancial year.
The operating prot margin increased to 22% compared to 21% in the 2005 nancial year.
Capital expenditure on property plant and equipment and computer software at 2013 million increased by 2% in the 2006 nancial year.
This reects increased capital expenditure to prepare for the 21 st Century Network and to invest in new systems to ensure compliance with the Undertakings agreed with Ofcom.
Investment in legacy network technologies continues to be lower than last year.
Following Ofcoms Strategic Review of Telecommunications Openreach a new line of business responsible for managing the UK access network on behalf of the telecommunications industry was launched on 21 January 2006.
For the 2006 nancial year Openreachs results are included within BT Wholesales results.
For the 2007 nancial year Openreach will be reported as a separate business segment.
BT Global Services 2006 2005 m m Revenue 8632 7488 EBITDA 1001 961 Operating prot 363 411 Capital expenditure 702 605 BT Global Services supplies managed services and solutions to multisite organisations worldwide  our core target market is 10000 multisite organisations including major companies with signicant global requirements together with large organisations in target local markets.
We aim to provide them with networked IT services and a complete range of managed solutions.
Our extensive global communications network and strong partnerships enable us to serve customers in the key commercial centres around the world using a combination of direct sales and services capabilities and strategic partners.
As well as local national and international communications services and highervalue broadband and internet products and services a comprehensive portfolio of networked IT services focused around messaging and conferencing CRM customer relationship management convergence outsourcing and security is offered to customers.
Consultancy services are also provided to help organisations understand network performance operate their networks and applications efciently and transform their business to gain advantage in the digital networked economy.
In the 2006 nancial year BT Global Services revenue was 8632 million 15% higher than the 2005 nancial year.
This includes revenue of 795 million from the acquisitions of AIbacom and Infonet which have strengthened our global networked IT services business.
Revenue arising from services provided outside the UK increased during the 2006 nancial year demonstrating BTs transformation into a global networked IT services company serving multisite organisations.
Excluding the impact of the Albacom and Infonet acquisitions BT Global Services revenue was 5% higher than the 2005 nancial year.
New wave external revenue grew in the 2006 nancial year fuelled by networked IT services contracts which generated revenue of 3732 million in the 2006 nancial year an increase of 34%.
Networked IT services contract wins were 5.4 billion in the 2006 nancial year.
We believe these wins coupled with the 7.7 billion contracts won in the 2005 nancial year are building the foundation for future revenue growth.
Included in the contract wins for the 2006 nancial year was a E450 million ve year contract with Fiat as well as a realigned and extended contract with the Department for Work and Pensions.
Traditional external revenue which includes the global carrier business as well as voice and data revenue from major corporates declined by 44 million compared to the 2005 nancial year to 3184 million.
This reects the migration to IVPNs sold to major corporate customers in the UK and further reductions in dial IP due to broadband substitution in the UK.
However the decline in traditional revenue was partly offset by a 34% increase in Multi Protocol Label Switching MPLS revenue which exceeded 400 million.
The increase in new wave revenue together with lower network and sales general and administrative costs coupled with the positive impact of the acquisitions has resulted in an increase in EBITDA in the 2006 nancial year of 4% to 1001 million.
The 2006 nancial year includes leaver costs of 49 million compared to 59 million in the 2005 nancial year.
Depreciation and amortisation costs were 88 million higher compared to the 2005 nancial year.
This reects the acquisitions and increased investment in our global infrastructure.
These factors have contributed to a decrease in operating prot of 12% to 363 million.
Capital expenditure for the 2006 nancial year was 702 million an increase of 16% from the 2005 nancial year mainly due to the investment in acquisitions and our global infrastructure.
OTHER OPERATING INCOME Other operating income decreased by 324 million to 227 million in the 2006 nancial year due to the one off Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 33 Filename 02.3d Time 143330 Date 200506 Checksum tel impact of the 358 million prot on disposal of non current asset investments in 2005.
OPERATING COSTS Total operating costs before specic items increased by 7% in the 2006 nancial year to 17108 million excluding the impact of acquisitions the increase was 3%.
Our cost efciency programmes achieved savings of over 400 million in the 2006 nancial year which enabled us to continue investing in growing our new wave activities.
As a percentage of revenue operating costs excluding specic items were 88% in the 2006 nancial year 2005 86%.
In both nancial years net specic items were incurred amounting to 138 million and 59 million in the 2006 and 2005 nancial years respectively.
These specic costs are considered separately in the discussion which follows.
2006 2005 m m Operating costs Staff costs 4966 4554 Depreciation 2635 2694 Amortisation 249 150 Payments to telecommunications operators 4045 3725 Other operating costs 6113 5528 Own work capitalised 900 722 Total operating costs before specic items 17108 15929 Specic items 138 59 Total operating costs 17246 15988 In the 2006 nancial year the number of staff employed increased by 2300 to 104400 mainly due to the additional staff required to service networked IT contracts and the increased levels of network activity.
Early leaver costs of 133 million were incurred in the 2006 nancial year compared with 166 million in the 2005 nancial year.
This reects BTs continued focus on improving operational efciencies.
The groups pension expense for 2006 was 603 million an increase of 63 million from the 2005 nancial year.
The increase in headcount pay rates and pension costs partially offset by lower leaver costs have contributed to a 9% increase in staff costs which were 4966 million in the 2006 nancial year.
The increase in pension costs includes a switch between wages and salaries and pension costs as a result of the introduction of Smart Pensions a salary sacrice scheme as well as the increased headcount and pay rates.
The depreciation charge decreased by 2% in the 2006 nancial year to 2635 million.
The amortisation charge increased by 99 million to 249 million in the 2006 nancial year due to higher capitalised software development costs and the intangible assets associated with the acquisitions in 2005.
Payments to other telecommunications operators increased by 9% in the 2006 nancial year to 4045 million.
The increase mainly reects the full year impact of the Albacom and Infonet acquisitions and higher volumes.
Other operating costs before specic items increased by 11% in the 2006 nancial year to 6113 million.
This reects not only the cost of supporting new networked IT services contracts but also increased levels of activity in the network.
Other operating costs include the maintenance and support of our networks accommodation sales and marketing costs research and development and general overheads.
SPECIFIC ITEMS The specic items for the 2006 and 2005 nancial years are shown in the table below.
2006 2005 m m Operating costs Property rationalisation costs 68 59 Creation of Openreach 70 Other operating income Prot on sale of non current asset investments  358 Associates and joint ventures Prot on sale of joint venture 1 Impairment of assets in joint ventures  25 Total specic items 137 274 In the 2006 nancial year specic operating costs included 68 million of property rationalisation charges in relation to the groups provincial ofce portfolio 2005 59 million.
This rationalisation programme is expected to continue through next year giving rise to further rationalisation costs.
In addition a provision of 70 million was recognised relating to the incremental and directly attributable costs to create the new line of business Openreach arising from the Undertakings agreed with Ofcom.
In the 2005 nancial year the prot from disposal of non current asset investments included within other operating income totalled 358 million.
This mainly comprised the sale of BTs 4% interest in Intelsat for net proceeds of 64 million which resulted in a prot on disposal of 46 million the sale of BTs 15.8% interest in Eutelsat SA for net proceeds of 356 million resulting in a prot on disposal of 236 million and the sale of BTs 11.9% shareholding in StarHub Pte Ltd for net proceeds of 77 million which resulted in a proton disposal of 38 million.
In the 2005 nancial year BT incurred an impairment charge of 25 million being BTs share of a write down of Albacoms assets prior to Albacom becoming a subsidiary.
OPERATING PROFIT In the 2006 nancial year operating prot before specic items described above was 2% lower than the 2005 nancial year at 2633 million.
This reects the increased operating costs described above in the 2006 nancial year more than offsetting the revenue growth.
Total operating prot for the 2006 nancial year was 2495 million compared to a prot of 2992 million in the 2005 nancial year.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 34 Filename 02.3d Time 143331 Date 200506
NET FINANCE EXPENSE Interest on borrowings 916 1053 Loss arising on derivatives not in a designated hedge relationship 8 Interest on pension scheme liabilities 1816 1720 Total nance expense 2740 2773 Income from listed investments 44 47 Other interest and similar income 154 209 Expected return on pension scheme assets 2070 1918 Total nance income 2268 2174 Net nance expense 472 599 In the 2006 nancial year net nance expense at 472 million were 127 million lower than last year with the net nance income associated with the groupsdened benet pension obligation of 254 million being 56 million higher than the 2005 nancial year.
The interest on pension scheme liabilities and expected return on pension scheme assets reects the IAS 19 assumptions and valuation as at 31 March 2005.
The reduction in the interest on borrowings reects the decrease in the groups debt.
The reduction in other interest and similar income reects the lower level of investment holdings following their utilisation on funding the maturity of bonds offset by a gain of 27 million on the groups US dollar convertible 2008 bond which was redeemed during the year.
Interest cover in the 2006 nancial year excluding the net nance income associated with the groupsdened benet pension obligation represented 3.6 times total operating prot before specic items and compares with interest cover of 3.4 in the 2005 nancial year.
The improvement in cover was due to the reduction in the interest expense mainly arising from the reduction in net debt.
ASSOCIATES AND JOINT VENTURES The results of associates and joint ventures before specic items are shown below Share of post tax prot loss of associates and joint ventures 16 14 The groups share of post tax prots losses from associates and joint ventures before specic items was a protof 16 million in the 2006 nancial year.
This compares to a loss of 14 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The principal contributors to prot before taxation in the 2006 nancial year were LG Telecom in Korea of 7 million 2005 6 million and Tech Mahindra Limited of 13 million 2005 6 million.
In the 2005 nancial year Albacom in Italy also contributed a loss of 22 million prior to becoming a subsidiary.
PROFIT BEFORE TAXATION The groups prot before taxation for the 2006 nancial year was 2040 million compared with a prot of 2354 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The groups prot before taxation before specic items for the 2006 nancial year was 2177 million compared with 2080 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The improvement in prot was mainly due to cost efciency savings lower leaver costs lower net nance charges and increased prots from joint ventures and associates.
TAXATION
The tax charge for the 2006 nancial year was 492 million and comprised a charge of 533 million on the prot before taxation and specic items offset by tax relief of 41 million on certain specic items.
The tax charge for the 2005 nancial year was 525 million and comprised a 541 million charge on the prot before tax and specic items offset by tax relief of 16 million on certain specic items.
The tax charge on the prot before taxation and specic items is at an effective rate of 24.5%.
This reduction in the effective rate from 26.0% in the 2005 nancial year reects the continued improvements in the tax efciency of the group.
EARNINGS PER SHARE The basic earnings per share of 18.4 pence per share for the 2006 nancial year compare with 21.5 pence for the 2005 nancial year.
The following table illustrates the impact of specic items on the basic earnings per share.
Basic earnings per share before specic items 19.5 18.1 Specic items 1.1 3.4 Total basic earnings per share 18.4 21.5 Basic earnings per share before specic items of 19.5 pence for the 2006 nancial year compare with an equivalent of 18.1 pence for the 2005 nancial year.
Diluted earnings per share were not materially different in either year.
DIVIDENDS
The Board recommends a nal dividend of 7.6 pence per share 2005 6.5 pence per share to shareholders amounting to 632 million 2005 551 million.
This will be paid subject to shareholder approval on 11 September 2006 to shareholders on the register on 18 August 2006.
When combined with the 2006 interim dividend of 4.3 pence per share the total dividend proposed for the 2006 nancial year is 11.9 pence per share totalling 993 million 2005 883 million.
This compares to 10.4 pence in the 2005 nancial year an increase of 14%.
Dividends paid in the 2006 nancial year were 912 million 2005 786 million and have been presented as a deduction in shareholders equity.
We continue with our progressive dividend policy.
We expect our pay out ratio to rise to around twothirds of underlying earnings by the 2008 nancial year.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 35 Filename 02.3d Time 143331 Date 200506 Checksum tel
Summarised cash ow statement Cash ow from operations 5777 5906 Income taxes paid 390 332 Net cash inow from operating activities 5387 5574 Net purchase of property plant equipment and software 2874 2945 Net acquisition of subsidiaries associates and joint ventures 167 418 Net sale of current and non current asset investments 3221 1249 Interest received 185 374 Net cash received used in investing activities 365 1740 Net repayment of borrowings and derivatives 2946 1292 Equity dividends paid 907 784 Repurchase of shares 339 193 Interest paid 1086 1260 Net cash used in nancing activities 5278 3529 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 474 305 Decrease in net debt resulting from cash ows 199 887 The cash inow from operations of 5777 million in the 2006 nancial year compares with 5906 million primarily as a result of lower working capital inows of 120 million compared to 253 million in the 2005 nancial year.
Tax paid in the 2006 nancial year totalled 390 million compared with 332 million in the 2005 nancial year.
This increase in tax payments was primarily as a result of normalisation of tax payments following low tax payments in the 2005 nancial year.
Net cash inow from investing activities of 365 million in the 2006 nancial year compares with a net cash outow of 1740 million in the 2005 nancial year.
This includes a net cash inow of 3221 million on investments which were used to partly fund the repayment of maturing debt.
Net cash outow for the purchase of property plant and equipment and computer software was 2874 million compared to 2945 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The net cash outow for acquisitions in the 2006 nancial year totalled 167 million and mainly related to the acquisitions of Radianz and Atlanet.
In the 2005 nancial year the net cash outow of 418 million mainly related to the acquisitions of Infonet and Albacom.
Interest received was 185 million in the 2006 nancial year compared to 374 million in 2005 which included receipts on restructuring the groups swap portfolio.
Net cash outow from nancing activities of 5278 million in the 2006 nancial year compares with 3529 million in the 2005 nancial year.
Included in the 2006 net cash outow is a repayment of 4432 million for maturing debt.
In addition the group raised a new sterling oating rate borrowing for 1000 million and issued new commercial paper raising net proceeds of 464 million.
Equity dividends paid in 2006 were 907 million whilst those paid in the 2005 nancial year totalled 784 million.
Interest paid was 1086 million compared to 1260 million in the prior year which included payments on restructuring the groups swap portfolio.
During the 2006 nancial year the share buyback programme continued with the group repurchasing 166 million shares for consideration of 360 million.
During the 2005 nancial year the group repurchased 101 million shares for consideration of 195 million.
As 31 March 2006 net debt was 7534 million a reduction of 359 million from 31 March 2005.
The groupsdenition of net debt which is a nonGAAP measure is provided on page 83.
Free cash ow Cash generated from operating activities 5387 5574 Net purchase of property plant equipment and software 2874 2945 Net sale purchase of non current asset investments 1 537 Dividends from associates 1 2 Interest received 185 374 Interest paid 1086 1260 Free cash ow 1612 2282 Free cash ow is dened as the net increase in cash and cash equivalents less ows from nancing activities excluding interest paid less the ows from the acquisition or disposal of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates.
It is a nonGAAP measure since it is not dened under IFRS but it is a key indicator used by management in order to assess operational performance.
Free cash ow was 1612 million in the 2006 nancial year compared to 2282 million in the 2005 nancial year.
The reduction in free cash ow compared to the 2005 nancial year is mainly due to the impact of proceeds of 537 million from the disposal of noncurrent asset investments in the 2005 nancial year mainly in respect of the disposal of Eutelsat Starhub and Intelsat.
Other factors contributing to the decrease were lower working capital inows and higher normalised tax payments following low tax payments in the 2005 nancial year.
This has been partly offset by lower cash payments on purchase of property plant and equipment and software in the 2006 nancial year although capital additions and accruals are higher at the end of the 2006 nancial year.
TREASURY POLICY The group has a centralised treasury operation whose primary role is to manage liquidity funding investment and the groups nancial risk including risk from volatility in currency and interest rates and counterparty credit risk.
The treasury operation is not a prot centre and the objective is to manage risk at optimum cost.
The Board sets the policy for the centralised treasury operations and its activities are subject to a set of controls commensurate with the magnitude of the borrowings and investments under its management.
Counterparty credit risk is closely monitored and managed within controls set by the
The group does not hold or issue derivative nancial instruments for trading purposes.
All transactions in nancial instruments are undertaken to manage the risks arising from underlying business activities.
We have set out further details on this topic in note 33 to the nancial statements.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 36 Filename 02.3d Time 143332 Date 200506 Checksum tel OFFBALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS As disclosed in the nancial statements there are no offbalance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on the groups nancial condition changes in nancial condition revenues or expenses results of operations liquidity capital expenditure or capital resources with the exception of the following Operating leases note 28 Capital commitments and guarantees note 28 CAPITAL RESOURCES During the period under review the group has reduced its level of borrowings so that its net debt was 7.5 billion at 31 March 2006 compared with 7.9 billion at 31 March 2005 based on BTsdenition of net debt as set out in note 10.
The directors have a reasonable expectation that the group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and therefore they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the nancial statements.
There has been no signicant change in the nancial or trading position of the group since 31 March 2006.
The following table sets out the groups contractual obligations and commitments as they fall due for payment as at 31 March 2006.
Payments due by period Contractual obligations and commitments
Less than 1 year years years
Loans and other borrowings 9078 1622 1225 2814 3417 Finance lease obligations Operating lease obligations 978tel7577 Capital commitments 754 684 70 Total 20459 3098 2477 3679 11205 At 31 March 2006 the group had cash cash equivalents and current asset investments of 2330 million.
At that date 1750 million of debt fell due for repayment in the 2007 nancial year.
The group had unused shortterm bank facilities amounting to approximately 1535 million at 31 March 2006.
These resources will allow the group to settle its obligations as they fall due.
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
Most of the groups current revenue is invoiced in pounds sterling and most of its operations and costs arise within the
The groups foreign currency borrowings which totalled 5.4 billion at 31 March 2006 are used to nance its operations.
These borrowings have been predominantly swapped into sterling.
Cross currency swaps and forward currency contracts have been entered into to reduce the foreign currency exposure on the groups operations and the groups net assets.
The group also enters into forward currency contracts to hedge foreign currency investments interest expense capital purchases and purchase and sale commitments on a selective basis.
The commitments hedged are principally US dollar and euro denominated.
As a result of these policies the groups exposure to foreign currency arises mainly on the residual currency exposure on its nonUK investments in its subsidiaries and on any imbalances between the value of outgoing and incoming international calls.
A 10% strengthening in sterling against major currencies would cause the groups net assets at 31 March 2006 to fall by less than 150 million with an insignicant effect on the groups prots.
This is consistent with the position at year ended 31 March 2005.
The majority of the groups longterm borrowings have been and are subject to sterling xed interest rates after applying the impact of hedging instruments.
The group has entered into interest rate swap agreements with commercial banks and other institutions to vary the amounts and period for which interest rates are xed.
At 31 March 2006 the group had outstanding interest rate swap agreements with notional principal amounts totalling 5.1 billion compared to 5.3 billion at 31 March 2005.
The longterm debt instruments which BT issued in December 2000 and February 2001 both contained covenants providing that if the BT group credit rating were downgraded below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of Standard and Poors SandP additional interest would accrue from the next interest coupon period at the rate of 0.25 percentage points for each ratings category adjustment by each ratings agency.
In May 2001 Moodys downgraded BTs credit rating to Baa1 which increased BTs annual nance expense by approximately 32 million.
BTs credit rating from SandP is A minus.
Based upon the total amount of debt of 5 billion outstanding on these instruments at 31 March 2006 BTs annual nance expense would increase by approximately 24 million if BTs credit rating were to be downgraded by one credit rating category by both agencies below a longterm debt rating of Baa1A minus.
If BTs credit rating with Moodys was to be upgraded by one credit rating category the annual nance expense would be reduced by approximately 12 million.
Based upon the composition of net debt at 31 March 2006 a one percentage point increase in interest rates would increase the groups annual net nance expense by around 10 million.
This is consistent with the position at 31 March 2005.
The group considers that it is not exposed to major concentrations of credit risk.
The group however is exposed to creditrelated losses in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to nancial instruments but does not expect any counterparties to fail to meet their obligations.
The group limits the amount of credit exposure to any one counterparty.
Where multiple transactions are undertaken with a single counterparty or group of related counterparties the group may enter into a netting arrangement to reduce the groups exposure to credit risk.
Currently the group makes use of standard International Swaps and Derivative Association ISDA documentation.
In addition where management have a legal right of set off and the ability and intention to settle net the relevant asset and liabilities are netted within the balance sheet.
The group seeks collateral or other security where it is considered necessary.
The group ensures its liquidity is maintained by entering into long and short term nancial instruments to support operational and other funding requirements.
The groups liquidity and funding management process includes projecting cash ows and considering the level of liquid assets in relation thereto monitoring balance sheet liquidity and maintaining a diverse range of funding sources and backup facilities.
Liquid assets surplus to immediate operating requirements of the group are generally invested and managed by the centralised treasury function.
Requirements of group companies for operating nance are met whenever possible from central resources.
The group manages liquidity risk by maintaining adequate committed borrowing facilities.
Renancing risk is managed by limiting the amount of borrowing that matures within any specic period.
The group has limited exposure to equity securities price risk on investments held by the group.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 37 Filename 02.3d Time 143332 Date 200506 Checksum tel CAPITAL EXPENDITURE Capital expenditure on property plant and equipment and computer software excluding the movement on capital accruals totalled 3142 million in the 2006 nancial year compared with 3011 million in the 2005 nancial year.
Capital expenditure is expected to be just over 3 billion in the 2007 nancial year as the group invests in its 21st century network 21CN programme.
Of the capital expenditure in the 2006 nancial year 270 million was in Europe outside of the UK the Americas and Asia Pacic compared to 152 million in the 2005 nancial year.
Contracts placed for ongoing capital expenditure totalled 754 million at 31 March 2006.
21CN is being developed using stringent capital return criteria and a rigorous approach to any investment in the narrowband network.
21CN aims to deliver long term structural cost reduction as we progressively migrate onto a simpler lower cost network architecture.
BT expects that future capital expenditure will be funded from net cash inows from operating activities and if required by external nancing.
ACQUISITIONS
The total amount invested in acquisitions in the 2006 nancial year was 167 million being mainly due to the acquisitions of Radianz and Atlanet.
In April 2005 the group completed the acquisition of Radianz for total consideration of 143 million including cash on the balance sheet and debt assumed on acquisition.
Net of cash and debt acquired the cash consideration was 71 million.
This gave rise to goodwill of 39 million.
In February 2006 the group completed the acquisition of Atlanet for 65 million including 7 million of deferred consideration being 53 million net of cash.
This gave rise to goodwill of 30 million.
The total amount invested in the 2005 nancial year was 453 million being mainly the acquisitions of Infonet and Albacom.
BALANCE SHEET Net assets at 31 March 2006 amounted to 1607 million compared to 95 million at 31 March 2005 with the increase of 1512 million mainly due to the retained prots for the year of 1548 million and actuarial gains of 1485 million net of deferred tax offset by dividends of 912 million losses on cash ow hedges of 155 million net of deferred tax and the net purchase of treasury shares of 344 million.
BTs non current assets totalled 17978 million at 31 March 2006 of which 15489 million were property plant and equipment principally forming the UK xed network.
At 31 March 2005 non current assets were 18212 million and property plant and equipment were 15391 million.
BT Group plc the parent company whose nancial statements are prepared in accordance with UK GAAP had prot and loss reserves of 9499 million at 31 March 2006 and 9647 million at 31 March 2005.
RETURN ON CAPITAL EMPLOYED The return before specic items on the average capital employed was 16.8% for the 2006 nancial year.
In the 2005 nancial year the group made a return before specic items of 16.5%.
PENSIONS
The groups total pension operating charges for the 2006 and 2005 nancial years were 603 million and 540 million respectively.
This includes 552 million and 507 million respectively in relation to the BTPS.
The increase in the pension charge in the 2006 nancial year partly reects the introduction of Smart Pensions a salary sacrice scheme part way through the 2005 nancial year as a result of which there is a switch between wages and salaries and pension charges as well as increases in pensionable pay.
The detailed IAS 19 disclosures are provided in the notes to the consolidated nancial statements.
At 31 March 2006 the IAS 19 decit was 1.8 billion net of tax being a 1.6 billion reduction from 3.4 billion at 31 March 2005.
The number of retired members and other current beneciaries in the BTPS pension fund has been increasing in recent years.
Consequently BTs future pension costs and contributions will depend on the investment returns of the pension fund and life expectancy of members and could uctuate in the medium term.
The BTPS was closed to new entrants on 31 March 2001 and we launched a new dened contribution pension scheme for people joining BT after that date which is to provide benets based on the employees and the employing companys contributions.
This change is in line with the practice increasingly adopted by major UK groups and is designed to be more exible for employees and enable the group to determine its pension costs more precisely than is the case for dened benet schemes.
The most recently completed triennial actuarial valuation of the BTPS performed by the BTPS independent actuary for the trustees of the scheme was carried out as at 31 December 2002.
This valuation showed the fund to be in decit to an amount of 2.1 billion.
Assets of the fund of 22.8 billion at that date covered 91.6% of the funds liabilities.
Under the 2002 funding plan the contribution rate was 12.2% of pensionable pay 18.2% under Smart Pensions and the company agreed to make annual deciency contributions to the BTPS of 232 million.
In the 2006 nancial year deciency payments were 54 million and no payments were made in the 2005 nancial year.
This was because in the 2004 nancial year total deciency contributions of 612 million were made including early payment of 380 million scheduled for payment in the 2005 and 2006 nancial years.
The triennial actuarial valuation at 31 December 2005 is currently being performed by the schemes independent actuaries and reviewed in the context of recent regulatory developments and the impact of the Crown Guarantee granted on privatisation in 1984.
Until that is completed the contributions will continue to be paid in accordance with the 2002 funding plan.
GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION In the 2006 nancial year approximately 87% of the groups revenue was generated by operations in the UK compared with 91% in the 2005.
BTs operating prots have been derived from its UK operations with losses being incurred outside the UK in the 2006 and 2005 nancial years.
REGULATORY FINANCIAL INFORMATION Ofcom requires regulatory nancial information in order to monitor and enforce various obligations that are placed on dominant providers in markets where they are found to have signicant market power SMP.
The current regulatory nancial reporting regime for BT has evolved over time in response to the ongoing changes in the regulatory environment.
The last signicant consultation on the regime was in 2004 in response to the regulatory framework for electronic communications network services that came into effect on 25 July 2003.
The SMP activities presented separately in the BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Operating and nancial review 38 Filename 02.3d Time 143332 Date 200506 within the group.
REGULATION COMPETITION AND PRICES See pages 13 to 16 in the Business review.
COMPETITION AND THE UK ECONOMY See page 15 in the Business review.
ENVIRONMENT
See pages 19 to 20 in the Business review.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES The groups principal accounting policies are set out on pages 65 to 72 of the consolidated nancial statements and conform with IFRS.
These policies and applicable estimation techniques have been reviewed by the directors who have conrmed them to be the most appropriate for the preparation of the 2006 nancial statements.
We in common with virtually all other companies need to use estimates in the preparation of our nancial statements.
The most sensitive estimates affecting our nancial statements are in the areas of assessing the level of interconnect income with and payments to other telecommunications operators providing for doubtful debts establishing asset lives of property plant and equipment for depreciation purposes assessing the stage of completion and likely outcome under long term contracts making appropriate longterm assumptions in calculating pension liabilities and costs making appropriate mediumterm assumptions on asset impairment reviews and calculating current and deferred tax liabilities.
Details of critical accounting estimates and key judgements are provided in the accounting policies on page 70 to 71.
US GAAP The groups net income and earnings per share for the two years ended 31 March 2006 and 31 March 2005 and shareholders equity at 31 March 2006 and 2005 under US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles US GAAP are shown in the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in note 35.
Differences between IFRS and US GAAP include the treatment of leasing transactions pension costs redundancy costs deferred taxation capitalisation of interest and nancial instruments.
US GAAP DEVELOPMENTS In November 2005 the FASB issued Financial Staff Position FSP FAS 1151 and FAS 1241 The Meaning of OtherThan Temporary Impairment and Its Application to Certain Investments which nullies certain requirements of Emerging Issues Task Force EITF Issue No.
031 The Meaning of OtherThanTemporary Impairment and Its Application to Certain Investments and supersedes EITF Abstracts Topic No.
D44 Recognition of OtherThanTemporary Impairment Upon the Planned Sale of a Security whose Cost Exceeds Fair Value.
The guidance in this FSP is applied to reporting periods beginning after 15 December 2005.
BT does not expect that the adoption of this guidance will have a material effect on its nancial position results of operations or cash ows.
In May 2005 the FASB issued SFAS No.
154 Accounting Changes and Error Corrections  a replacement of APB Opinion
20 and FASB Statement No.
SFAS No.
154 requires retrospective application of prior periodsnancial statements for changes in accounting principles.
SFAS No.
154 applies to accounting periods beginning after 15 December 2005.
The adoption of SFAS No.
154 is not expected to have a material effect on the results or net assets of the Group.
In February 2006 the FASB issued FASB Staff Position No.
FAS 123R4 Classication of Options and Similar Instruments Issued as Employee Compensation That Allow for Cash Settlement upon the Occurrence of a Contingent Event FSP FAS 123R4.
FSP FAS 123R4 addresses the classication of options and similar instruments issued as employee compensation that allow for cash settlement upon the occurrence of a contingent event.
An option or similar instrument that is classied as equity but subsequently becomes a liability because the contingent cash settlement event is probable of occurring shall be accounted for similar to a modication from an equity to liability award.
The application of this FSP did not have a material impact on the results or net assets of the group.
In February 2006 the FASB issued SFAS No.
Accounting for Certain Hybrid Financial Instruments  an amendment of FASB Statements No.
133 and 140 that amends SFAS No.
133 Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities and No.
140 Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishments of
This Statement resolves issues addressed in SFAS
133 Implementation Issue No.
D1 Application of Statement 133 to Benecial Interests in Securitised Financial
The Statement permits fair value remeasurement for any hybrid nancial instrument that contains an embedded derivative that otherwise would require bifurcation.
Additionally it claries which interestonly strips and principalonly strips are not subject to the requirements of SFAS No.
SFAS No.
155 also establishes a requirement to evaluate interests in securitised nancial assets to identify interests that are freestanding derivatives or that are hybrid nancial instruments that contain an embedded derivative requiring bifurcation.
It claries that concentrations of credit risk in the form of subordination are not embedded derivatives.
Also SFAS No.
155 amends SFAS No.
140 to eliminate the prohibition on a qualifying specialpurpose entity from holding a derivative nancial instrument that pertains to a benecial interest other than another derivative nancial instrument.
SFAS No.
155 is effective for BT for all nancial instruments acquired or issued after 31 March 2007.
BT is currently evaluating the impact of this statement.
In March 2006 the FASB issued SFAS No.
156 Accounting for Servicing of Financial Assets an amendment of FASB Statement No.
140 that amends SFAS No.
140 Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishments of Liabilities with respect to the accounting for separately recognised servicing assets and servicing liabilities.
SFAS No.
156 is effective for BT on 1 April 2007.
BT does not anticipate that the adoption of this new statement at the required effective date will have a signicant effect on its results of operations nancial position or cash ows.
Operating and nancial review BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 39 Filename 03.3d Time 143347 Date 200506 Checksum tel BOARD OF DIRECTORS Sir Christopher Bland Chairman def Sir Christopher Bland was appointed to the Board as Chairman on 1 May 2001.
He chairs the Nominating and Community Support committees.
He was chairman of the BBC Board of Governors from 1 April 1996 until 30 September 2001.
From 1972 to 1979 Sir Christopher was deputy chairman of the Independent Broadcasting Authority and chairman of its Complaints Review
In 1982 he became a nonexecutive director of LWT Holdings and was chairman from 1983 to 1994 when LWT was acquired by Granada Group.
From December 1994 to May 2000 he was chairman of NFC.
From 1977 to 1985 he was chairman of Sir Joseph Causton and Sons.
Sir Christopher who was chairman of the Hammersmith and Queen Charlottes Hospitals Special Health Authority from 1982 to 1994 and of Hammersmith Hospitals NHS Trust from 1994 to February 1997 was knighted for his work in the NHS in 1993.
He was chairman of the Private Finance Panel from 1995 to 1996 and a member of the Prime Ministers Advisory Panel on the Citizens Charter.
He is a Senior Adviser at Warburg Pincus and chairman of the Royal Shakespeare
Aged 67.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002 and became Chief Executive on 1 February 2002.
He chairs the Operating Committee.
Ben was formerly vice chairman of the management board of Lucent Technologies in the USA from October 1999.
He joined Lucent in September 1997 as executive vice president international and became chief operating ofcer the following month.
Prior to joining Lucent Ben worked for KPN in the Netherlands for nine years as president and managing director of its telecoms subsidiary PTT Telecom.
From 1975 to 1988 he worked for ITT in Europe.
He was created an Ofcer of the Order of OrangeNassau in April 2006.
He is a nonexecutive director of UPS.
A Dutch national he is aged 54.
Andy Green Chief Executive BT Global Services Andy Green was appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
He was appointed as Chief Executive of BT Global Services in October 2001.
Since joining BT in 1986 he has held a number of positions including Chief Executive of BT Openworld and Group Director of Strategy and Development.
Andy was a member of the former Executive Committee from February 1995.
He is a board member of eskills UK and a nonexecutive director of NAVTEQ Corporation a US corporation.
Aged 50.
Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director af Hanif Lalani was appointed to the Board on 7 February 2005 as Group Finance Director.
He was formerly Chief Financial Ofcer for BT Wholesale.
Since joining BT in 1983 he has held a number of positions including Chief Executive of BT Northern Ireland and Managing Director BT Regions.
Hanif was also chairman of OCEAN Communications BTs subsidiary in the Republic of Ireland.
He was awarded the OBE in January 2003 for services to business in Northern Ireland.
He is a Chartered Management Accountant.
Aged 44.
Ian Livingston Chief Executive BT Retail Ian Livingston was appointed as Chief Executive of BT Retail on 7 February 2005.
He was formerly Group Finance Director from April 2002.
Prior to joining BT he was group nance director of Dixons Group from 1997.
He joined Dixons in 1991 after working for 3i Group and Bank of America International.
His experience at Dixons spanned a number of operational and nancial roles both in the UK and overseas.
He was also a director of Freeserve from its inception.
He is a Chartered Accountant and also a nonexecutive director of Ladbrokes.
Aged 41.
Dr Paul Reynolds Chief Executive BT Wholesale Paul Reynolds was appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
In April 2000 he was appointed as Chief Executive of BT
He joined BT in 1983 and has held a number of roles including Director of the Ofce of the Chairman Director of Multimedia and from 1999 Managing Director of Networks and Information Services.
He is a nonexecutive director of EAccess a Japanese corporation.
Aged 49.
NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman bcd Sir Anthony Greener was appointed to the Board on 1 October 2000.
He was appointed Joint Deputy Chairman and chairman of the Audit Committee on 1 January 2001.
He is the senior independent director.
He became Deputy Chairman and chairman of the Remuneration Committee on 18 July 2001.
Sir Anthony is chairman of the Qualications and Curriculum
He was formerly chairman of Diageo.
Prior to the merger of Guinness and Grand Metropolitan he was chairman and chief executive of Guinness having been chief executive of Guinness since 1992.
A member of the board of United Learning Trust.
Aged 65.
Matti Alahuhta Matti Alahuhta was appointed to the Board on 1 February 2006.
He has been president of Kone Corporation since January 2005 and a director since 2003.
He was formerly at Nokia Corporation for more than 20 years where his most recent roles were executive vice president and chief strategy ofcer president mobile phones then president telecommunications.
Matti is foundation board chairman of the International Institute for Management Development IMD and chairman of Technology Industries of Finland Centennial Foundation.
A Finnish national he is aged 53.
Maarten van den Bergh bcdf Maarten van den Bergh was appointed to the Board on 1 September 2000.
He chairs the Pension Scheme Performance Review Group.
He is chairman of Akzo Nobel Supervisory Board and a nonexecutive director of British Airways and Royal Dutch Shell and former chairman of Lloyds TSB Group.
Prior to his retirement in July 2000 Maarten was president of the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company and vice chairman of its committee of managing directors from July 1998 having been appointed a managing director of the Royal Dutch Shell Group of companies in July 1992.
A Dutch national he is aged 64.
Clayton Brendish be Clay Brendish was appointed to the Board on 1 September 2002.
He is nonexecutive director and external chairman of the Meteorological Ofce Board nonexecutive chairman of Anite Close Beacon Investment Fund and Echo Research Limited and a nonexecutive director of Herald Investment Trust.
He is also a trustee of Economist Newspapers and the Foundation for Liver
Prior to his retirement in May 2001 Clay was executive deputy chairman of CMG having joined the board when it acquired Admiral.
Clay was cofounder and executive BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND OPERATING COMMITTEE BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Board of directors and Operating Committee 40 Filename 03.3d Time 143348 Date 200506 Checksum tel chairman of Admiral incorporated in 1979.
He also acted as an adviser to the Government on the efciency of the Civil Service.
Aged 59.
Phil Hodkinson be Phil Hodkinson was appointed to the Board on 1 February 2006.
He is group nance director of HBOS and chairman of Insight Investment.
A Fellow of the Institute of Actuaries he was formerly chairman of Clerical Medical Investment Group and Halifax Financial Services and previously chief executive of Zurich Life and Eagle Star Life.
Phil is a nonexecutive director of Business in the Community and chairman of the HBOS Foundation.
Aged 48.
The Rt Hon Baroness Jay of Paddington PC ce Baroness Margaret Jay was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
She was formerly Lord Privy Seal Leader of the House of Lords and Minister for Women.
Previously she was Minister of State at the Department of Health.
Baroness Jay has held nonexecutive positions with Scottish Power Carlton Television and LBC.
She has been a member of the Central Research and Development Committee for the NHS was a founding director of the National AIDS Trust and a governor of South Bank University.
She is currently chairman of the Overseas Development Institute and a nonexecutive director of Independent News and Media and a member of its International Advisory Board.
Aged 66.
John Nelson bdf John Nelson was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
Chartered Accountant he retired as chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston Europe CSFB on 31 January 2002.
He was a member of the executive board and chairman of the European executive committee of CSFB.
Prior to joining CSFB in January 1999 John spent 13 years with Lazard Brothers.
He was appointed vice chairman of Lazard Brothers in 1990.
He was also a chairman of Lazard S.
Italy and a managing director of Lazard Freres New York.
He was a nonexecutive director of Woolwich until it was taken over by Barclays Bank in 2000.
He is chairman of Hammerson deputy chairman of Kingsher and a senior advisor to Charterhouse Capital Partners.
Aged 58.
Carl G Symon bcg Carl Symon was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002 and was appointed chairman of the Equality of Access Board when it became operational on 1 November 2005.
He retired from IBM in May 2001 after a 32year career during which he held senior executive positions in the USA Canada Latin America Asia and Europe including chairman and chief executive ofcer of IBM UK.
Carl is chairman of HMV Group and a number of private companies and a nonexecutive director of RollsRoyce and
A US national he is aged 60.
OPERATING COMMITTEE Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Andy Green Chief Executive BT Global Services Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director Ian Livingston Chief Executive BT Retail Dr Paul Reynolds Chief Executive BT Wholesale See page 40 for biographical details.
COMPANY SECRETARY Larry Stone Larry Stone formerly Corporate Governance Director from 1 June 2000 was appointed Company Secretary on 27 March 2002.
He previously held external relations and regulatory roles with BT in Tokyo and Brussels and with BT Cellnet now O2.
He is a trustee of the BT Pension Scheme a member of the ifsProShare faculty and a member of the Primary Markets Group of the London Stock Exchange.
Aged 48.
Key to membership of all Board committees
Audit
Remuneration
Nominating
Community Support Pension Scheme Performance Review Group Equality of Access Board All the nonexecutive directors are considered independent of the management of the company.
Board of directors and Operating Committee BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 41 Filename 03.3d Time 143348 Date 200506
The directors submit their report and the audited nancial statements of the company BT Group plc and the group which includes its subsidiary undertakings for the 2006 nancial year.
It is BTs policy to achieve for all our operations best practice in our standards of business integrity.
This includes a commitment to maintaining the highest standards of corporate governance and ethics throughout the group.
The directors consider that BT has throughout the year complied with the provisions set out in section 1 of the 2003 Combined Code on Corporate Governance and that the Operating and nancial review has been prepared in accordance with the principles in the Reporting Statement on the Operating and Financial Review issued by the Accounting Standards Board.
INTRODUCTION
BT Group plc is the listed holding company for the BT group of companies.
The Operating and nancial review on pages 6 to 39 and the Report of the Audit Committee the Report of the Nominating Committee and the Report on directors remuneration on pages 48 to 61 form part of this report.
The audited nancial statements are presented on pages 65 to 122.
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITY The groups principal activity is the supply of communications solutions and services and includes networked IT services local national and international telecommunications services and broadband and internet products and services.
In the 2006 nancial year approximately 87% of revenues were derived from operations in the UK.
The groups key performance indicators can be found in the Operating and nancial review.
THE BOARD
The names and biographical details of the directors of the company are given on pages 40 to 41 in the Board of directors and Operating Committee.
All served throughout the nancial year with the exception of Matti Alahuhta and Phil Hodkinson who were appointed on 1 February 2006.
Lou Hughes served as a director until 31 March 2006.
Election and reelection All directors are required by the companys articles of association to be elected by shareholders at the rst AGM after their appointment if appointed by the Board.
A director must subsequently retire by rotation at an AGM at intervals of not more than three years.
The director may seek reelection.
In accordance with the articles of association Matti Alahuhta and Phil Hodkinson having been appointed as directors by the Board retire at the forthcoming annual general meeting AGM and will be proposed for election.
Sir Anthony Greener Maarten van den Bergh and Clayton Brendish retire by rotation and will be proposed for reelection.
Details of these directors contracts of appointment are included in the Report on directors remuneration.
Composition and role The Board which operates as a single team is currently made up of the parttime Chairman the Chief Executive four other executive directors and eight nonexecutive directors.
All of the nonexecutive directors during the 2006 nancial year met and continue to meet the criteria for independence set out in the Combined Code and are therefore considered by the Board to be independent.
In line with BTs policy the Board comprised a majority of independent nonexecutive directors throughout the 2006 nancial year.
The Boards principal focus is the overall strategic direction development and control of the group.
In support of this the Board approves the groups values business practice policies strategic plans annual budget capital expenditure and investments budgets larger capital expenditure proposals and the groups overall system of internal controls governance and compliance authorities.
It also has oversight and control of the groups operating and nancial performance and reviews the risk register.
These responsibilities are set out in a formal statement of the Boards role.
The Board has agreed the groups corporate governance framework including empowering the companys key management committee the Operating Committee to make decisions on operational and other matters.
The roles and powers of this committee are set out on page 43.
Their powers and the authorities delegated to individual members of the Operating Committee are available to everyone in the group on the groups intranet site.
Historically the Board met every month except in August.
The standard Board cycle changed in the 2006 nancial year to nine meetings each year.
The Board met 11 times during the 2006 nancial year including two ad hoc meetings to consider timecritical matters.
The roles of the Chairman and the Chief Executive are separate.
They are set out in written job descriptions approved by the Nominating Committee.
In addition to chairing the Board the Chairman is responsible for consulting the nonexecutive directors particularly the Deputy Chairman on corporate governance issues matters considered by the Nominating Committee which the Chairman chairs and the individual performances of the nonexecutive directors.
The Chairman and the nonexecutive directors hold regular dinners at which they discuss matters without the executive directors being present.
With the Chief Executive and the Secretary the Chairman ensures the Board is kept properly informed is consulted on all issues reserved to it and that its decisions are made in a timely and considered way that enables the directors to full their duciary duties.
The Chairman ensures that the views of the shareholders are known to the Board and considered appropriately.
He represents the company in specied strategic and Government relationships as agreed with the Chief Executive and generally acts as the bridge between the Board and the companys executive team particularly on the groups broad strategic direction.
The Chief Executive has nal executive responsibility reporting to the Board for the success of the group.
The Chairmans other current signicant commitments are shown in the Board of directors and Operating Committee.
The Secretary manages the provision of timely accurate and considered information to the Board for its meetings and in consultation with the Chairman and Chief Executive at other appropriate times.
He recommends to the Chairman and the Chief Executive for Board consideration where appropriate the companys corporate governance policies and practices and is responsible for their communication and implementation.
The appointment and removal of the Secretary is a matter for the whole Board.
He advises the Board on appropriate procedures for the management of its meetings and duties and the meetings of the companys principal committees as well as the implementation of corporate governance and compliance within the group.
REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Report of the directors 42 Filename 03.3d Time 143349 Date 200506
BTs nonexecutive directors The Nominating Committee has agreed and periodically reviews the combination of experience skills and other attributes which the nonexecutive directors as a whole are to bring to the
This prole is used by the Committee when the appointment of a nonexecutive director is being considered to assess the suitability of candidates who are put forward by the directors and outside consultants.
Shortlisted candidates meet the Committee which then recommends to the Board a candidates for appointment.
The nonexecutive directors provide a strong independent element on the Board.
Between them they bring experience and independent judgement gained at the most senior levels of international business operations and strategy nance marketing technology communications and political and international affairs.
Sir Anthony Greener the Deputy Chairman is the senior independent director.
He chairs the Audit and Remuneration
In his capacity as the chairman of the Remuneration Committee he meets with BTs major institutional shareholders.
The Deputy Chairman also continues to be available to discuss matters with institutional shareholders where it would be inappropriate for those discussions to take place with either the Chairman or the Chief Executive.
Nonexecutive directors are appointed initially for three years subject to three months termination notice from either BT or the director.
At the end of the rst three years the appointment may be continued by mutual agreement.
Each nonexecutive director is provided upon appointment with a letter setting out the terms of his or her appointment including membership of Board committees the fees to be paid and the time commitment expected from the director.
The letter also covers such matters as the condentiality of information and the companys share dealing code.
Principal Board committees The Operating Committee the companys key management committee meets weekly and is chaired by the Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen.
The other members are the Group Finance Director and the Chief Executives of BT Retail BT Wholesale and BT Global Services.
The Secretary attends all meetings.
The
Group Strategy and the Group HR Directors normally attend each meeting.
The Committee has collective responsibility for running the groups business endtoend.
To do that it develops the groups strategy and budget for Board approval recommends to the Board the groups capital expenditure and investments budgets monitors the nancial operational and customer quality of service performance of the whole group reviews the groups risks register allocates resources across the group within plans agreed by the Board plans and delivers major crossbusiness programmes and reviews the senior talent base and succession plans of the group.
Within the groups corporate governance framework approved by the Board the Operating Committee is empowered to approve up to limits after which Board approval is required capital expenditure disposals of xed assets the making of investments by the group and divestments.
It is authorised to delegate these approvals up to its own limits to senior executives.
To meet best corporate governance practice the Audit Committee the Remuneration Committee and the Nominating Committee have long been an established part of BTs system of governance.
Each committee has written terms of reference which are available on the companys website.
The Report of the Audit Committee the Report of the Nominating Committee and the Report on directors remuneration are on pages 48 to 61.
The Equality of Access Board EAB was established on 1 November 2005 as part of the Undertakings given by BT to Ofcom following Ofcoms Strategic Review of Telecommunications to monitor report and advise BT on BTs compliance with these Undertakings.
The EAB is a committee of the BT Group plc Board which formally approved its formation and its terms of reference.
As required by the Undertakings the EAB comprises ve members Carl Symon a BT Group plc non executive director and chairman of the EAB a BT senior executive Sally Davis Chief Portfolio Ofcer and three independent members Sir Bryan Carsberg Stephen Pettit and Dr Peter Radley.
The EAB reports regularly to the Board.
Meetings attendance The following table shows the attendance of directors at meetings of the Board and Audit Remuneration and Nominating Committees during the 2006 nancial year.
Board
Audit
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nominating
Committee
Attendance shown for committee member Number of meetings Sir Christopher Bland 11 4 Matti Alahuhta Maarten van den Bergh 9443 Clay Brendish 9 4 Andy Green 11 Sir Anthony Greener 8243 Phil Hodkinson Lou Hughes Margaret Jay 10 4 Hanif Lalani 11 Ian Livingston 11 John Nelson 9 4 4 Paul Reynolds 10 Carl Symon 9 4 4 Ben Verwaayen 11 Appointed a director on 1 February 2006 Granted unpaid leave of absence by the Board from 1 September 2004 to 30 June 2005 to lead the civil reconstruction effort for the US Government in Afghanistan.
Resigned as a director on 31 March 2006 Includes two ad hoc meetings Service agreements The Chairman and executive directors have service agreements which are approved by the Remuneration Committee.
Information
Independent advice The Board has a procedure for directors in furtherance of their duties to take independent professional advice if necessary at the companys expense.
In addition all directors have access to the advice and services of the Secretary.
Training and information On appointment the directors take part in an induction programme when they receive information about BT the role of the Board and the matters reserved for its decision the terms of reference and membership of the principal Board committees and the powers delegated to those committees the companys corporate governance policies and procedures including the powers reserved to the groups most senior executives and the latest nancial information about the group.
This is supplemented by visits to key BT locations and meetings with members of the Operating Committee and other Report of the directors BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 43 Filename 03.3d Time 143349 Date 200506 Checksum tel key senior executives.
Each year Directors participate in BTs Back to the oor programme an activity that demonstrates commitment to our customers and the people who serve them.
Throughout their period in ofce the directors are continually updated on BTs business the competitive and regulatory environments in which it operates technology and corporate social responsibility matters and other changes affecting BT and the communications industry as a whole by written briengs and meetings with senior BT executives.
Directors are also advised on appointment of their legal and other duties and obligations as a director of a listed company both in writing and in facetoface meetings with the Secretary.
They are reminded of these duties each year and they are also updated on changes to the legal accounting and governance requirements on the company and themselves as directors.
During the 2006 nancial year for example they have attended presentations on BTs 21CN Investment Programme on the effects of the introduction of International Financial Reporting Standards on the groups results and on the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 which affects BT because its securities are registered with the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC and received briengs on changes to UK company law and various corporate governance proposals from the European Commission.
The Chairman also sends a weekly email to nonexecutive directors with topical sector highlights.
Guidelines are in place concerning the content presentation and delivery of papers for each Board meeting so that the directors have enough information to be properly briefed sufciently far ahead of each Board meeting and at other appropriate times.
Directors and ofcers liability insurance and indemnity For some years the company has purchased insurance to cover its directors and ofcers against their costs in defending themselves in civil legal proceedings taken against them in that capacity and in respect of damages resulting from the unsuccessful defence of any proceedings.
At the date upon which this report was approved and throughout the 2006 nancial year the companys whollyowned subsidiary British Telecommunications plc has provided an indemnity in respect of all the companys directors.
Neither the insurance nor the indemnity provides cover where the director has acted fraudulently or dishonestly.
Interest of management in certain transactions During and at the end of the 2006 nancial year none of the companys directors was materially interested in any material transaction in relation to the groups business and none is materially interested in any presently proposed material transactions.
SUBSTANTIAL SHAREHOLDINGS At 17 May 2006 the company had received notications from Legal and General Investment Management Limited Barclays PLC and Brandes Investment Partners LLC under Part VI of the Companies Act 1985 in respect of holdings of 318525417 shares 369832178 shares and 413832977 shares respectively representing holdings of 3.8% 4.3% and 4.9% of the companys issued ordinary share capital.
POLICY ON THE PAYMENT OF SUPPLIERS BT subscribes to the Better Payment Practice Code for all suppliers the four principles of which are to agree payment terms at the outset and stick to them to explain payment procedures to suppliers to pay bills in accordance with any contract agreed with the supplier or as required by law and to tell suppliers without delay when an invoice is contested and settle disputes quickly.
The normal payment terms are 42 calendar days from date of receipt of a due and valid invoice.
BT will make payment to the supplier on the next payment run following expiry of this term. creditors at the end of the year was 39 calendar days.
CHARITABLE DONATIONS Details of charitable donations made by the group can be found in Business review  Community investment.
POLITICAL DONATIONS The companys continuing policy is that no company in the group shall make contributions in cash or kind to any political party whether by gift or loan.
Arrangements are in place to implement this policy.
However the denition of political donations used in the Companies Act 1985 is very much broader than the sense in which these words are ordinarily used.
It covers activities such as making MPs and others in the political world aware of key industry issues and matters affecting the company which make an important contribution to their understanding of BT.
These activities are carried out on an evenhanded basis related broadly to the major UK political parties electoral strength.
The authority we are requesting at the AGM is not designed to change the above policy.
It will however ensure that BT acts within the provisions of the Companies Act 1985 requiring companies to obtain shareholder authority before they can make donations to EU political organisations which includes UK political parties as dened in the Act.
During the 2006 nancial year the companys wholly owned subsidiary British Telecommunications plc made the following payments to cover the cost of hosting brieng meetings about the companys activities with MPs and MEPs Labour Party 9956 Conservative Party 10867 Liberal Democrats Party 1747 Scottish National Party 1200 Plaid Cymru 88.
No loans were made to any political party by any company in the BT group.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Details of the nancial risk management objectives and policies of the group and exposure of the group to interest risk foreign exchange risk credit risk liquidity risk and price risk is given on page 37 and note 33 on pages 105 to 110.
AUDITORS
Resolutions to reappoint PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as auditors of the company and to authorise the directors to settle their remuneration will be proposed at the AGM.
AUTHORITY TO PURCHASE SHARES The authority given at last years AGM of the company held on 13 July 2005 for the company to purchase in the market 850 million of its shares representing 10% of the issued share capital expires on 12 October 2006.
Shareholders will be asked to give a similar authority at the AGM.
During the 2006 nancial year 166 million shares of 5 pence each were purchased under this authority 1.9% of the share capital for a total consideration of 360 million at an average price of 2.17 per share.
The shares were purchased in an onmarket programme of buying back the companys shares initiated in November 2003 as part of the companys shareholder distribution strategy.
290 million shares have been BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Report of the directors 44 Filename 03.3d Time 143349 Date 200506 retained as treasury shares.
At 17 May 2006 22 million treasury shares had been transferred to meet the companys obligations under its employee share plans.
RELATIONS WITH SHAREHOLDERS Senior executives led by the Chief Executive and the Group Finance Director and including as appropriate the other executive directors hold meetings with the companys principal institutional shareholders to discuss the companys strategy nancial performance and specic major investment activities.
The Deputy Chairman also attends at his discretion and in consultation with the Chairman and the Chief Executive meetings with shareholders during the year.
All nonexecutive directors have an invitation to attend investors meetings if they wish.
The company also maintains contact with investors when appropriate through the chairman of the Remuneration Committee and other senior executives to discuss overall remuneration policies and plans.
Contact with institutional shareholders and with nancial analysts brokers and the media is controlled by written guidelines to ensure the protection of share price sensitive information that has not already been made generally available to the companys shareholders.
The directors are provided with either full or summarised reports and other written briengs from the companys major shareholders and analysts and are regularly informed by the Secretary about the holdings of its principal shareholders.
The Secretary also surveys the companys retail shareholders about the quality of the companys shareholder communications and share registration services.
We are continuing our policy that shareholders vote on the annual report at the AGM.
Shareholders will also again be asked to vote separately on the Report on directors remuneration.
It is part of our policy to involve shareholders fully in the affairs of the company and to give them the opportunity at the AGM to ask questions about the companys activities and prospects.
We also give the shareholders the opportunity to vote on every substantially different issue by proposing a separate resolution for each issue.
The proxy votes for and against each resolution as well as abstentions will be counted before the AGM and the results will be made available at the meeting after the shareholders have voted on each resolution on a show of hands and at the end of the meeting.
It is our policy for all directors to attend the AGM if at all possible.
Whilst because of ill health or other pressing reasons this may not always be possible in normal circumstances this means that the chairmen of the Audit Nominating and Remuneration committees are at the AGM and are available to answer relevant questions.
All the directors attended the 2005 AGM.
The Annual Review and Notice of Meeting 2006 and if requested the Annual Report and Form 20F are sent to shareholders in the most costeffective fashion given the large number of shareholders.
We aim to give as much notice as possible and at least 21 clear days as required by the companys articles of association.
In practice these documents are being sent to shareholders more than 20 working days before the AGM.
Established procedures ensure the timely release of share price sensitive information and the publication of the companys nancial results and regulatory nancial statements.
All external announcements are also reviewed for accuracy and compliance requirements by a committee of senior executives the Disclosure Committee which is chaired by the Secretary.
STATEMENT OF BUSINESS PRACTICE To reinforce our commitment to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity and ethics BT has had in place a written statement of business practice The Way We Work for nearly seven years.
The statement covers all our operations. available in eight languages.
Copies are also sent to the employees of newly acquired subsidiaries.
These highlevel principles are supported by a continuing and comprehensive communications programme and online training.
A condential helpline and dedicated email facility are also available to employees who have questions about the application of these principles.
The helpline number is published externally as part of the statement of business practice.
We also continue to require our agents and contractors to apply these principles when representing BT.
BTs new Undertakings code of practice It Matters forms part of BTs statement of business practice and is consistent with it.
PENSION FUNDS BTs two main pension funds  the BT Pension Scheme and the BT Retirement Plan  are not controlled by the Board but by separate trustees who are company and union nominees under independent chairmen.
The trustees look after the assets of the funds which are held separately from those of the company.
The pension funds assets can only be used in accordance with their respective rules and for no other purpose.
INTERNAL CONTROL AND RISK MANAGEMENT The Board is responsible for the groups systems of internal control and risk management and for reviewing the effectiveness of those systems which it does annually.
Such systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives any system can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Board also takes account of signicant social environmental and ethical matters that relate to BTs businesses and reviews annually BTs corporate social responsibility.
The companys workplace practices specic environmental social and ethical risks and opportunities and details of underlying governance processes are dealt with in the Business review  Motivating our people and living the BT values and Our commitment to society.
BT has processes for identifying evaluating and managing the signicant risks faced by the group.
These processes have been in place for the whole of the 2006 nancial year and have continued up to the date on which this document was approved.
The processes are in accordance with the Internal Control Guidance for Directors on the Combined Code rst published in the UK in September 1999.
Risk assessment and evaluation takes place as an integral part of the groups annual strategic planning cycle.
The group has a detailed risk management process culminating in a Board review which identies the key risks facing the group and each business unit.
This information is reviewed by senior management as part of the strategic review.
The groups current key risks are summarised in Business Review  Group risk factors.
The key features of the risk management process comprise the following procedures s senior executives led by the Secretary review the groups key risks and have created a group risk register describing the risks owners and mitigation strategies.
This is reviewed Report of the directors BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 45 Filename 03.3d Time 143350 Date 200506 approved by the Board. and ensure that the key risks are addressed.
Director on the operation of internal controls in its area of responsibility. internal controls during the nancial year. assessments of the quality of risk management and control.
Internal Audit reports to the management and the Audit Committee on the status of specic areas identied for improvement.
Internal Audit also promotes effective risk management in the lines of business operations. in the group during the nancial year.
It reviews reports from the internal auditors and from the external auditors and reports its conclusions to the Board.
The Audit Committee has carried out these actions for the 2006 nancial year.
New subsidiaries acquired during the year have not been included in the above risk management process.
They will be included for the 2007 nancial year.
Material joint ventures and associates which BT does not control outside the UK have not been dealt with as part of the group for the purposes of this internal control assessment.
The Board has approved the formal statement of matters which are reserved to it for consideration approval or oversight.
It has also approved the groups corporate governance framework which sets out the high level principles by which the group is managed and the responsibilities and powers of the Operating Committee and the groups senior executives.
As part of this framework the development and implementation of certain powers relating to groupwide policies and practices are reserved to identied senior executives.
US SARBANESOXLEY ACT OF 2002 BT has securities registered with the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC.
As a result BT is obliged to comply with those provisions of the SarbanesOxley Act applicable to foreign issuers.
BT complies with the legal and regulatory requirements introduced pursuant to this legislation in so far as they are applicable to the group.
With the appointment of Phil Hodkinson it is the opinion of the Board that the Audit Committee now includes a member who is an audit committee nancial expert and who is independent as dened for this purpose.
The Board considers that the Committees members generally have broad commercial and business leadership experience having held various roles in accountancy nancial management and supervision treasury and corporate nance and that there is a broad and suitable mix of business nancial and IT experience on the Committee.
The Chief Executive and Group Finance Director after evaluating the effectiveness of BTs disclosure controls and procedures as of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report and Form 20F have concluded that as of such date BTs disclosure controls and procedures were effective to ensure that material information relating to BT was made known to them by others within the group.
The Chief Executive and Group Finance Director have also provided the certications required by the SarbanesOxley Act.
There were no changes in BTs internal control over nancial reporting that occurred during the year ended 31 March 2006 that have materially affected or are reasonably likely to materially affect BTs internal control over nancial reporting.
Preparations are well advanced for BT to be able to comply with the requirements of Section 404 of the SarbanesOxley Act.
BT is required to report under Section 404 in the 2007 Annual Report and Form 20F.
The code of ethics for the Chief Executive Group Finance Director and Director Group Financial Control and Treasury adopted for the purposes of the SarbanesOxley Act is posted on the companys website at siteethics THE NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE The company as a foreign issuer with American Depositary Shares listed on the New York Stock Exchange NYSE is obliged to disclose any signicant ways in which its corporate governance practices differ from the corporate governance listing standards of the NYSE.
The company has reviewed the NYSEs new listing standards and believes that its corporate governance practices are consistent with them with the following exception where the company does not meet the strict requirements set out in the standards.
The standards state that companies must have a nominatingcorporate governance committee composed entirely of independent directors and with written terms of reference which in addition to identifying individuals qualied to become board members develops and recommends to the Board a set of corporate governance principles applicable to the company.
BT has a Nominating Committee chaired by the Chairman Sir Christopher Bland.
It does not develop corporate governance principles for the Boards approval.
The Board approves the groups overall system of internal controls governance and compliance authorities.
The Board and the Nominating Committee are made up of a majority of independent non executive directors.
The SarbanesOxley Act the SEC and NYSE introduced rules on 31 July 2005 requiring the company to comply with certain provisions relating to the Audit Committee.
These include the independence of Audit Committee members and procedures for the treatment of complaints regarding accounting or auditing matters.
The company is fully compliant with these requirements.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS So far as each of the directors is aware there is no relevant information that has not been disclosed to the companys auditors and each of the directors believes that all steps have been taken that ought to have been taken to make them aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the companys auditors have been made aware of that information.
A statement by the directors of their responsibilities for preparing the nancial statements is included in the Statement of directors responsibility.
The directors statement on going concern is included in the Operating and nancial review Financial review  Capital resources on page 37.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Report of the directors 46 Filename 03.3d Time 143350 Date 200506 Checksum tel AGM RESOLUTIONS The resolutions to be proposed at the AGM at the Barbican Centre London on 12 July 2006 together with explanatory notes appear in the separate Annual Review and Notice of Meeting 2006 sent to all shareholders.
By order of the Board Larry Stone
17 May 2006 Report of the directors BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 47 Filename 03.3d Time 143350 Date 200506
The Audit Committee is chaired by Sir Anthony Greener the Deputy Chairman and senior independent director.
The other members are Maarten van den Bergh Clay Brendish Phil Hodkinson John Nelson and Carl Symon.
They are all independent nonexecutive directors.
They were members of the Committee throughout the 2006 nancial year with the exception of Phil Hodkinson who was appointed on 1 February 2006.
Lou Hughes stepped down on 31 March 2006 when he stepped down from the Board.
The Board considers that the Committees members have broad commercial knowledge and extensive business leadership experience having held various roles in accountancy nancial management and supervision treasury and corporate nance and that there is a broad and suitable mix of business nancial and IT experience on the
The Board has reviewed membership of the Committee and is satised that several of the Committees members have the recent and relevant nancial experience required for the provisions of the Combined Code and with the appointment of Phil Hodkinson it is the opinion of the Board that the Audit Committee includes a member who is an audit committee nancial expert for purposes of the SarbanesOxley Act of 2002.
COMMITTEE ROLE The Committee recommends the appointment and reappointment of the companys external auditors and considers their resignation or dismissal recommending to the Board appropriate action to appoint new auditors.
It ensures that key partners are rotated at appropriate intervals.
It discusses with the auditors the scope of their audits before they commence reviews the results and considers the formal reports of the auditors and reports the results of those reviews to the
It reviews the auditors performance including the scope of the audit and recommends to the Board appropriate remuneration.
As a result of regulatory or similar requirements it may be necessary to employ the companys external auditors for certain nonaudit work.
In order to safeguard the independence and objectivity of the external auditors the Board has determined policies as to what nonaudit services can be provided by the companys external auditors and the approval processes related to them.
Under those policies work of a consultancy nature will not be offered to the external auditors unless there are clear efciencies and value added benets to the company.
The overall policies and the processes to implement them were reviewed and appropriately modied in the light of the provisions of the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 relating to nonaudit services that external auditors may not perform.
The
Audit Committee monitors the extent of nonaudit work being performed by the companys auditors and approves such work before it is undertaken.
It also monitors the level of nonaudit fees paid to the external auditors.
The Audit Committee reviews the companys published nancial results the Annual Report and Form 20F and other published information for statutory and regulatory compliance.
It reports its views to the Board to assist it in its approval of the results announcements and the Annual Report and Form 20F.
The Committee also reviews the disclosure made by the Chief Executive and Group Finance Director during the certication process for the annual report about the design or operation of internal controls or material weaknesses in the controls including any fraud involving management or other employees who have a signicant role in the companys nancial controls.
The Board as required by UK law takes responsibility for all disclosures in the annual report.
COMMITTEE ACTIVITIES During the year the Audit Committee monitored and reviewed the standards of risk management and internal control the effectiveness of internal control nancial reporting accounting policies and procedures and the companys statements on internal controls before they are agreed by the Board for each years annual report.
It also reviewed the companys internal audit function and its relationship with the external auditors including internal audits plans and performance.
It reviewed the arrangements for dealing in condence with complaints from employees about accounting or nancial management impropriety fraud poor business practices and other matters.
At each of its meetings it reviewed with the group chief internal auditor and appropriate executives the implementation and effectiveness of key operational and functional change and remedial programmes including major contracts and IT programmes.
The Committee also set aside time at every meeting to seek the views of the companys internal and external auditors in the absence of executives.
In addition to carrying out those regular tasks described above under the Committees terms of reference which are posted on the companys website at sitemittees the Committee also carried out its annual consideration of the groups risk register process and reviewed the companys system of internal control its accounting systems IT security and fraud and related matters.
It also considered the effect on the companys results of the introduction of international nancial reporting standards which have applied to the companys results for the 2006 nancial year.
Additionally the Committee has reviewed at each of its meetings during the 2006 nancial year the steps being taken within the group with regard to the application of the SarbanesOxley Act dealing with the internal control over nancial reporting.
It also specically evaluated its performance and processes by again inviting Committee members and several executives and the external auditors to complete questionnaires.
This process formed part of the annual Board and Committee evaluation.
Committee members and those others consulted regard the Committee as effective on both behaviours and processes.
There is a similar view too of the external audit process which is regarded as effective.
The evaluation highlighted the need for the Committee to consider action both to reduce paperwork and to increase the length of the quarterly meetings to give more discussion time if at all possible.
The Committee also reviewed the experience skills and succession planning within the Groups nance function.
The Group Finance Director the Secretary the groups chief internal auditor and the companys external auditors attend the Committees meetings.
The Committee met four times during the 2006 nancial year.
The minutes of Audit Committee meetings are sent at their request to directors who are not members of the Committee.
REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Report of the Audit Committee 48 Filename 03.3d Time 143350 Date 200506 Checksum tel The Nominating Committee consisted of the Chairman the Deputy Chairman Maarten van den Bergh and John Nelson throughout the 2006 nancial year.
Three of its four members are independent nonexecutive directors.
The Secretary and where appropriate at the invitation of the Chairman the Chief Executive attends the Committees meetings.
COMMITTEE ROLE AND ACTIVITIES The Nominating Committee ensures an appropriate balance of experience and abilities on the Board using this evaluation to review the size and composition of the Board and to recommend any proposed changes to the Board.
It keeps under review the need for appointments to the Board prepares a description of the specic experience and skills needed for an appointment considers candidates who are put forward by the directors and external consultants and recommends to the Board the appointments of all directors after having met short listed candidates.
It also reviews the time required from the Deputy Chairman and other nonexecutive directors to carry out their duties and advises the Board on succession planning for the positions of the Chairman Deputy Chairman Chief Executive and all other Board appointments.
The Committee met four times during the 2006 nancial year.
It reviewed Board succession the size prole and composition of the Board and the Board and Board committee evaluation questionnaire and process.
The Committee also reviewed and recommended to the Board the continued appointments of nonexecutive directors and the new appointments of Matti Alahuhta and Phil
The terms of reference of the Nominating Committee are posted on the companys website at site committees.
The minutes of Nominating Committee meetings are sent at their request to directors who are not members of the Committee.
BOARD EVALUATION During summer 2005 the Board carried out through a questionnaire and discussion with directors its third formal evaluation of Board and Board committee performance and effectiveness.
The individual performance of directors was also evaluated at onetoone sessions with the Chairman.
The
Deputy Chairman Sir Anthony Greener the senior independent director led the review of the Chairmans performance in consultation with the nonexecutive and executive directors.
The results of that evaluation were considered by the Board in July 2005.
The directors considered BTs Board processes and effectiveness to be good.
Key areas highlighted were the need for continued focus on Board diversity continued efforts to maintain visibility of major capital projects including post project reviews and the amount of time available at Board meetings for more freeranging discussion.
These matters are being addressed.
Further evaluations will be carried out annually.
Separate questionnaires about Audit Committee effectiveness were also completed and the results are reviewed on page 48 in the Report of the Audit Committee.
REPORT OF THE NOMINATING COMMITTEE Report of the Nominating Committee BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 49 Filename 03.3d Time 143350 Date 200506
The Report on directors remuneration is divided into the following sections r REMUNERATION POLICY NOT AUDITED i Constitution and process ii Packages and nancial year 200506 operation iii Annual package nancial year 200607 iv Other matters Executive share ownership
Other benets Service agreements Outside appointments Nonexecutive directors letters of appointment Nonexecutive directors remuneration Directors service agreements and contracts of appointment Directors interests Performance graph r REMUNERATION REVIEW AUDITED Directors emoluments Former directors
Pensions
Share options Share awards under longterm incentive schemes Vesting of outstanding share awards and options Deferred Bonus Plan Share awards under the Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP Operating Committee REMUNERATION POLICY This part of the Report on directors remuneration is not subject to audit.
The directors consider that BT has thoughout the year complied with the provisions set out in Section 1 of the 2003 Combined Code on Corporate Governance.
Shareholders will be invited to approve this report at the companys 2006 AGM.
The
Board is ultimately responsible for both the structure and amount of executive remuneration but it has delegated prime responsibility for executive remuneration to the Remuneration
The Committee is made up wholly of independent nonexecutive directors.
The terms of reference of the Committee are available on the companys website at sitemittees.
The Committees role is to set the remuneration policy and individual remuneration packages for the Chairman and the senior management team comprising the executive directors members of the Operating Committee OC and other senior executives reporting to the Chief
This includes approving changes to the companys longterm incentive plans recommending to the Board those plans which require shareholder approval and overseeing their operation.
In this role the Committee also monitors the structure of reward for executives reporting to the senior management team and determines the basis on which awards are granted under the companys executive share plans.
The
Committee met four times during the nancial year 200506.
Sir Anthony Greener has chaired the Committee since 18 July 2001.
Other members of the Committee who served during the nancial years 200405 and 200506 were s Matti Alahuhta appointed 7 February 2006 s Maarten van den Bergh s Lou Hughes s Margaret Jay s Carl Symon.
Lou Hughes stepped down from the Committee on 31 March 2006 when he left the Board.
The Chairman and Chief Executive are invited to attend meetings.
They are not present when matters affecting their own remuneration arrangements are considered.
No director or executive is involved in any decision relating to his or her remuneration.
Nonexecutive directors who are not members of the Committee are entitled to receive papers and minutes of the Committee.
The Committee had access during the year to professional advisers both from within the company and externally.
Towers Perrin Remuneration consultants and Kepler Associates Remuneration consultants who were appointed by the company Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director Alex Wilson Group HR Director and Larry Stone Company Secretary provided advice that materially assisted the Committee in relation to directors remuneration in the nancial year 200506.
Remuneration consultants provide a range of data and advisory services covering all aspects of executive pay bonus arrangements shares and benets.
The Committee agreed that its Remuneration consultants Kepler Associates may advise both the Committee and BT and should be invited to attend meetings when major remuneration policy issues were discussed.
Towers Perrin provides market data.
BTs executive remuneration policy is to reward employees competitively taking into account individual line of business and company performance market comparisons and the competitive pressures in the information and communications technology industry as BT focuses on growth through transformation.
Base salaries are positioned around the mid
REPORT ON DIRECTORS REMUNERATION
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Report on directors remuneration 50 Filename 03.3d Time 143351 Date 200506 and excellent performance.
There are no plans to change this policy.
A signicant and increasing proportion of the total executive remuneration package is linked to line of business and or corporate performance.
Remuneration arrangements and performance targets are kept under regular review to achieve this.
The remuneration package is made up of some or all of the following Basic salary Salaries are reviewed annually but increases are made only where the Committee believes that adjustments are appropriate to reect contribution increased responsibilities andor market pressures.
No base pay changes were proposed or made for executive directors in 200506 save that the Committee agreed an increase in annual base salary effective from 1 August 2005 for Paul Reynolds to reect his responsibility for delivering the 21st Century Network and a number of key productivity and process improvements.
Performancerelated remuneration Annual bonus The annual bonus plan is designed to reward the achievement of results against set objectives.
For the nancial year 200506 ontarget and maximum requiring truly exceptional performance bonus levels for executive directors and OC members as a percentage of salary were set at 87.5% and 175% respectively with approximately 43% of any bonus payable in the form of deferred shares.
The Committee last year increased the deferred share element of the Chief Executives annual bonus but not the cash element for the nancial year 200506 and subsequent nancial years in order to make his total package more retentive and competitive with those of the leaders of the 30 largest companies in the FTSE 100.
Both the cash and shares elements are determined by performance against corporate targets.
Up to twothirds of his bonus is paid in deferred shares which vest after three years.
This had the effect of increasing his ontarget bonus to 255% of salary of which 85% would be paid in cash as previously and 170% of salary would be paid in deferred shares.
His total bonus  cash and deferred shares  is subject to an overall cap of 300% of base salary in any one year.
Under his contract the Chairman is not entitled to a bonus.
Corporate performance targets set at the beginning of the nancial year 200506 were weighted such that 40% of the bonus potential was based on earnings per share 40% on free cash ow and 20% on customer satisfaction.
Delivery against these operational targets is a key determinant of success and supports BTs strategy for transformation and growth.
The
Committee agreed that in calculating earnings per share for purposes of the annual bonus volatile items which would be reported under IFRS should be excluded.
The impact of market movements in foreign exchange and nancial instruments plus the net nance income relating to the groups pension liabilities were excluded from the target.
For the three line of business Chief Executives and other relevant executives the importance of meeting these operational targets was recognised by linking 100% of their potential bonus to BTs corporate performance.
The Committee retains the exibility to enhance or reduce bonus awards in exceptional circumstances.
Achievement against corporate targets in the nancial year 200506 Earnings per share weighting 40% of target Free cash ow weighting 40% of target
20% of target Total % of target Note  threshold reflects 50% of target target is 100% and stretch is 200% The deferred share element of the annual bonus is paid under the Deferred Bonus Plan DBP.
The shares vest and are transferred to the executive after three years if still employed by the company.
There are no additional performance measures for the vesting of deferred share awards.
The Committee considers that deferring a part of the annual bonus in this way also acts as a retention measure and contributes to aligning management with longterm shareholder interests.
The deferred awards for Ben Verwaayen Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds at the end of the nancial year 200506 are contained in the table on page 61.
The initial values of the awards to be granted in respect of the nancial year 200506 are given in the table on page 57.
As a retention measure and given competitive market conditions the Committee decided last year to introduce an additional special bonus arrangement for Andy Green Chief Executive BT Global Services linked to performance targets for that line of business.
This bonus arrangement payable in retention shares see Retention shares which will vest three years after grant was applied to performance for the nancial year 200506 and will be applied for 200607 and 200708.
Awards will be linked to a sliding scale of BT Global Services performance weighted equally around revenue growth EBIT and cash generation.
The target award is equivalent to 100% of salary with a maximum of 150% of salary.
The rst award of retention shares with a value of 750000 will be granted in June 2006 and will vest in June 2009 subject to continued employment.
Longterm incentives The BT Equity Incentive Portfolio the Portfolio is designed to ensure that equity participation is an important part of overall remuneration.
It comprises three elements share options incentive shares and retention shares.
Incentive shares were used for equity participation in the nancial year 200506.
Retention shares are used only as a recruitment or retention tool.
No options were granted in the nancial year 200506.
Under his service agreement the Chairman is not entitled to receive annual grants of incentive awards or options.
Normally awards vest and options become exercisable only if a predetermined performance target has been achieved.
The performance measure for outstanding awards and options is TSR total shareholder return compared with a relevant basket of companies.
TSR for these purposes was calculated by New Bridge Street Consultants.
TSR links the reward given to directors with the performance of BT against the shares of other major companies.
For grants in the nancial years 200102 200203 and 200304 the comparator group was the FTSE 100 at 1 April in each year.
For grants in the nancial year 200405 and in 200506 TSR was measured against a group of companies from the European Telecom Sector.
Report on directors remuneration BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 51 Filename 03.3d Time 143352 Date 200506
At 1 April 2005 the group contained the following companies BT Group
Cable and Wireless Cosmote Mobile Telecommunications Deutsche Telekom France Telecom Hellenic Telecommunications
Portugal Telecom
Swisscom
TDC
Telecom Italia Telecom Italia Mobile
Telekom Austria
TeliaSonera
Vodafone Group The base price at the beginning of the performance period is calculated by averaging the share price of BT and other companies in the comparator group over the six months to 31 March prior to the grant of the award.
However for the awards granted in the nancial year 200203 the period was from 19 November 2001 the date of the O2 demerger to 31 March 2002.
The end price is the average of the share price over the six months to the end of the performance period adjusted for all capital actions and dividend payments that occur during the performance period.
Incentive shares For the nancial year 200506 the Committee decided to grant incentive shares and to increase the annual bonus potential payable in deferred shares instead of the combination of share options and incentive shares granted in 200405.
Incentive
The Committee determined with advice from Towers Perrin that the change of emphasis would increase the proportion of variable reward linked to annual performance targets.
Incentive
Awards of incentive shares vest after a performance period of three years if the participant is still employed by BT and a performance measure has been met.
For awards of incentive shares in the nancial years 200405 and 200506 TSR at the end of the three year period must be in the upper quartile relative to the comparator group for all of the shares to vest.
At median 25% of the shares under award will vest.
Below that point none of the shares under award will vest.
The proportion of shares that vests reduces on a straightline basis between those points.
There will be no retesting and no matching shares are being offered to any executive on vesting of the incentive shares.
The details of incentive share awards held by Ben Verwaayen Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds at the end of the nancial year 200506 are contained in the table on page 60.
Share options No share options were granted in 200506.
The price at which shares may be acquired under the Global Share Option Plan GSOP is the market price at the date of grant.
Other than for new recruits the size of option grant is based on corporate and individual performance.
Options are exercisable after three years subject to a performance target being met.
The Committee would not normally expect the initial value of annual grants of options based on the market price of a BT share to exceed three times base salary.
In the nancial year 200405 the maximum option grant for executive directors and OC members was reduced to 1.5 times base salary see Incentive shares above.
For options granted subject to a TSR measure BTs TSR at the end of the threeyear period must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to be exercisable.
At median 30% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
The proportion of options that are exercisable reduces on a straightline basis between those points.
For options granted in the nancial year 200203 if the performance measure is not met in full at the rst measurement it may be retested against a xed base in years four and ve and for options granted in the nancial year 200304 it may be retested in year ve.
If TSR has not reached the median at the end of the fth year previously unexercisable options will lapse.
For options granted in the nancial year 200203 TSR had reached 74th position at the rst measurement relative to the FTSE 100 it had reached 73rd position on the second measurement and performance will be retested in the nancial year 200607.
For options granted in the nancial year 200304 TSR had reached 85th position at the rst measurement relative to the FTSE 100 and performance will be retested in the nancial year 200708.
If
For options granted in the nancial year 200405 there were no retesting provisions and the policy of the Committee is for there to be no retesting for future equity awards.
The option granted to Sir Christopher Bland on 22 June 2001 as part of his recruitment package is not subject to a performance measure as it matched a personal investment in BT shares of 1 million.
The details of the options held by Sir Christopher Bland Ben Verwaayen Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds at the end of the nancial year 200506 are contained in the table on page 59.
Retention shares Retention shares are granted under the Retention Share Plan RSP to individuals with critical skills as a recruitment or retention tool.
As a result shares currently under award are not generally linked to a corporate performance target.
The length of the retention period before awards vest is exible although this would normally be three years unless the Committee agreed otherwise.
The shares are transferred at the end of the specied period if the individual is still employed by BT.
Retention shares are used only in exceptional circumstances and in the nancial year 200506 14 awards were made of which eight awards were made for recruitment purposes.
In May 2005 an award of retention shares with an initial market value of 1 million was granted to Ian Livingston to help secure his appointment and longterm retention as Chief Executive BT Retail.
This award will vest in two tranches in November 2006 and November 2007.
Andy Green will be granted an award of retention shares in respect of BT Global Servicesnancial performance in 200506 under a special bonus arrangement see Annual bonus on page 51.
The awards under the RSP held by Sir Christopher Bland and Ian Livingston at the end of the nancial year 200506 or which vested during the year are contained in the table on page 60.
Other share plans The executive directors and the Chairman may participate in BTs HM Revenue and Customs HMRC approved allemployee share plans the Employee Sharesave Scheme and Employee BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Report on directors remuneration 52 Filename 03.3d Time 143352 Date 200506 Checksum tel Share Investment Plan on the same basis as other employees.
There are further details of these plans in note 31 to the accounts.
The Remuneration Committee has determined that there will not be any general increase in base pay for executive directors in the nancial year 200607.
However Ben Verwaayens base pay which has not increased since he joined the company in 2002 will be increased to 750000 per annum from 1 June 2006.
Hanif Lalanis base pay will be increased to 460000 per annum from 1 June 2006 following his successful assumption of and continuing performance in the Group Finance Directors role.
Long term reward In the nancial year 200607 incentive shares will again be granted for equity participation on the same terms as incentive shares in 200506.
TSR will continue to be measured against a comparator group of companies from the European Telecom
Annual bonus plan The bonus structure remains unchanged.
However in line with the Committees policy progressively to make a greater part of the remuneration packages variable ontarget and maximum requiring exceptional performance bonus levels for executive directors as a percentage of salary will be 105% and 192.5% respectively with approximately 43% of any bonus payable in deferred shares.
The bonus arrangements for the Chief Executive remain unchanged.
The annual bonus plan will continue to focus on annual objectives and to reward the achievement of results against those objectives.
Performance will again be against earnings per share free cash ow and customer satisfaction measures and the weighting of those objectives will be the same as in 2005 As in the nancial year 200506 for purposes of calculating earnings per share for the scorecard volatile items reported under IFRS have been excluded from the target.
Group performance targets for the nancial year 200607 are believed by the Committee to be more challenging than the outturn of the nancial year 200506.
Proportion of xed and variable remuneration The targeted composition of each executive directors performancerelated remuneration excluding pension for the nancial year 200607 comprising annual and longterm incentives will be
Base Pay Variable Total
Verwaayen 25% 75% 100%
Green 40% 60% 100%
Lalani 40% 60% 100%
Livingston 40% 60% 100%
P.
Reynolds 40% 60% 100% Total remuneration comprises base salary annual bonus  cash and deferred shares  and the expected value of awards under BTs longterm incentive plans excluding retention shares.
Openreach
In the Undertakings given to Ofcom on 22 September 2005 BT agreed that the incentive elements of the remuneration of executives within Openreach should be linked to Openreach performance rather than BT targets or share price.
These incentives cannot be provided by way of BT shares.
New arrangements have been agreed by the Committee and put in place which will give Openreach executives an opportunity to receive bonuses and longterm incentive awards of equivalent value to the bonuses and longterm incentives awarded to other BT executives.
Longterm incentives will however be paid in cash instead of BT shares.
For the nancial year 200607 the annual bonus will continue to be linked to an annual scorecard but the scorecard targets will be those of Openreach alone.
As required by the Undertakings a cash arrangement is also in place to enable Openreach executives to exchange if they wish in June 2006 their options and awards over BT shares for cash awards.
Openreach executives will continue to participate in the BT HMRCapproved allemployee share plans on the same terms as other BT employees.
In addition there would be no changes to the pension arrangements of these executives.
None of the executive directors will participate in the Openreach incentive plans.
Executive share ownership A mandatory shareholding programme was introduced for the nancial year 200506 onwards.
This is to encourage executive directors and certain other executives to build up a shareholding in the company over time by retaining shares received either as a result of participating in a BT employee share plan other than the shares sold to pay a National Insurance or income tax liability or from onmarket purchases.
The Chief Executive is required to build up a shareholding of 2 x salary and the remaining executive directors 1.5 x salary.
Given that a large part of an executives remuneration is already variable the requirement excludes the need to make a further personal investment to build up the shareholding should share plan awards not vest.
Current shareholdings are set out on page Progress towards meeting these targets has been made during the nancial year 200506.
Pensions
Those directors and other employees who joined the company prior to 1 April 2001 are members of the BT Pension Scheme which is a dened benet scheme.
The benets for the three executive directors who are members of the scheme are set out on page 58.
The Committee reviewed the impact of the Lifetime Allowance under the pension simplication legislation which came into force from 6 April 2006.
As a result BT offered those members affected the option to opt out of future accruals of pensionable service and in its place to receive a cash allowance annually.
This was broadly cash neutral for the company.
BT closed the BT Pension Scheme to new members from 1 April 2001.
From this date provision is generally made on a dened contribution basis.
The company agrees to pay a xed percentage of the executives salary each year which can be put towards the provision of retirement benets.
Additionally a lump sum equal to four times salary is payable on death in service.
The benets for the three executive directors who are covered by this are set out on page 58.
Pension provision for all executives is based on salary alone bonuses other elements of pay and longterm incentives are excluded.
Report on directors remuneration BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 53 Filename 03.3d Time 143352 Date 200506
Other benets Other benets for the Chairman and the senior management team include some or all of the following company car fuel or driver personal telecommunications facilities and home security medical and dental cover for the director and immediate family special life cover professional subscriptions and personal tax planning and nancial counselling.
The company has a permanent health insurance policy to provide cover for the Chairman and certain executive directors who may become permanently incapacitated.
Service agreements It is the policy for the Chairman and executive directors to have service agreements providing for one years notice.
It may be necessary on recruitment to offer longer initial periods to new directors from outside BT or circumstances may make it appropriate to offer a longer xed term.
All of the service agreements contain provisions dealing with the removal of a director through poor performance including in the event of early termination of the contract by BT.
Sir Christopher Blands contract expires at the conclusion of the AGM in 2007.
On termination of his contract by BT before that date he is entitled to payment of salary and the value of benets for the period of 12 months from date of termination or until the conclusion of the companys AGM in 2007 if that period is shorter.
Ben
Verwaayens contract entitles him on termination of his contract by BT to payment of 700000.
The contracts of Andy Green Hanif Lalani Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds entitle them on termination of their contract by BT to payment of salary and the value of benets until the earlier of 12 months from notice of termination or the director obtaining fulltime employment.
If
Chairman and Hanif Lalani is terminated by BT within one year of BT entering into a scheme of arrangement or becoming a subsidiary of another company he will be entitled to receive the higher of that current years ontarget bonus or the previous years bonus the market value of shares awarded under an employee share ownership plan or deferred bonus plan that have not vested together with a years salary and the value of any benets.
The Committee has reviewed contracts taking into account the joint statement of best practice on executive contracts and severance by the Association of British Insurers and the National Association of Pension Funds and other relevant guidelines and believes that contract terms are generally in line with best practice.
The clause described above dealing with termination following BT entering into a scheme of arrangement or becoming a subsidiary of another company will be excluded from contracts for new appointments as was the case for Hanif Lalani.
Outside appointments The Committee believes that there are signicant benets to both the company and the individual from executive directors accepting nonexecutive directorships of companies outside BT.
The Committee will consider up to two external appointments of which only one may be to the Board of a major company for which a director may retain the fees.
Ben Verwaayen as a nonexecutive director of United Parcel Service UPS receives an annual fee of US75000.
On joining UPSs Board on 17 March 2005 he received 336 shares of restricted UPS common stock amounting to US25000 and a further grant of 1180 shares of restricted stock on 9 May 2005 amounting to
Ian Livingston receives an annual fee of 38000 as a nonexecutive director of Ladbrokes plc formerly Hilton Group plc.
Paul Reynolds as a nonexecutive director of EAccess in Japan receives an annual fee of 3204000 approximately 15600.
He was granted an option over 250 shares at 76565 approximately 367 per share on 1 July 2005.
Andy Green was appointed a nonexecutive director of NAVTEQ in the US on 16 March 2006.
He is entitled to receive an annual fee of US40000 stock options to the value of US60000 and restricted stock units to the value of
Nonexecutive directors letters of appointment Nonexecutive directors have letters of appointment.
They are appointed for an initial period of three years.
During that period either party can give the other at least three months notice.
At the end of the period the appointment may be continued by mutual agreement.
Further details of appointment arrangements for nonexecutive directors are set out in the Report of the directors.
The letters of appointment of non executive directors are terminable on notice by the company without compensation.
Nonexecutive directors remuneration Eight of the directors on the Board are nonexecutive directors who in accordance with BTs articles of association cannot individually vote on their own remuneration.
Nonexecutive remuneration is reviewed by the Chairman and the Chief Executive and discussed and agreed by the Board.
Non executive directors may attend the Board discussion but may not participate in it.
The fees paid to nonexecutive directors were increased with effect from 1 January 2004 to reect their increasing responsibilities and time commitments.
The basic fee for nonexecutive directors is 40000 per year.
An additional fee for membership of a Board committee is 5000 per year and a further 5000 for chairing a committee.
Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman and senior non executive director who also chairs both the Remuneration Committee and the Audit Committee receives total fees of 115000 per year.
In recognition of the greater commitment required during the year it was agreed that Maarten van den Bergh and John Nelson should receive an annual fee of 5000 as members of the Pension Scheme Performance Review Group and Maarten van den Bergh should receive an additional 5000 per annum as chairman of the Group.
Carl Symon receives an annual fee of 50000 as chairman of the Equality of Access Board a Board committee which was established on 1 November 2005.
To align further the interests of the nonexecutive directors with those of shareholders the companys policy is to encourage these directors to purchase on a voluntary basis 5000 of BT shares each year.
The directors are asked to hold these shares until they retire from the Board.
This policy is not mandatory.
No element of nonexecutive remuneration is performance related.
Nonexecutive directors do not participate in BTs bonus or employee share plans and are not members of any of the company pension schemes.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Report on directors remuneration 54 Filename 03.3d Time 143353 Date 200506 Checksum tel Directors service agreements and contracts of appointment The dates on which directors initial service agreementsletters of appointment commenced and the current expiry dates are as follows Chairman and executive directors Commencement date Expiry date of current service agreement or letter of appointment Sir Christopher Bland 1 May 2001 Sir Christopher Bland entered into a new service agreement on 29 August 2003 which terminates at the conclusion of the 2007 AGM terminable on 12 months notice by either the company or the director before that date.
B Verwaayen 14 January 2002 A Green H Lalani I Livingston Dr P Reynolds 19 November 2001 7 February 2005 8 April 2002 19 November 2001 The contract is terminable by the company on 12 months notice and by the director on six months notice.
Nonexecutive directors Sir Anthony Greener M van den Bergh C Brendish Baroness Jay J Nelson C G Symon 1 October 2000 1 September 2000 1 September 2002 14 January 2002 14 January 2002 14 January 2002 Letters of appointment were for an initial period of three years.
Appointments were extended for a further three years and are terminable by the company or the director on three months notice.
L R Hughes 1 January 2000 Letter of appointment was for an initial period of three years.
The appointment was extended for a further three years and three months.
Terminated 31 March 2006.
M Alahuhta P Hodkinson 1 February 2006 1 February 2006 Letters of appointment are for an initial period of three years and are terminable by the company or the director on three months notice.
The appointment is renewable by mutual agreement.
There are no other service agreements or material contracts existing or proposed between the company and the directors.
There are no arrangements or understandings between any director or executive ofcer and any other person pursuant to which any director or executive ofcer was selected to serve.
There are no family relationships between the directors.
Report on directors remuneration BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 55 Filename 03.3d Time 143354 Date 200506 Checksum tel Directors interests The interests of directors holding ofce at the end of the year and their families in the companys shares at 31 March 2006 and 1 April 2005 or date of appointment if later are shown below
Benecial holdings 2006 2005 Sir Christopher Bland B Verwaayen 951497 902001 A Green H Lalani ab I Livingston ab Dr P Reynolds ab Sir Anthony Greener 60007 60007 M Alahuhta 20000 M van den Bergh 12040 7540 C Brendish 30920 23920 P Hodkinson 4622 L R Hughes 6800 6800 Baroness Jay 8214 J Nelson 50000 50000 C G Symon 15069 10069 Total 2411591 2246649 During the period from 1 April 2006 to 15 May 2006 Paul Reynolds and Hanif Lalani each purchased 692 shares and Ian Livingston purchased 1394 shares under the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan.
Includes free shares awarded under the Employee Share Investment Plan.
At 31 March 2006 Sir Christopher Bland and each of the executive directors as potential beneficiaries had a nonbeneficial interest in 24809976 shares 2005  27733138 held in trust by Ilford Trustees Jersey Limited for allocation to employees under the employee share schemes.
They each also had a nonbeneficial interest in 50342 shares 2005  139029 held in trust by Halifax Corporate Trustees Limited for participants in the Employee Share Investment Plan.
Matti Alahuhta and Phil Hodkinson joined the Board on 1 February 2006.
On 2 May 2006 Baroness Jay inherited 261 shares.
The directors as a group benecially own less than 1% of the companys ordinary shares.
Performance graph This graph illustrates as required by the Companies Act 1985 the performance of BT Group plc measured by TSR adjusted for the rights issue and the demerger of BTs mobile business in the nancial year 200102 relative to a broad equity market index over the past ve years.
We consider the FTSE 100 to be the most appropriate index against which to measure performance for these purposes as BT has been a constituent of the FTSE 100 throughout the veyear period and the index is widely used.
TSR is the measure of the returns that a company has provided for its shareholders reecting share price movements and assuming reinvestment of dividends.
Mar
31 Mar 31 Mar 31 Mar 31 Mar 31 Mar BTs total shareholder return TSR performance over the five financial years to 31 March 2006 Source Datastream 1 April 2001  100 BT FTSE 100 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Report on directors remuneration 56 Filename 03.3d Time 143356 Date 200506
REMUNERATION REVIEW This part of the Report on directors remuneration is subject to audit.
Directors emoluments Directors emoluments for the nancial year 200506 were as follows
Pension allowance net of pension Total salary Annual Expenses
Sir Christopher Bland B Verwaayen bc 70tel 32 1694 1512 1316 224 A Green H Lalani cd I Livingston bc 52tel19 10 1Dr P Reynolds bcf Sir Anthony Greener 115  115  115 115 M Alahuhta 8  8  8 M van den Bergh 59  59  59 55 C Brendish 50  50  50 50 P Hodkinson 8  8  8 L R Hughes 38  38  38 21 Baroness Jay 50  50  50 50 J Nelson 52  52  52 50 C G Symon 87  87  87 50 3525 314 3839 2284 38 165 6326 4795 Balance or part of the pension allowance for the financial year 200506  see Pensions below.
Retirement benefits are accruing to three directors under defined contribution arrangements and to three directors and one former director under defined benefit arrangements.
Expenses allowance in the above table includes a monthly cash allowance in lieu of a company car equivalent to 18500 received by Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds.
Ben Verwaayen was entitled to an annual housing allowance of 250000 until 13 January 2005.
In the financial year 200405 196000 was paid in respect of that year.
Other benefits includes some or all of the following company car fuel or driver personal telecommunications facilities and home security medical and dental cover for the director and immediate family special life cover professional subscriptions and personal tax planning and financial counselling.
In addition Paul Reynolds had an interest free loan  see Loans below.
Hanif Lalani joined the Board on 7 February 2005.
Deferred annual bonuses payable in shares in three years time subject to continued employment.
Paul Reynolds sacrificed 225000 of his total bonus of 360000 and the company paid an equivalent amount into the BT Pension Scheme to provide him with additional benefits on a defined contribution basis.
Report on directors remuneration BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 57 Filename 03.3d Time 143357 Date 200506
The annual salaries of the Chairman Ben Verwaayen Andy Green Ian Livingston and Hanif Lalani remained unchanged during the nancial year 200506.
On 1 August 2005 the annual salary of Paul Reynolds was increased from 400000 to 450000.
Following this years salary review the Committee decided that there should be no general increase from 1 June 2006 in basic salaries save that Ben Verwaayens annual salary will be increased from 700000 to 750000 and Hanif Lalanis annual salary will be increased from 400000 to 460000 both on 1 June 2006.
A special retention arrangement was established for Hanif Lalani on 1 July 2004 when he was CFO BT Wholesale under which he will receive a lump sum cash payment of 150000 on 30 June 2006 provided he is still an employee of the company on that date.
The award will be forfeited without compensation if Mr Lalani resigns or his employment is terminated by the company with cause before that date.
Annual cash bonus awards in respect of the nancial year 200506 which are not pensionable to executive directors ranged from 80% to 112% of current salary 2005  38% to 64%.
Former directors Sir Peter Boneld received under preexisting arrangements a pension of 352153 payable in the nancial year 200506 200405  340000.
Loans
Prior to the date of his appointment to the Board on 19 November 2001 Paul Reynolds had an interestfree loan of 300000 from the company to assist with relocation.
At
31 March 2006 he owed 200000 2005  230000.
During the nancial year 200506 the maximum amount outstanding was 230000.
There are no outstanding loans granted by any member of the BT group to any other of the directors or guarantees provided by any member of the BT group for their benet.
The outstanding amount of a loan of 209374 granted to a former director Pierre Danon was repaid during the year.
Pensions
Sir Christopher Bland is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company matches his contributions up to 10% of the earnings cap to a personal pension plan.
Company contributions of 10560 were payable in respect of the nancial year 200506.
The earnings cap is a restriction on the amount of pay which can be used to calculate contributions and benets due to a tax approved pension scheme.
Ben Verwaayen is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company has agreed to pay an annual amount equal to 30% of his salary towards pension provision.
The company paid 31680 into his personal pension plan the maximum permitted by HMRC plus a cash payment of 178320 representing the balance of the pension allowance for the nancial year 200506.
BT also provides him with a lump sum death in service benet of four times his salary.
Ian Livingston is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company has agreed to pay an annual amount equal to 30% of his salary towards pension provision.
The company paid 21120 into his personal pension plan the maximum permitted by HMRC plus a cash payment of 136380 representing the balance of the pension allowance for the nancial year 200506.
BT also provides him with a lump sum death in service benet of four times his salary.
Andy Green is a member of the BT Pension Scheme.
From
31 December 1997 the company has been purchasing an additional 203 days of pensionable service each year to bring his pensionable service at age 60 up to 40 years.
A twothirds widows pension would be payable on his death.
Hanif Lalani is a member of the BT Pension Scheme.
From
7 February 2005 the company has been purchasing an additional 27 days of pensionable service each year to bring his pensionable service at age 60 up to 40 years.
A twothirds widows pension would be payable on his death.
He chose to opt out of future accrual of pensionable service from 1 April 2006 and in its place to receive a cash allowance of 30% of salary.
Paul Reynolds is a member of the BT Pension Scheme.
From
1 July 1996 the company has been purchasing an additional 109 days of pensionable service each year to bring his pensionable service at age 60 up to 40 years.
A twothirds widows pension would be payable on his death.
He chose to opt out of future accrual of pensionable service from 1 April 2006 and in its place to receive a cash allowance of 30% of salary.
The table below shows the increase in the accrued benets including those referred to above to which each director who is a member of the BT Pension Scheme has become entitled during the year and the transfer value of the increase in accrued benets Accrued pension Transfer value of accrued benets Change in transfer value cd less directors contributions
Transfer value of increase in accrued benets less directors contributionsteltel 2006 A Green 157 131 2448 1H Lalani
P Reynolds 140 123 1995 1ad As required by the Companies Act 1985 Schedule 7A.
These amounts represent the deferred pension to which the directors would have been entitled had they left the company on 31 March 2006 and 2005 respectively.
Transfer value of the deferred pension in column a as at 31 March 2006 calculated on the basis of actuarial advice in accordance with Actuarial Guidance Note GN11.
The transfer value represents a liability of the BT Pension Scheme rather than any remuneration due to the individual and cannot be meaningfully aggregated with annual remuneration as it is not money the individual is entitled to receive.
The equivalent transfer value but calculated as at 31 March 2005 on the assumption that the director left service at that date.
The increase in pension built up during the year net of inflation.
The gross amount can be calculated by deducting the amount under column b from the amount under column a.
The transfer value of the pension in column e less directors contributions.
Directors contributions in the financial year 200506 were as follows Andy Green 30000.
2005  26625 Hanif Lalani 24000 2005  16300 and Paul Reynolds 26000 2005  24000.
Hanif Lalani joined the Board on 7 February 2005.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Report on directors remuneration 58 Filename 03.3d Time 143358 Date 200506 Checksum tel Share options held at 31 March 2006 Number of shares under option 1 April 2005 Granted Lapsed 31 March 2006 Option price per share Usual date from which exercisable Usual expiry date Sir Christopher Bland 314244 314244 318p 01052004 01052011 B Verwaayen 1121121 1121121 250p 01042005 11022012 935830 187p 29072005 29072012 1052632 199.5p 24062006 24062013 546875 192p 24062007 24062014 3656458  3656458 A Green 568190 568190 187p 29072005 29072012 639098 199.5p 24062006 24062013 332032 192p 24062007 24062014 5712 165p 14082007 13022008 1545032  1545032 H Lalani 177810 177810 187p 29072005 29072012 210527 199.5p 24062006 24062013 156250 192p 24062007 24062014 5346 173p 14082006 13022007 105264 199.5p 24062004 24062013 655197  655197 I Livingston 601610 601610 187p 29072005 29072012 676692 199.5p 24062006 24062013 351563 192p 24062007 24062014 7290 227p 14082007 13022008 1637155  1637155 Dr P Reynolds 534760 534760 187p 29072005 29072012 601504 199.5p 24062006 24062013 312500 192p 24062007 24062014 4555 218p 14022007 13082007 1453319  1453319 Total 9261405  9261405 All of the above options were granted for nil consideration.
No options were exercised during the year.
Options granted under the GSOP on 22 June 2001.
The option is not subject to a performance measure.
It was a term of Sir Christopher Blands initial service contract that i he purchased BT shares to the value of at least 1 million and ii as soon as practicable after the purchase of the shares invested shares the company would grant a share option over shares to the value of at least 1 million.
Sir Christopher Bland was the legal and beneficial owner of the invested shares on 1 May 2004 so the option became exercisable on that date.
Option granted under the GSOP on 11 February 2002.
The exercise of the option is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100 as at 1 April 2002.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the option to become exercisable.
At median 40% of the option will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the option may be exercised.
On 31 March 2005 BTs TSR was at 74th position against the FTSE 100 and on 31 March 2006 BTs TSR was at 73rd position against the FTSE 100.
As a result the option did not become exercisable.
The TSR will be retested against a fixed base on 31 March 2007.
Options granted under the GSOP on 29 July 2002.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100 as at 1 April 2002.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to become exercisable.
At median 30% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
On 31 March 2005 BTs TSR was at 74th position against the FTSE 100 and on 31 March 2006 BTs TSR was at 73rd position against the FTSE 100.
As a result the options did not become exercisable.
The TSR will be retested against a fixed base on 31 March 2007 Options granted under the GSOP on 24 June 2003.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100 as at 1 April 2003.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to become exercisable.
At median 30% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
On 31 March 2006 BTs TSR was at 85th position against the FTSE 100.
As a result the options did not become exercisable.
The TSR will be retested against a fixed base on 31 March 2008.
Options granted under the GSOP on 24 June 2004.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with a group of companies from the European Telecom Sector as at 1 April 2004.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all the options to become exercisable.
At median 30% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
Option granted on 25 June 2004 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Option granted on 27 June 2003 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Option granted under the GSOP Special Incentive Award on 24 June 2003 prior to Mr Lalanis appointment as a director.
This option is not subject to a performance measure as the grant was linked to personal performance.
Option granted on 25 June 2002 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Option granted on 21 December 2001 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
The market price of a share at 31 March 2006 was 222p 2005  205.5p and the range during the nancial year 200506 was From 31 March 2006 two thirds of Hanif Lalanis option granted on 24 June 2003 was exercisable giving an unrealised gain as at that date of 15790.
There were no further unrealised gains on the above share options at 31 March 2006 2005  2105 based on the market price of the shares on 31 March 2006.
Report on directors remuneration BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 59 Filename 03.3d Time 143359 Date 200506
Share awards under longterm incentive plans held at 31 March 2006 Details of the companys ordinary shares provisionally awarded to directors as participants under the ISP and RSP are as follows 1 April 2005 Awarded
Lapsed
Total number of award shares 31 March
Market price at vesting
Sir Christopher Bland RSP 2003 299753  15032  314785 2007 B Verwaayen ISP 2004 252798  12677  265475 310307 193.42p ISP 2005  307354 15413  322767 310308 227.75p A Green ISP 2004 153484  7696  161180 310307 193.42p ISP 2005  219538 11008  230546 310308 227.75p H Lalani ISP 2004 72224  3621  75845 310307 193.42p ISP 2005  175631 8807  184438 310308 227.75p I Livingston ISP 2004 162512  8149  170661 310307 193.42p ISP 2005  230515 11559  242074 310308 227.75p RSP 2002 183698  183698   200505 273.5p 212.25p 390 RSP 2002 123307  123307   200505 202.0p 212.25p 262 RSP 2005 511169 25634  536803 091107 213.25p Dr P Reynolds ISP 2004 144456  7244  151700 310307 193.42p ISP 2005  175631 8807  184438 310308 227.75p The number of shares subject to awards granted during the financial year 200506 was calculated using the average middle market price of a BT share for the three days prior to the grant.
Awards under the ISP were granted on 3 August 2005.
The awards will vest subject to meeting a performance target on 31 March 2008.
The performance target is relative TSR compared with a group of companies from the European Telecom Sector.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the awards to vest.
At median 25% of the shares will vest.
Below that point none of the shares will vest.
In accordance with his service agreement an award of 493601 shares with an initial value of 1350000 was granted on 30 May 2002 to Ian Livingston under the RSP.
This award vested in three equal tranches on the first three anniversaries of his joining BT.
Ian Livingston purchased BT shares with a value of 300000 on 20 May 2002 and was granted an award on that date under the RSP with a value of 300000 which vested on the third anniversary of the date of purchase of his purchased shares.
Ian Livingston was granted an award under the RSP on 31 May 2005.
The award will vest in two tranches 50% on 10 November 2006 and 50% on 9 November 2007.
Vesting of RSP awards is not subject to a performance target being met.
The award under the RSP granted to Sir Christopher Bland on 1 September 2003 will vest subject to continued employment at the conclusion of the 2007 AGM.
Vesting of outstanding share awards and options Details of options granted under the GSOP in the nancial years 200203 and 200304 which would vest based on BT Groups TSR compared with the other companies in the FTSE 100 for the relevant performance periods up to 31 March 2006 and details of options granted under the GSOP in the nancial year 200405 and awards of shares under the ISP in the nancial years 200405 and 200506 which would vest based on BT Groups TSR compared with a group of companies from the European Telecom Sector for the relevant performance periods up to 31 March 2006 are as follows 31 March 2006 31 March 2005 Expected vesting date TSR position Percentage of shares vesting TSR position Percentage of shares vesting GSOP 2002 290705 73  74 GSOP 2003 240606 85  84 GSOP 2004 240607 9 44% 11 ISP 2004 310307 9 40% 11 ISP 2005 310308 8 55% The options are not exercisable because the performance target has not been met see note c to the table on page 59.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Report on directors remuneration 60 Filename 03.3d Time 143400 Date 200506
Deferred Bonus Plan awards at 31 March 2006 The following deferred bonuses have been awarded to the directors under the Deferred Bonus Plan.
These shares will normally be transferred to participants at the end of the threeyear deferred period if those participants are still employed by BT Group.
1 April 2005 Awarded
Dividends reinvested Lapsed Total number of award shares 31 March
Market price at vesting
B Verwaayen 84009  84009    202.0p 225.5p 189 464390  23289  487679 010806 199.5p 232625  11665  244290 010807 193.42p 98461  4937  103398 010808 227.75p A Green 55268  55268    202.0p 225.5p 125 83799  4202  88001 010806 199.5p 91087  4567  95654 010807 193.42p 44731  2243  46974 010808 227.75p H Lalani 12985  12985    202.0p 225.5p 29 26396  1322  27718 010806 199.5p 27339  1370  28709 010807 193.42p 29957  1502  31459 010808 227.75p I Livingston 92291  4627  96918 010806 199.5p 87967  4411  92378 010807 193.42p 43440  2177  45617 010808 227.75p Dr P Reynolds 49740  49740    202.0p 225.5p 112 78868  3954  82822 010806 199.5p 79985  4010  83995 010807 193.42p 46774  2345  49119 010808 227.75p The number of shares subject to awards granted during the financial year 200506 was calculated using the average middle market price of a BT share for the three days prior to the grant.
Awards granted on 3 August 2005 in respect of the financial year 200405.
Awards granted on 24 June 2002 vested on 1 August 2005.
Details of deferred bonus awards in respect of the financial year 200506 are given in the table on page 57.
Awards in respect of the deferred bonuses will be granted in June 2006.
The number of shares subject to the awards will be calculated using the average middle market price of a BT share for the three days prior to the grant.
Share awards under the Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP at 31 March 2006 1 April 2005 Awarded Vested Total number of award shares 31 March 2006
Sir Christopher Bland ESIP 2003 186  186 050808 ESIP 2004 116  116 040809 ESIP 2005  56 56 2706A Green ESIP 2002 130  130 140807 ESIP 2003 186  186 050808 ESIP 2004 116  116 040809 ESIP 2005  56 56 270610 H Lalani ESIP 2002 130  130 140807 ESIP 2003 186  186 050808 ESIP 2004 116  116 040809 ESIP 2005  56 56 270610 I Livingston ESIP 2004 116  116 040809 ESIP 2005  56 56 270610 P Reynolds ESIP 2002 130  130 140807 ESIP 2003 186  186 050808 ESIP 2004 116  116 040809 ESIP 2005  56 56 270610 Awards granted on 27 June 2005.
On that date the market price of a BT share was 220p.
Operating Committee The one member of the Operating Committee OC who was not a member of the Board left the company on 30 September 2005.
The remuneration of that OC member for the nancial year 200506 was 148000 200405  296000 together with pension contributions of 17000 200405  34000.
No options or awards under the BT Group plans were granted to the OC member during the nancial year 200506.
The company met its contractual obligations in connection with the leaving arrangements and a number of outstanding options and share awards of the OC member were preserved under the terms of the relevant plans.
By order of the Board Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman and Chairman of Remuneration Committee 17 May 2006 Report on directors remuneration BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 61 Filename 04.3d Time 143405 Date 200506
The directors are responsible for preparing the groups nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union EU and for preparing the parent company nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
The directors are responsible for preparing nancial statements for each nancial year which give a true and fair view in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU of the state of affairs of the group and of the prot or loss of the group and a true and fair view in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice UK GAAP of the state of affairs of the company and of the prot or loss of the company for that period.
In preparing those nancial statements the directors are required to s select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently s make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent s state whether the group nancial statements comply with IFRS as adopted by the EU and with regard to the parent company nancial statements whether applicable accounting standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the nancial statements and s prepare the group nancial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the group will continue in business.
The directors conrm that they have complied with the above requirements in preparing the nancial statements.
The directors are responsible for keeping proper accounting records that disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the company and the group and to enable them to ensure that the group nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 1985 and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and the parent company nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 1985.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the company and the group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and nancial information included on the groups website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of nancial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITY for preparing the nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Statement of directors responsibility 62 Filename 04.3d Time 143407 Date 200506
UNITED KINGDOM OPINION Independent auditors report to the members of BT Group plc We have audited the group nancial statements of BT Group plc for the year ended 31 March 2006 which comprise the group income statement the group balance sheet the group cash ow statement the group statement of recognised income and expense accounting policies and the related notes.
These group nancial statements are set out on pages 65 to 122.
These group nancial statements have been prepared under the accounting policies set out therein.
We have reported separately on the parent company nancial statements of BT Group plc for the year ended 31 March 2006 and on the information in the Report on directors remuneration that is described as having been audited.
This separate report is set out on page 123.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditors The directors responsibilities for preparing the annual report and the group nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union EU are set out in the statement of directors responsibilities.
Our responsibility is to audit the group nancial statements in accordance with relevant legal and regulatory requirements and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
This report including the opinion has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Section 235 of the Companies Act 1985 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving this opinion accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
We report to you our opinion as to whether the group nancial statements give a true and fair view and whether the group nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We report to you whether in our opinion the information given in the Report of the directors is consistent with the group nancial statements.
The information given in the directors report includes that specic information presented in the operating and nancial review that is cross referred from the Report of the directors.
We also report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or if information specied by law regarding directors remuneration and other transactions is not disclosed.
We review whether the corporate governance statement reects the companys compliance with the nine provisions of the 2003 FRC Combined Code specied for our review by the Listing Rules of the Financial Services Authority and we report if it does not.
We are not required to consider whether the boards statements on internal control cover all risks and controls or form an opinion on the effectiveness of the groups corporate governance procedures or its risk and control procedures.
We read other information contained in the Annual Report and consider whether it is consistent with the audited group nancial statements.
The other information comprises only the Financial headlines Chairmans message Chief Executives statement the Operating and nancial review the Report of the directors the Report of the audit committee the Report of the nominating committee and the unaudited part of the Report on directors remuneration.
We consider the implications for our report if we become aware of any apparent misstatements or material inconsistencies with the group nancial statements.
Our responsibilities do not extend to any other information.
Basis of audit opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland issued by the Auditing Practices Board.
An audit includes examination on a test basis of evidence relevant to the amounts and disclosures in the group nancial statements.
It also includes an assessment of the signicant estimates and judgments made by the directors in the preparation of the group nancial statements and of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the groups circumstances consistently applied and adequately disclosed.
We planned and performed our audit so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered necessary in order to provide us with sufcient evidence to give reasonable assurance that the group nancial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or other irregularity or error.
In forming our opinion we also evaluated the overall adequacy of the presentation of information in the group nancial statements.
Opinion
In our opinion s the group nancial statements give a true and fair view in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union of the state of the groups affairs as at 31 March 2006 and of its prot and cash ows for the year then ended s the group nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and s the information given in the Report of the directors is consistent with the group nancial statements.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors
17 May 2006 UNITED STATES OPINION Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm to the board of directors and shareholders of BT Group plc In our opinion the accompanying group balance sheets and the related group statements of income of cash ows and of statements of recognised income and expenses present fairly in all material respects the nancial position of BT Group plc and its subsidiaries at 31 March 2006 and 2005 and the results of their operations and their cash ows for each of the two years in the period ended 31 March 2006 in conformity with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union
These nancial statements are the responsibility of the groups management our responsibility is to express an opinion on these nancial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits of these statements in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States which require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the nancial statements are free of material misstatement.
An audit includes examining on a test basis evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the nancial statements assessing the accounting principles used and signicant estimates made by management and evaluating the overall nancial statement presentation.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
As discussed in the accounting policies section to the nancial statements the group has adopted prospectively from 1 April 2005 International Accounting Standards IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the
IFRS as adopted by the EU vary in certain signicant respects from accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Information relating to the nature and effect of such differences is presented in the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles note within the notes to the consolidated nancial statements note 35.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors
17 May 2006 REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS Report of the independent auditors BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 63 Filename 04.3d Time 143408 Date 200506
The consolidated nancial statements are divided into the following sections 65 Accounting policies 73 Group income statement 74 Group statement of recognised income and expense 75 Group cash ow statement 76 Group balance sheet 77 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 77 Segmental analysis 79 Other operating income 80 Operating costs 80 Specic items 81 Finance income and nance expense 81 Taxation 82 Dividends 82 Earnings per share 83 Cash and cash equivalents 83 Net debt 84 Free cash ow 84 Acquisitions 88 Intangible assets 89 Property plant and equipment 90 Investments 91 Associates and joint ventures 91 Trade and other receivables 92 Loans and other borrowings 93 Derivative nancial instruments 93 Trade and other payables 94 Provisions 94 Deferred taxation 95 Minority interests 95 Reconciliation of movements in equity 96 Share capital 96 Other reserves and retained earnings 97 Related party transactions 97 Financial commitments and contingent liabilities 98 Retirement benet plans 101 Employees 101 Sharebased payment 104 Audit services 105 Financial instruments and risk management 111 Explanation of transition to IFRS 114 United States generally accepted accounting principles 122 Glossary of terms and US equivalents CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Consolidated nancial statements 64 Filename 04.3d Time 143408 Date 200506
I BASIS OF PREPARATION OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS These group nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union
For BT there are no differences between IFRS as adopted for use in the EU and full IFRS as published by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB.
The nancial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention modied for the revaluation of certain nancial assets and liabilities at fair value.
Where there are signicant differences to US GAAP these have been described in note 35.
IFRS 1 Firsttime Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards has been applied in preparing these group nancial statements.
These are the groups rst nancial statements to be prepared in accordance with IFRS note 34 describes how the directors have applied the rsttime adoption provisions as set out in IFRS 1.
The policies set out below have been consistently applied to all the years presented with the exception of those relating to nancial instruments under IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement which have been applied with effect from 1 April 2005.
The preparation of nancial statements in conformity with IFRS requires the use of accounting estimates.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the groups accounting policies.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity or areas where assumptions and estimates are signicant to the consolidated nancial statements are disclosed below in Critical accounting estimates and key judgements.
The groups income statement and segmental analysis separately identies material oneoff or unusual items termed specic items.
This is in accordance with IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements and is consistent with the way that nancial performance is measured by management and assists in providing a meaningful analysis of the trading results of the group.
Specic items may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Items which have been considered material oneoff or unusual in nature include disposals of businesses and investments business restructuring and property rationalisation programmes.
The directors intend to follow such a presentation on a consistent basis in the future.
Specic items for the current and prior year are disclosed in note 4.
Accounting policies in respect of the parent company information for BT Group plc are set out on page 124.
These are in accordance with UK GAAP.
II BASIS OF CONSOLIDATION The group nancial statements consolidate the nancial statements of BT Group plc the company and entities controlled by the company its subsidiaries and incorporate its share of the results of jointly controlled entities joint ventures and associates using the equity method of accounting.
The results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are consolidated from the effective date of acquisition or up to the effective date of disposal as appropriate.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the nancial statements of subsidiaries associates and joint ventures to bring the accounting policies used into line with those used by the group.
All intragroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Investments in associates and joint ventures are carried at cost plus postacquisition changes in the groups share of the net assets or liabilities of the associate or joint venture less any impairment in value in individual investments.
The income statement reects the groups share of the results of operations after tax of the associate or joint venture using the equity method of accounting.
The groups principal operating subsidiaries and associate are detailed on page 127.
III REVENUE Revenue represents the fair value of the consideration received or receivable for services provided and equipment sales net of discounts and sales taxes.
Revenue from the sale of equipment and rendering of services is recognised when it is probable that the economic benets associated with a transaction will ow to the group and the amount of revenue and the associated costs incurred or to be incurred can be measured reliably.
Where the group acts as agent in a transaction amounts collected on behalf of the principal are excluded from revenue.
Revenue arising from separable installation and connection activities is recognised when it is earned upon activation.
Revenue from the rental of analogue and digital lines and private circuits is recognised evenly over the period to which the charges relate.
Revenue from calls is recognised at the time the call is made over the groups networks.
Subscription fees consisting primarily of monthly charges for access to broadband and other internet access or voice services are recognised as revenue over the associated subscription period.
Revenue arising from the interconnection of voice and data trafc between other telecommunications operators is recognised at the time of transit across the groups network.
Sales of peripheral and other equipment are recognised when all of the signicant risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the buyer which is normally the date the equipment is delivered and accepted by the customer.
Revenue and costs from long term contractual arrangements are recognised based on the percentage of completion method.
The stage of completion is estimated using an appropriate measure according to the nature of the contract.
For xed price contracts revenue and costs are recognised on the proportional performance basis.
For milestone based contracts revenue and costs are recognised at the time a milestone is achieved and accepted by the customer.
In the case of time and materials contracts revenue and costs are recognised as the service is rendered.
An element of the costs incurred in the initial phase of contracts may be deferred when they relate directly to the specic contract relate to future activity of the contract and will generate future economic benets.
The percentage of completion method relies on estimates of total expected contract revenues and costs as well as reliable measurement of the progress made towards completion.
Unless the nancial outcome of a contract can be estimated with reasonable certainty no attributable prot is recognised.
Recognised revenue and prots are subject to revisions during the contract in the event that the assumptions regarding the overall contract outcome are changed.
The cumulative impact of a revision in estimates is recorded in the period in which such revisions become likely and can be estimated.
Where the actual and estimated costs to completion exceed the estimated revenue for a contract the full contract life loss is immediately recognised.
Where a contractual arrangement consists of two or more separate elements that have value to the customer on a standalone basis revenue is recognised for each element as if it ACCOUNTING POLICIES Accounting policies BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 65 Filename 04.3d Time 143408 Date 200506 were an individual contract.
The total contract consideration is allocated between the separate elements on the basis of fair value and the appropriate revenue recognition criteria applied to each element as described above.
IV LEASES Leases of property plant and equipment where the group holds substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership are classied as nance leases.
Finance lease assets are capitalised at the commencement of the lease at the lower of the present value of the minimum lease payments or the fair value of the leased asset.
The obligations relating to nance leases net of nance charges in respect of future periods are recognised as liabilities.
Leases are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
If a sale and leaseback transaction results in a nance lease any excess of sale proceeds over the carrying amount is deferred and recognised in the income statement over the lease term.
Leases where a signicant portion of the risks and rewards are held by the lessor are classied as operating leases.
Rentals are charged to the income statement on a straight line basis over the period of the lease.
If a sale and leaseback transaction results in an operating lease any prot or loss is recognised in the income statement immediately.
V FOREIGN CURRENCIES Items included in the nancial statements of each of the groups entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency.
The consolidated nancial statements are presented in sterling the functional and presentation currency of the group.
Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the date of the transaction.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at year end exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the income statement in the line which most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
However where monetary items form part of the net investment in a foreign operation or are designated as hedges of a net investment or from 1 April 2005 as cash ow hedges such exchange differences are initially recognised in equity.
On consolidation assets and liabilities of foreign undertakings are translated into sterling at year end exchange rates.
The results of foreign undertakings are translated into sterling at average rates of exchange for the year unless this average is not a reasonable approximation of the cumulative effects of the rates prevailing on the transaction dates in which case income and expenses are translated at the dates of the transactions.
Foreign exchange differences arising on retranslation are recognised directly in a separate component of equity the translation reserve.
At the date of transition to IFRS the cumulative translation differences for foreign operations have been set to zero.
In the event of the disposal of an undertaking with assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency the cumulative translation difference associated with the undertaking in the translation reserve is charged or credited to the gain or loss on disposal.
VI BUSINESS COMBINATIONS AND GOODWILL The purchase method of accounting is used to account for the acquisition of subsidiaries.
On transition to IFRS the group has elected not to apply IFRS 3 Business Combinations retrospectively to acquisitions that occurred before 1 April 2004.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition of a business which occurred between 1 January 1998 and 1 April 2004 is included in the balance sheet at original cost less accumulated amortisation to the date of transition and any provisions for impairment.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition of a business which occurred prior to 1 January 1998 was written off directly to retained earnings.
From the date of transition goodwill is not amortised but is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired.
On the acquisition of a subsidiary undertaking joint venture or associate from the transition date fair values are attributed to the acquired identiable tangible and intangible assets liabilities and contingent liabilities.
Goodwill which is capitalised represents the difference between the fair value of purchase consideration and the acquired interest in the fair values of those net assets.
Any negative goodwill is credited to the income statement in the year of acquisition.
Gains and losses on disposal of an entity include the carrying amount of goodwill relating to the entity or investment sold.
Goodwill previously written off to retained earnings is not recycled to the income statement on disposal of an undertaking.
VII OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS Other intangible assets include licence fees trademarks brands customer relationships licences development costs and computer software.
When intangible assets are acquired in a business combination their cost is generally based on fair market values.
Costs directly associated with the development of computer software for internal use are capitalised where technical feasibility can be demonstrated the group is satised that future economic benets will ow to the group and the cost can be separately identied and reliably measured.
Intangible assets are amortised on a straight line basis at rates sufcient to write off the cost less any estimated residual value over their estimated useful lives.
Licence fees paid to governments which permit telecommunication activities to be operated for dened periods are amortised from the time the network is available for use to the end of the licence period on a straight line basis.
Subscriber acquisition costs are expensed as incurred unless they meet the criteria for capitalisation in which case the costs are capitalised and amortised over the shorter of the estimated customer life or contractual period.
The estimated useful lives assigned to the principal categories of intangible assets are as follows Telecommunication licences 1 to 5 years Brands customer lists and customer relationships 3 to 15 years Computer software 2 to 5 years VIII RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT Research expenditure is recognised in the income statement in the year in which it is incurred.
Development expenditure including internally developed software is recognised in the income statement in the year in which it is incurred unless it is probable that economic benets will ow to the group from the asset being developed the cost of the asset can be reliably measured and technical feasibility BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Accounting policies 66 Filename 04.3d Time 143408 Date 200506 Checksum tel can be demonstrated.
When the recognition criteria are met intangible assets are capitalised and amortised on a straight line basis over their estimated useful lives from the time the assets are available for use.
IX PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Property plant and equipment is included in the balance sheet at historic cost less accumulated depreciation and any provisions for impairment.
Cost
Included within the cost for network assets are direct labour contractors charges materials payments on account and directly attributable overheads.
Depreciation
Depreciation is provided on property plant and equipment on a straight line basis from the time the assets are available for use so as to write off their costs over their estimated useful lives taking into account any expected residual values.
No depreciation is provided on freehold land.
The lives assigned to principal categories of assets are as follows Freehold buildings 40 years Leasehold land and buildings Unexpired portion of lease or 40 years whichever is the shorter Transmission equipment Duct 25 years Cable 3 to 25 years Radio and repeater equipment 2 to 25 years Exchange equipment 2 to 13 years Computers and ofce equipment 3 to 6 years Payphones other network equipment motor vehicles and cableships 2 to 20 years Assets held under nance leases are depreciated over the shorter of the lease term or their useful economic life.
Residual values and useful lives are reassessed annually and if necessary changes are recognised prospectively.
X ASSET IMPAIRMENT NONFINANCIAL ASSETS Intangible assets with nite useful lives and property plant and equipment are tested for impairment if events or changes in circumstances assessed at each reporting date indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
When an impairment test is conducted the recoverable amount is assessed by reference to the higher of the net present value of expected future cash ows value in use of the relevant cash generating unit and the fair value less cost to sell.
Goodwill and other intangible xed assets with an indenite useful life are tested for impairment at least annually.
If a cash generating unit is impaired provision is made to reduce the carrying amount of the related assets to their estimated recoverable amount.
Impairment losses are allocated rstly against goodwill and secondly on a pro rata basis against intangible and other assets.
Where an impairment loss is recognised against an asset it may be reversed in future periods where there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the recoverable amount since the last impairment loss was recognised except in respect of impairment of goodwill which may not be reversed in any circumstances.
XI INVENTORY Inventory mainly comprises items of equipment held for sale or rental and consumable items.
Equipment held and consumable items are stated at the lower of cost and estimated net realisable value after provisions for obsolescence.
Cost is calculated on a rstinrstout basis.
XII TERMINATION BENEFITS Termination benets are payable when employment is terminated before the normal retirement date or when an employee accepts voluntary redundancy in exchange for these benets.
The group recognises termination benets when it is demonstrably committed to the employees leaving the group.
XIII POST RETIREMENT BENEFITS The group operates a funded dened benet pension scheme which is administered by an independent trustee for the majority of its employees.
The groups net obligation in respect of dened benet pension schemes is calculated separately for each scheme by estimating the amount of future benet that employees have earned in return for their service to date.
That benetis discounted to determine its present value and the fair value of any plan assets is deducted.
The discount rate used is the yield at the balance sheet date on AA credit rated bonds that have maturity dates approximating the terms of the groups obligations.
The calculation is performed by a qualied actuary using the projected unit credit method.
The net obligation recognised in the balance sheet is the present value of the dened benet obligation less the fair value of the scheme assets.
The income statement charge is split between an operating charge and a net nance charge.
The operating charge reects the service costs which are spread systematically over the working lives of the employees.
The net nance charge relates to the unwinding of the discount applied to the liabilities of the scheme offset by the expected return on the assets of the scheme based on conditions prevailing at the start of the year.
Actuarial gains and losses are recognised in full in the period in which they occur and are presented in the statement of recognised income and expense.
Actuarial valuations of the main dened benet scheme are carried out by an independent actuary as determined by the trustees at intervals of not more than three years to determine the rates of contribution payable.
The pension cost is determined on the advice of the groups actuary having regard to the results of these valuations.
In any intervening years the actuaries review the continuing appropriateness of the contribution rates.
The group also operates dened contribution pension schemes and the income statement is charged with the contributions payable.
XIV SHARE BASED PAYMENTS The group has a number of employee share schemes and share option plans under which it makes equity settled share based payments to certain employees.
The fair value of options granted is recognised as an employee expense after taking into account the companys best estimate of the number of awards expected to vest allowing for non market and service conditions.
Fair value is measured at the date of grant and is spread over the vesting period of the award.
The fair value of options granted is measured using either the Binomial or Monte Carlo model whichever is most appropriate to the award.
Any proceeds received are credited to share capital and share Accounting policies BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 67 Filename 04.3d Time 143409 Date 200506 premium when the options are exercised.
The group has applied IFRS 2 Share based payment retrospectively to all options granted after 7 November 2002 and not fully vested at 1 January 2005.
XV TAXATION Current tax including UK corporation tax and foreign tax is provided at amounts expected to be paid or recovered using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantially enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is recognised using the liability method in respect of temporary differences between the carrying amount of the groups assets and liabilities and their tax base.
Deferred tax liabilities are offset against deferred tax assets within the same taxable entity or qualifying local tax group.
Any remaining deferred tax asset is recognised only when on the basis of all available evidence it can be regarded as probable that there will be suitable taxable prots within the same jurisdiction in the foreseeable future against which the deductible temporary difference can be utilised.
Deferred tax is determined using tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods in which the asset is realised or liability settled based on tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantially enacted by the balance sheet date.
Current and deferred tax are recognised in the income statement except when the tax relates to items charged or credited directly in equity in which case the tax is also recognised in equity.
XVI DIVIDENDS Final dividends are recognised as a liability in the year in which they are declared and approved by the company in general meeting.
Interim dividends are recognised when they are paid.
XVII PROVISIONS Provisions are recognised when the group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events it is more likely than not that an outow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount can be reliably estimated.
Provisions are discounted to present value where the effect is material.
XVIII SHARE CAPITAL Ordinary shares are classied as equity.
Shares held in the parent company BT Group plc by employee share ownership trusts and repurchased shares are recorded in the balance sheet as a deduction from shareholders equity at cost.
XIX FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS TO 31 MARCH 2005 The accounting policies adopted in respect of nancial instruments in periods up to and including 31 March 2005 are set out below.
However to provide comparability certain classication principles have been applied to nancial assets and liabilities for periods up to and including 31 March 2005.
Financial assets are classied as either nancial assets at fair value through the income statement loans and receivables or availableforsale nancial assets see below.
The classication depends on the purpose for which the investments were acquired.
Management determines the classication of its investments at initial recognition and reevaluates this designation at each reporting date.
Up to 31 March 2005 nancial assets in these categories were held at the lower of cost and net realisable value in accordance with UK GAAP.
Debt instruments are stated at the amount of net proceeds adjusted to amortise any discount over the term of the debt.
The effect of the currency element of currency swaps acting as hedges against nancial assets and debt is reported separately in current and non current derivative nancial instruments.
Criteria to qualify for hedge accounting The group considers its derivative nancial instruments to be hedges when certain criteria are met.
For foreign currency derivatives the instrument must be related to actual foreign currency assets or liabilities or a probable commitment whose characteristics have been identied.
It must involve the same currency or similar currencies as the hedged item and must also reduce the risk of foreign currency exchange movements on the groups operations.
For interest rate derivatives the instrument must be related to assets or liabilities or a probable commitment such as a future bond issue and must also change the interest rate or the nature of the interest rate by converting a xed rate to a variable rate or vice versa.
Accounting for derivative nancial instruments Principal amounts underlying currency swaps are revalued at exchange rates ruling at the balance sheet date and are included in current and noncurrent derivative nancial instruments.
Interest differentials under interest rate swap agreements used to vary the amounts and periods for which interest rates on borrowings are xed are recognised by adjustment of net nance expense.
The forward exchange contracts used to change the currency mix of net debt are revalued to balance sheet rates with net unrealised gains and losses included in current and noncurrent derivative nancial instruments.
The difference between spot and forward rate for these contracts is recognised as part of net nance expense over the term of the contract.
The forward exchange contracts hedging transaction exposures are revalued at the prevailing forward rate on the balance sheet date with net unrealised gains and losses being shown as current and noncurrent derivative nancial instruments.
XX FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS FROM 1 APRIL 2005 The following are the key accounting policies used in the preparation of the restated 1 April 2005 opening balance sheet and subsequent periods to reect the adoption of IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
Financial assets Purchases and sales of nancial assets All regular way purchases and sales of nancial assets are recognised on the settlement date which is the date that the asset is delivered to or by the group.
Financial assets at fair value through income statement A nancial asset is classied in this category if acquired principally for the purpose of selling in the short term or if so designated by management.
Financial assets held in this category are initially recognised and subsequently measured at fair value with changes in value recognised in the income statement in the line which most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Accounting policies 68 Filename 04.3d Time 143409 Date 200506 Checksum tel Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative nancial assets with xed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market other than s those that the group intends to sell immediately or in the short term which are classied as held for trading s those for which the group may not recover substantially all of its initial investment other than because of credit deterioration which are classied as available for sale.
Loans and receivables are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs and subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method with changes in carrying value recognised in the income statement in the line which most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
Availableforsale nancial assets Nonderivative nancial assets classied as availableforsale are either specically designated in this category or not classied in any of the other categories.
Availableforsale nancial assets are carried at fair value with unrealised gains and losses except for changes in exchange rates for monetary items interest dividends and impairment losses which are recognised in the income statement are recognised in equity until the nancial asset is derecognised at which time the cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in equity is taken to the income statement in the line that most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
Trade receivables Trade receivables are initially recognised at fair value which is usually the original invoiced amount and subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provisions made for doubtful receivables.
Provisions are made specically where there is objective evidence of a dispute or an inability to pay.
An additional provision is made based on an analysis of balances by age previous losses experienced and general economic conditions.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand and current balances with banks and similar institutions which are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and which are subject to insignicant risk of changes in value and have an original maturity of three months or less.
For the purpose of the consolidated cash ow statement cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and cash equivalents as dened above net of outstanding bank overdrafts.
Bank overdrafts are included within loans and other borrowings in current liabilities on the balance sheet.
Impairment of nancial assets The group assesses at each balance sheet date whether a nancial asset or group of nancial assets are impaired.
Where there is objective evidence that an impairment loss has arisen on assets carried at amortised cost the carrying amount is reduced with the loss being recognised in the income statement.
The impairment loss is measured as the difference between that assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash ows discounted at the nancial assets original effective interest rate.
The impairment loss is only reversed if it can be related objectively to an event after the impairment was recognised and is reversed to the extent the carrying value of the asset does not exceed its amortised cost at the date of reversal.
If an availableforsale asset is impaired an amount comprising the difference between its cost net of any principal payment and amortisation and its fair value is transferred from equity to the income statement.
Reversals of impairment losses on debt instruments are taken through the income statement if the increase in fair value of the instrument can be objectively related to an event occurring after the impairment loss was recognised in the income statement.
Reversals in respect of equity instruments classied as availableforsale are not recognised in the income statement.
If there is objective evidence of an impairment loss on an unquoted equity instrument that is not carried at fair value because its fair value cannot be objectively measured or on a derivative asset that is linked to and must be settled by delivery of such an unquoted equity instrument has been incurred the amount of loss is measured as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash ows discounted at the current market rate of return for a similar nancial asset.
Loans and other borrowings Loans and other borrowings are initially recognised at fair value plus directly attributable transaction costs.
Where loans and other borrowings contain a separable embedded derivative the fair value of the embedded derivative is the difference between the fair value of the hybrid instrument and the fair value of the loan or borrowing.
The fair value of the embedded derivative and the loan or borrowing is recorded separately on initial recognition.
Loans and other borrowings are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method and if included in a fair value hedge relationship are revalued to reect the fair value movements on the hedged risk associated with the loans and other borrowings.
Derivative nancial instruments The group uses derivative nancial instruments mainly to reduce exposure to foreign exchange risks and interest rate movements.
The group does not hold or issue derivative nancial instruments for nancial trading purposes.
However derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting are accounted for as trading instruments.
Derivative nancial instruments are classied as held for trading and initially recognised at cost.
Subsequent to initial recognition derivative nancial instruments are stated at fair value.
The gain or loss on remeasurement to fair value is recognised immediately in the income statement in net nance expense.
However where derivatives qualify for hedge accounting recognition of any resultant gain or loss depends on the nature of the hedge.
Derivative nancial instruments are classied as current assets or current liabilities where they are not designated in a hedging relationship or have a maturity period within 12 months.
Where derivative nancial instruments have a maturity period greater than 12 months and are designated in a hedge relationship they are classied within either non current assets or non current liabilities.
Derivatives embedded in other nancial instruments or other host contracts are treated as separate derivatives when their risk and characteristics are not closely related to those of host contracts and host contracts are not carried at fair value.
Changes in the fair value of embedded derivatives are recognised in the income statement in the line which most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
Accounting policies BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 69 Filename 04.3d Time 143409 Date 200506
Hedge accounting Cash ow hedge When a nancial instrument is designated as a hedge of the variability in cash ows of a recognised asset or liability or a highly probable transaction the effective part of any gain or loss on the derivative nancial instrument is recognised directly in equity.
For cash ow hedges of recognised assets or liabilities the associated cumulative gain or loss is removed from equity and recognised in the same line in the income statement in the same period or periods during which the hedged transaction affects the income statement.
For highly probable transactions when the transaction subsequently results in the recognition of a nonnancial asset or nonnancial liability the associated cumulative gain or loss is removed from equity and included in the initial cost or carrying amount of the nonnancial asset or liability.
If a hedge of a highly probable transaction subsequently results in the recognition of a nancial asset or a nancial liability then the associated gains and losses that were recognised directly in equity are reclassied into the income statement in the same period or periods during which the asset acquired or liability assumed affects the income statement.
Any ineffectiveness arising on a cash ow hedge of a recognised asset or liability is recognised immediately in the same income statement line as the hedged item.
Where ineffectiveness arises on highly probable transactions it is recognised in the line which most appropriately reects the nature of the item or transaction.
Fair value hedge When a derivative nancial instrument is designated as a hedge of the variability in fair value of a recognised asset or liability or unrecognised rm commitment the change in fair value of the derivatives that are designated as fair value hedges are recorded in the same line in the income statement together with any changes in fair value of the hedged asset or liability that is attributable to the hedged risk.
Hedge of net investment in a foreign operation Exchange differences arising from the retranslation of currency instruments designated as hedges of net investments in a foreign operation are taken to shareholders equity on consolidation to the extent the hedges are deemed effective.
Any ineffectiveness arising on a hedge of a net investment in a foreign operation is recognised in net nance expense.
Discontinuance of hedge accounting Discontinuance of hedge accounting may occur when a hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised the hedge no longer qualies for hedge accounting or the group revokes designation of the hedge relationship but the hedged nancial asset or liability remains or highly probable transaction is still expected to occur.
Under a cash ow hedge the cumulative gain or loss at that point remains in equity and is recognised in accordance with the above policy when the transaction occurs.
If the hedged transaction is no longer expected to take place or the underlying hedged nancial asset or liability no longer exists the cumulative unrealised gain or loss recognised in equity is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Under a hedge of a net investment the cumulative gain or loss remains in equity when the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised the hedge no longer qualies for hedge accounting or the group revokes designation of the hedge relationship.
The cumulative gain or loss is recognised in the income statement as part of the prot on disposal when the net investment in the foreign operation is disposed.
Under a fair value hedge the cumulative gain or loss adjustment associated with the hedged risk is amortised to the income statement using the effective interest method over the remaining term of the hedged item.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND KEY JUDGEMENTS The preparation of nancial statements in conformity with IFRS requires the use of accounting estimates and assumptions.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the groups accounting policies.
We continually evaluate our estimates assumptions and judgements based on available information and experience.
As the use of estimates is inherent in nancial reporting actual results could differ from these estimates.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity are described below.
Interconnect income and payments to other telecommunications operators In certain instances BT rely on other operators to measure the trafc ows interconnecting with our networks.
Estimates are used in these cases to determine the amount of income receivable from or payments we need to make to these other operators.
The prices at which these services are charged are often regulated and are subject to retrospective adjustment and estimates are used in assessing the likely effect of these adjustments.
Providing for doubtful debts BT provide services to around 20 million individuals and businesses mainly on credit terms.
We know that certain debts due to us will not be paid through the default of a small number of our customers.
Estimates based on our historical experience are used in determining the level of debts that we believe will not be collected.
These estimates include such factors as the current state of the UK economy and particular industry issues.
Goodwill
The recoverable amount of cashgenerating units have been determined based on value in use calculations.
These calculations require the use of estimates.
Useful lives for property plant and equipment The plant and equipment in BTs networks is longlived with cables and switching equipment operating for over ten years and underground ducts being used for decades.
The annual depreciation charge is sensitive to the estimated service lives allocated to each type of asset.
Asset lives are assessed annually and changed when necessary to reect current thinking on their remaining lives in light of technological change prospective economic utilisation and physical condition of the assets concerned.
Changes to service lives of assets implemented from 1 April 2005 had no signicant impact on the results for the year ended 31 March 2006.
Property arrangements As part of the property rationalisation programme we have identied a number of surplus properties.
Although efforts are being made to sublet this space it is recognised that this may not be possible immediately in the current economic environment.
Estimates have been made of the cost of vacant possession and any shortfall arising from the sub lease rental income being lower than the lease costs being borne by BT.
Any such cost or shortfall has been recognised as a provision.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Accounting policies 70 Filename 04.3d Time 143409 Date 200506
Long term customer contracts Long term customer contracts can extend over a number of nancial years.
During the contractual period revenue costs and prots may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate protability of each contract.
If at any time these estimates indicate the contract will be unprotable the entire estimated loss for the contract is recognised immediately.
The company performs ongoing protability reviews of its contracts in order to determine whether the latest estimates require updating.
Key factors reviewed include transaction volumes or other inputs for which we get paid future staff and third party costs and anticipated cost productivity savings and efciencies.
Pension obligations BT has a commitment mainly through the BT Pension Scheme to pay pension benets to approximately 354000 people over more than 60 years.
The cost of these benets and the present value of our pension liabilities depend on such factors as the life expectancy of the members the salary progression of our current employees the return that the pension fund assets will generate in the time before they are used to fund the pension payments and the discount rate at which the future pension payments are discounted.
We use estimates for all these factors in determining the pension costs and liabilities incorporated in our nancial statements.
The assumptions reect historical experience and our judgement regarding future expectations.
Deferred tax Deferred tax assets and liabilities require management judgement in determining the amounts to be recognised.
In particular judgement is used when assessing the extent to which deferred tax assets should be recognised with consideration given to the timing and level of future taxable income.
Income tax The actual tax we pay on our prots is determined according to complex tax laws and regulations.
Where the effect of these laws and regulations is unclear we use estimates in determining the liability for the tax to be paid on our past prots which we recognise in our nancial statements.
We believe the estimates assumptions and judgements are reasonable but this can involve complex issues which may take a number of years to resolve.
The nal determination of prior year tax liabilities could be different from the estimates reected in the nancial statements.
Determination of fair values Certain nancial instruments are carried on the balance sheet at fair value with changes in fair value reected in the income statement.
Fair values are estimated by reference in part to published price quotations and in part by using valuation techniques.
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS INTERPRETATIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO PUBLISHED STANDARDS NOT YET EFFECTIVE Certain new standards amendments and interpretations to existing standards have been published that are mandatory for the groups accounting periods beginning on or after 1 April 2006 or later periods but which the group has not early adopted.
The new standards which are expected to be relevant to the groups operations are as follows Amendment to IAS 39 and IFRS 4 Financial Guarantee Contracts effective from 1 April 2006 This amendment requires issued nancial guarantees other than those previously asserted by the entity to be insurance contracts to be initially recognised at their fair value and subsequently measured at the higher of a the unamortised balance of the related fees received and determined and b the expenditure required to settle the commitment at the balance sheet date.
Management is currently assessing the impact of this amendment on the groups nancial statements.
Amendment to IAS 39 Cash Flow Hedge Accounting of Forecast Intragroup Transactions effective from 1 April 2006 This amendment allows the foreign currency risk of a highly probable forecast intragroup transaction to qualify as a hedged item in the consolidated nancial statements provided that a the transaction is denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of the entity entering into that transaction and b the foreign currency risk will affect consolidated protor loss.
Management does not expect adoption of this amendment to have a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements.
Amendment to IAS 39 The Fair Value Option effective from 1 April 2006 This amendment changes the denition of the nancial instruments classied at fair value through the income statement and restricts the ability to designate nancial instruments as part of this category.
Management does not expect adoption of this amendment to have a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements.
IFRIC 4 Determining whether an arrangement contains a lease effective from 1 April 2006 IFRIC 4 requires the determination of whether an arrangement is or contains a lease to be based on the substance of the arrangement.
Management does not expect adoption of this interpretation to have a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements.
IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures effective from 1 April 2007 and amendment to IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements  Capital Disclosures effective from 1 April 2007 IFRS 7 introduces new disclosures of qualitative and quantitative information about exposure to risks arising from nancial instruments including specied minimum disclosures about credit risk liquidity risk and market risk including sensitivity analysis to market risk.
The amendment to IAS 1 introduces disclosures about the level of an entitys capital and how it manages capital.
Management is currently assessing the impact of IFRS 7 and the amendment to IAS 1 on the groups nancial statements.
Amendment to IAS 21 Net Investment in a Foreign Operation effective from 1 April 2006 This amendment relaxes the requirement for a monetary item that forms part of a reporting entitys net investment in a foreign operation to be denominated in the functional currency of either the reporting entity or the foreign operation.
It also claries the treatment of so called sister company loans.
The group has assessed the impact of the amendment and concluded it is not likely to have a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements.
Accounting policies BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 71 Filename 04.3d Time 143409 Date 200506
IFRIC 7 Applying the restatement approach under IAS 29 effective from 1 April 2006 IFRIC 7 deals with the accounting when an entity identies the existence of hyperination in the economy of its functional currency and how deferred tax items in the opening balance sheet should be restated.
The group has operations in hyper inationary economies.
The group has assessed the impact of the interpretation and concluded it is not likely to have a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements.
IFRIC 8 Scope of IFRS 2 effective from 1 April 2007 IFRIC 8 claries that transactions within the scope of IFRS 2 Share Based Payment include those in which the entity cannot specically identify some or all of the goods and services received.
The group has assessed the impact of this interpretation and has concluded it is not likely to have a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements.
IFRIC 9 Reassessment of embedded derivatives effective from 1 April 2007 IFRIC 9 claries that an entity should assess whether an embedded derivative is required to be separated from the host contract and accounted for as a derivative when the entity rst becomes a party to the contract.
Subsequent reassessment is prohibited unless there is a change in the contract terms in which case it is required.
The group has assessed the impact of this interpretation and has concluded it is not likely to have a signicant impact on the groups nancial statements.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Accounting policies 72 Filename 04.3d Time 143410 Date 200506 Checksum tel Before specic items
Total
For the year ended 31 March 2006 Notes m m m Revenue 1 19514  19514 Other operating income 2 227  227 Operating costs 3 17108 138 17246 Operating prot 1 2633 138 2495 Finance expense 5 2740  2740 Finance income 5 2268  2268 Net nance expense 472  472 Share of post tax prot of associates and joint ventures 16 16  16 Prot on disposal of joint venture  11 Prot before taxation 2177 137 2040 Taxation 6 533 41 492 Prot for the year 1644 96 1548 Attributable to Equity shareholders of the parent 1643 96 1547 Minority interests 1  1 Earnings per share 8 Basic 18.4p Diluted 18.1p Before specic items
Total
For the year ended 31 March 2005 Notes m m m Revenue 1 18429  18429 Other operating income telOperating costs 3 15929 59 15988 Operating prot 1 2693 299 2992 Finance expense 5 2773  2773 Finance income 5 2174  2174 Net nance expense 599  599 Share of post tax loss of associates and joint ventures 16 14 25 39 Prot before taxation 2080 274 2354 Taxation 6 541 16 525 Prot for the year 1539 290 1829 Attributable to Equity shareholders of the parent 1540 290 1830 Minority interests 1  1 Earnings per share 8 Basic 21.5p Diluted 21.3p For a denition of specic items see accounting policies.
An analysis of specic items is provided in note 4.
Dividends paid in the year were 912 million 2005 786 million as shown in note 7.
Interim and nal dividends proposed in respect of the 2006 nancial year were 11.9 pence per share 2005 10.4 pence which amounts to 993 million 2005 883 million.
GROUP INCOME STATEMENT For the year ended 31 March 2006 Group income statement BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 73 Filename 04.3d Time 143410 Date 200506
Prot for the year 1548 1829 Actuarial gains relating to retirement benet obligations 2122 294 Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 53 27 fair value loss on net investment hedges 20 reclassied and reported in net prot 9 Fair value movements on availableforsale assets fair value gains 35 reclassied and reported in net prot 35 Fair value movements on cash ow hedges fair value gains 4 reclassied and reported in net prot 204 Tax impact of above items 588 79 Net gains recognised directly in equity 1358 242 Total recognised income and expense for the year 2906 2071 Attributable to Equity shareholders of the parent 2905 2072 Minority interests 1 1 2906 2071 The group has adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 with effect from 1 April 2005.
The adoption of IAS 32 and IAS 39 resulted in a decrease in equity at 1 April 2005 of 209 million net of deferred tax of which nil was attributable to minority interests.
A reconciliation of the changes in other reserves and retained earnings is given in note 26.
GROUP STATEMENT OF RECOGNISED INCOME AND EXPENSE For the year ended 31 March 2006 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Group statement of recognised income and expense 74 Filename 04.3d Time 143411 Date 200506 Checksum tel
Cash ow from operating activities Prot before taxation 2040 2354 Depreciation and amortisation 2884 2844 Prot on sale of non current asset investments  358 Net nance expense 472 599 Other non cash charges 88 2 Share of prots losses of associates and joint ventures 16 39 Increase in inventories 13 12 Increase decrease in trade and other receivables 41 206 Increase in trade and other payables 174 59 Increase in provisions and other liabilities 189 173 Cash generated from operations 5777 5906 Income taxes paid 390 332 Net cash inow from operating activities 5387 5574 Cash ow from investing activities Interest received 185 374 Dividends received 1 2 Proceeds on disposal of property plant and equipment 66 111 Proceeds on disposal of associates and joint ventures  35 Proceeds on disposal of non current nancial assets 1 539 Proceeds on disposal of current nancial assets 5964 3754 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired 12 165 426 Purchases of property plant and equipment and computer software 2940 3056 Investment in associates and joint ventures 2 27 Purchases of non current nancial assets 2 2 Purchases of current nancial assets 2743 3044 Net cash inow outow from investing activities 365 1740 Cash ow from nancing activities Equity dividends paid 907 784 Interest paid 1086 1260 Repayments of borrowings and derivatives 4148 1022 Repayment of nance lease liabilities 284 275 New bank loans raised 1022 5 Net proceeds on issue of commercial paper 464 Repurchase of ordinary shares 348 195 Net proceeds on issue of treasury shares 9 2 Net cash used in nancing activities 5278 3529 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 474 305 Cash and cash equivalents at the start of the year 1310 1005 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 9 1784 1310 GROUP CASH FLOW STATEMENT For the year ended 31 March 2006 Group cash ow statement BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 75 Filename 04.3d Time 143412 Date 200506 Checksum tel
Non current assets Intangible assets 13 1641 1254 Property plant and equipment 14 15489 15391 Derivative nancial instruments 19 19 18 Investments 15 17 13 Associates and joint ventures 16 48 102 Deferred tax assets 22 764 1434 17978 18212 Current assets Inventories 124 106 Trade and other receivables 17 4199 4269 Derivative nancial instruments 19 69 143 Investments 15 365 3491 Cash and cash equivalents 9 1965 1312 6722 9321 Current liabilities Loans and other borrowings 18 1940 4261 Derivative nancial instruments 19 332 375 Trade and other payables 20 6540 6763 Current tax liabilities 598 645 Provisions 21 70 60 9480 12104 Total assets less current liabilities 15220 15429 Non current liabilities Loans and other borrowings 18 7995 7744 Derivative nancial instruments 19 820 472 Other payables 20 485 394 Deferred tax liabilities 22 1505 1715 Retirement benet obligations 29 2547 4807 Provisions 21 261 202 13613 15334
Ordinary shares 25 432 432 Share premium 25 7 3 Capital redemption reserve 2 2 Other reserves 26 364 762 Retained earnings 26 750 1154 Total parent shareholders equity 1555 45 Minority interests 23 52 50 Total equity 24 1607 95 15220 15429 The consolidated nancial statements on pages 64 to 122 were approved by the Board of Directors on 17 May 2006 and were signed on its behalf by Sir Christopher Bland
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director GROUP BALANCE SHEET As at 31 March 2006 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Group balance sheet 76 Filename 05.3d Time 143428 Date 200506 Checksum tel SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS Primary reporting format  business segments The group provides communications services which include networked IT services local and international telecommunications services broadband and internet products and services.
The group is organised into three primary business segments BT Retail BT Wholesale and BT Global Services each with differing risks rewards and customer proles.
Hence these lines of business are the groups primary reporting segments.
The revenue of each business segment is derived as follows BT Retail derives its revenue from the supply of exchange lines and from the calls made over these lines the leasing of private circuits and other private services.
It also generates revenue from broadband mobility data internet and multimedia services and from providing managed and packaged communications solutions to customers.
BT Wholesale derives its revenue from providing network services and solutions to communications companies including xed and mobile network operators ISPs internet service providers and other service providers including other BT lines of business and from carrying transit trafc between telecommunications operators.
BT Global Services mainly generates its revenue from the provision of networked IT services outsourcing and systems integration work to major corporates and from the xed network operations of the groups worldwide subsidiaries.
Other includes the groups corporate and internal property vehicle eet and IT operations.
Openreach was launched on 21 January 2006.
We will have completed the separation conguration and implementation of the nancial and operating systems to facilitate the separate reporting of Openreach by the rst quarter of the 2007 nancial year.
This is in accordance with the timetable specied by the Undertakings.
Therefore as Openreach is not a discrete segment at 31 March 2006 it is not presented as a separate business segment.
There is extensive trading between BTs lines of business and the line of business protability is dependent on the transfer price levels.
For regulated products and services those transfer prices are market based whilst for other products and services the transfer prices are agreed between the relevant lines of business.
These intragroup trading arrangements are subject to periodic review.
BT Retail BT Wholesale BT Global Services Other Intragroup Total Year ended 31 March 2006 m m m m m m
External revenue 8119 4226 7151 18  19514 Internal revenue 333 5006 1481  6820 Total revenue 8452 9232 8632 18 6820 19514 BT Retail BT Wholesale BT Global Services Other Intragroup Total Year ended 31 March 2005 m m m m m m
External revenue 8430 3820 6154 25  18429 Internal revenue 268 5275 1334  6877 Total revenue 8698 9095 7488 25 6877 18429 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 77 Filename 05.3d Time 151035 Date 200506
SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS continued BT Retail BT Wholesale BT Global Services Other Total Year ended 31 March 2006 m m m m m
Operating prot before specic items 644 1992 363 366 2633 Specic items 138 138 Segment result 644 1992 363 504 2495 Share of post tax prot of associates and joint ventures 16 16 Prot on disposal of joint venture 1 1 Net nance expense 472 Prot before tax 2040 Taxation 492 Prot for the year 1548 Capital additions Intangible assets Property plant and equipment 98 1743 609 243 2693 153 2013 702 274 3142 Depreciation 120 1778 556 181 2635
Additions to intangible assets exclude goodwill.
BT Retail BT Wholesale BT Global Services Other Total Year ended 31 March 2005 m m m m m
Operating prot before specic items 607 1950 411 275 2693 Specic items 299 299 Segment result 607 1950 411 24 2992 Share of post tax loss of associates and joint ventures 39 39 Net nance expense 599 Prot before tax 2354 Taxation 525 Prot for the year 1829 Capital additions Intangible assets Property plant and equipment 119 1783 575 219 2696 170 1981 605 255 3011 Depreciation 133 1831 513 217 2694
Additions to intangible assets exclude goodwill.
BT Retail BT Wholesale BT Global Services Other Total As at 31 March 2006 m m m m m
Segment assets 2517 13159 6253 93 21836 Associates and joint ventures 48 48 Unallocated assets 2816 2816 Consolidated total assets 2517 13159 6253 2771 24700
Segment liabilities 2419 1400 3776 308 7287 Unallocated liabilities 15806 15806 Consolidated total liabilities 2419 1400 3776 15498 23093 BT Retail BT Wholesale BT Global Services Other Total As at 31 March 2005 m m m m m
Segment assets 2238 13222 5490 3575 24525 Associates and joint ventures 102 102 Unallocated assets 2906 2906 Consolidated total assets 2238 13222 5490 6583 27533
Segment liabilities 2472 1387 3095 405 7359 Unallocated liabilities 20079 20079 Consolidated total liabilities 2472 1387 3095 20484 27438 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 78 Filename 05.3d Time 143430 Date 200506
SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS continued Segment assets consist primarily of property plant and equipment intangible assets inventories trade receivables and associates and joint ventures.
Unallocated assets include deferred taxation investments and derivatives.
Segment liabilities comprise trade and other payables and provisions.
Unallocated liabilities include current and deferred taxation retirement benet obligations nance lease liabilities corporate borrowings and related derivatives.
Secondary reporting format  geographical segments Revenue by geographic area UK 16901 16863 Europe excluding the UK 1900 1306 Americas 627 190 Asia and Pacic 86 70 Total 19514 18429 The analysis of revenue by geographical area is on the basis of the country of origin of the customer invoice.
In an analysis of revenue by destination incoming and transit international calls would be treated differently but would not lead to a materially different geographical analysis.
Total assets Capital additions Total assets and capital additions by geographic area UK 16240 19125 2872 2859 Europe excluding the UK 3777 4316 191 114 Americas 1704 1014 66 31 Asia and Pacic Unallocated assets 2816 2906 Total assets 24700 27533 3142 3011 Total assets and capital additions are allocated to geographical areas based on the location of the asset.
OTHER OPERATING INCOME Prots on disposal of property plant and equipment 2 22 Income from repayment works 74 64 Other operating income 151 107 Other operating income before specic items 227 193 Specic items note 4  358 Other operating income 227 551 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 79 Filename 05.3d Time 143431 Date 200506 Checksum tel OPERATING COSTS 2006 2005 m m Costs by nature Staff costs Wages and salaries 3910 3645 Social security costs 377 319 Pension costs 603 540 Sharebased payment 76 50 Total staff costs 4966 4554 Depreciation of property plant and equipment Owned assets 2501 2536 Under nance leases 134 158 Amortisation of intangible assets 249 150 Payments to telecommunications operators 4045 3725 Other operating costs 6113 5528 Own work capitalised 900 722 Total operating costs before specic items 17108 15929 Specic items 138 59 Total operating costs 17246 15988 Operating costs include the following Early leaver costs 133 166 Research and development expenditure Rental costs relating to operating leases 413 419 Foreign currency losses 12 3 Research and development expenditure includes amortisation of 160 million 2005 95 million in respect of internally developed computer software.
SPECIFIC ITEMS The group separately identies and discloses material oneoff or unusual items termed specic itemsas dened in accounting policies.
This is consistent with the way that nancial performance is measured by management and we believe assists in providing a meaningful analysis of the trading results of the group.
2006 2005 m m Other operating income Prot on sale of non current asset investments Operating costs Property rationalisation costs Creation of Openreach Share of results of associates and joint ventures Impairment of assets in joint ventures Prot on disposal of joint venture 1 Net specic items before tax 137 274 Tax credit on specic items 41 16 Net specic items after tax 96 290 During the prior year the group disposed of some noncore investments.
The resulting profit on disposal of 358 million comprised 236 million from the sale of the groups 15.8% interest in Eutelsat SA 46 million from sale of the 4% interest in Intelsat 38 million from the sale of the 11.9% interest in Starhub Pte Ltd and other gains of 38 million.
In the current year 68 million 2005 59 million of property rationalisation charges were recognised in relation to the groups provincial office portfolio.
During the current financial year a provision of 70 million was recognised for the estimated incremental and directly attributable costs arising from the groups obligation to set up Openreach in accordance with the Undertakings agreed with Ofcom on 21 September 2005.
In the prior year the group incurred an impairment charge of 25 million representing its share of a write down of Albacoms assets prior to Albacom becoming a subsidiary.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 80 Filename 05.3d Time 143431 Date 200506 Checksum tel FINANCE INCOME AND FINANCE EXPENSE 2006 2005 m m Finance expense Interest on listed bonds debentures and notes Interest on nance leases 62 68 Interest on other borrowings 20 19 Unwinding of discount on provisions 3 3 Net charge on nancial instruments in a fair value hedge Net foreign exchange on items in hedging relationships Fair value movements on derivatives not in a designated hedge relationship 8 Interest on pension scheme liabilities 1816 1720 Total nance expense 2740 2773 The group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 from 1 April 2005.
The comparative period has therefore applied the groups previous accounting policies in calculating the recognition and measurement basis for finance expense see accounting policies.
Includes a net charge of 41 million relating to fair value movements on derivatives recycled from the cash flow reserve.
Includes a net charge of 71 million relating to fair value movements arising on hedged items and a net credit of 71 million relating to fair value movements arising on derivatives designated as fair value hedges.
Includes a net charge of 330 million relating to foreign exchange movements on hedged loans and borrowings and a net credit of 330 million relating to fair value movements on derivatives recycled from the cash flow reserve.
2006 2005 m m Finance income Income from listed investments Other interest and similar income Net foreign exchange on items in hedging relationships Expected return on pension scheme assets 2070 1918 Total nance income 2268 2174 Net nance expense 472 599 The group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 from 1 April 2005.
The comparative period has therefore applied the groups previous accounting policies in calculating the recognition and measurement basis for finance income see accounting policies.
Income from listed investments includes 37 million relating to gains on held for trading investments.
On 11 August 2005 the group exercised its option to require early redemption of its US dollar convertible 2008 bond.
Bondholders had the option to take redemption proceeds in the form of cash or shares in the groups interest in LG Telecom.
The majority of bondholders exercised their option to take the redemption proceeds in the form of LG Telecom shares.
Other interest includes a net bond redemption gain of 27 million.
This reflects the write off of LG Telecom shares of 121 million and the associated release from the availableforsale reserve of 35 million the write off of the bond and transaction costs of 87 million and the associated option liability of 17 million and the release from the translation reserve of 9 million credit relating to foreign exchange movements on the investment in LG Telecom to the date of disposal.
Includes a net credit of 85 million relating to foreign exchange movements on hedged investments and a net charge of 85 million relating to fair value movements on derivatives recycled from the cash flow reserve.
TAXATION
2006 2005 m m Analysis of taxation expense for the year United Kingdom Corporation tax at 30% 2005 30% 404 542 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 69 4 NonUK taxation Current 12 4 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 1 3 Total current tax 348 539 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary differences 155 15 Adjustment in respect of prior periods 11 1 Total deferred tax 144 14 Total taxation expense in the income statement 492 525 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 81 Filename 05.3d Time 143432 Date 200506
TAXATION continued Factors affecting taxation expense The taxation expense on the prot for the year differs from the amount computed by applying the corporation tax rate to the prot before taxation as a result of the following factors 2006 2005 m % m % Prot before tax 2040 2354 Notional taxation expense at UK rate of 30% 2005 30% 612 30.0 706 30.0 Effects of Non deductible depreciation and amortisation 8 0.4 6 0.2 Non deductible nonUK losses 29 1.4 38 1.6 Lower taxes on nonUK prots 1  14 0.6 Lower taxes on gain on disposal of noncurrent investments and group undertakings  107 4.5 Other deferred tax assets not recognised 25 1.2 Associates and joint ventures 5 0.2 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 79 3.9 2 0.1 Total taxation expense and effective tax rate 492 24.1 525 22.3 Specic items 41 0.4 16 3.7 Total taxation expense before specic itemseffective tax rate 533 24.5 541 26.0 2006 2005 m m Tax on items charged to equity Current tax charge on exchange movements offset in reserves  7 Deferred tax credit relating to losses on cash ow hedges 45 Deferred tax charge relating to ineffective hedges 9 Deferred tax charge on actuarial gain relating to retirement benet obligations 629 72 Deferred tax credit relating to share based payments 5 Total taxation on items taken directly to equity 588 79
2006 2005 pence per share pence per share Final paid in respect of the prior year 6.50 5.30 551 454 Interim paid in respect of the current year 4.30 3.90 361 332 The directors are proposing that a nal dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2006 of 7.6 pence per share will be paid to shareholders on 11 September 2006 taking the full year proposed dividend in respect of the 2006 nancial year to 11.9 pence 2005 10.4 pence.
This dividend is subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting and therefore the liability of 632 million 2005 551 million has not been included in these nancial statements.
The proposed dividend will be payable to all shareholders on the Register of Members on 18 August 2006.
EARNINGS PER SHARE The basic earnings per share are calculated by dividing the prot attributable to equity shareholders by the weighted average number of shares in issue after deducting the companys shares held by employee share ownership trusts and treasury shares.
In calculating the diluted earnings per share share options outstanding and other potential ordinary shares have been taken into account where the impact of these is dilutive.
Options over 52 million shares 2005 207 million shares were excluded from the calculation of the total diluted number of shares as the impact of these is antidilutive.
The weighted average number of shares in the years were millions of shares millions of shares Basic 8422 8524 Dilutive ordinary shares from share options and shares held in trust 115 57 Total diluted 8537 8581 Prot attributable to equity shareholders of the parent m 1547 1830 Basic earnings per share pence 18.4p 21.5p Diluted earnings per share pence 18.1p 21.3p BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 82 Filename 05.3d Time 143432 Date 200506
EARNINGS PER SHARE continued Basic earnings per share before specic items and the per share impact of individual specic items is as follows pence per share pence per share Per share impact of specic items Prot on sale of non current asset investments  4.2 358 Prot on sale of joint venture  1 Property rationalisation costs 0.8 68 0.7 59 Provision for the creation of Openreach 0.8 70 Impairment in associates and joint ventures  0.3 25 Tax credit on specic items 0.5 41 0.2 16 Basic loss earnings per shareloss prot for the year attributable to specic Basic earnings per shareprot for the year 18.4 1548 21.5 1829 Adjustment Basic loss earnings per shareloss prot for the nancial year attributable to specic items 1.1 96 3.4 290 Basic earnings per shareprot for the year before specic items 19.5 1644 18.1 1539 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS 2006 2005 m m Cash at bank and in hand 511 206 Cash equivalents Listed cash equivalents Euro treasury bills 8 20 Unlisted cash equivalents US corporate debt securities 422 223 UK deposits 914 818 European deposits 70 36 US deposits 40 9 Total cash equivalents 1454 1106 Total cash and cash equivalents 1965 1312 Bank overdrafts 181 2 Cash and cash equivalents per the cash ow statement 1784 1310 The group has a cross undertaking guarantee facility across certain bank accounts which allows a legally enforceable right of set off of the relevant cash and overdraft balances on bank accounts included within the scheme.
At 31 March 2006 overdraft balances of 171 million had a legally enforceable right of set off against cash balances of 209 million.
These balances have not been netted above as settlement is not intended to take place simultaneously or on a net basis.
NET DEBT Net debt consists of loans and other borrowings less current asset investments and cash and cash equivalents.
Loans and other borrowings are measured at the net proceeds raised adjusted to amortise any discount over the term of the debt.
For the purpose of this analysis current asset investments and cash and cash equivalents are measured at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Currency denominated balances within net debt are translated to sterling at swapped rates where hedged.
This denition of net debt measures balances at the future cash ows due to arise on maturity of nancial instruments and removes the balance sheet adjustments made from the remeasurement of hedged risks under fair value hedges and the use of the amortised cost method as required by IAS 39.
In addition the gross balances are adjusted to take account of netting arrangements amounting to 171 million.
Net debt is a non GAAP measure since it is not dened in IFRS but it is a key indicator used by management in order to assess operational performance.
2006 2005 m m Analysis of net debt Loans and other borrowings current and non current 9935 12005
Cash and cash equivalents 1965 1312 Current asset investments 365 3491 7605 7202
To retranslate currency denominated balances at swapped rates where hedged 121 691 To recognise borrowings and investments at net proceeds and unamortised discount 192 Net debt 7534 7893 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 83 Filename 05.3d Time 143433 Date 200506 Checksum tel NET DEBT continued After allocating the element of the adjustments which impacts loans and other borrowings as dened above gross debt at 31 March 2006 was 9685 million 31 March 2005 12696 million.
2006 2005 m m Reconciliation of net cash ow to movement in net debt Net debt at 1 April 7893 8530 Decrease in net debt resulting from cash ows 199 887 Net debt assumed or issued on acquisitions  159 Currency movements 75 2 Other noncash movements 85 89 Net debt at 31 March 7534 7893 Noncash transactions Other noncash movements in 2006 includes 87 million relating to the early redemption of the groups US dollar convertible bond for shares in LG Telecom.
FREE CASH FLOW Free cash ow is dened as the net increase in cash and cash equivalents less cash ows from nancing activities excluding interest paid and less the acquisition or disposal of group undertakings.
It is a nonGAAP measure since it is not dened in IFRS but it is a key indicator used by management in order to assess operational performance.
2006 2005 m m Cash generated from operations before taxation 5777 5906 Income taxes paid 390 332 Net cash inow from operating activities 5387 5574 Included in cash ows from investing activities Net purchase of property plant and equipment computer software and licences 2874 2945 Sale purchase of non current nancial assets 1 537 Dividends received from associates 1 2 Interest received 185 374 Included in cash ows from nancing activities Interest paid 1086 1260 Free cash ow 1612 2282
Year ended 31 March 2006
Radianz
Other
Total
Fair value of consideration Less fair value of net assets acquired Goodwill arising Consideration Cash Deferred consideration 7  17 24 Debt assumed  23  23 Total The outow of cash and cash equivalents is as follows Cash consideration Less cash acquired BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 84 Filename 05.3d Time 143434 Date 200506 Checksum tel ACQUISITIONS continued Year ended 31 March 2005
Albacom
Other
Total
Fair value of consideration Less fair value of net assets acquired Goodwill arising Consideration Cash Deferred consideration  38 1 39 Total The outow of cash and cash equivalents is as follows Cash consideration Less cash acquired 205  Year ended 31 March 2006
On 28 February 2006 the group acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Atlanet SpA Atlanet for total consideration of 65 million including deferred consideration of 7 million and acquisition costs of 1 million.
The net assets acquired in the transaction and the goodwill arising were as follows Book and fair value Intangible assets 2 Property plant and equipment 25 Receivables 46 Cash and cash equivalents 5 Payables 43 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets 35 Goodwill 30 Total consideration 65 The fair value adjustments relating to the acquisition of Atlanet are provisional due to the timing of the transaction and will be nalised during the 2007 nancial year.
From the date of acquisition Atlanet has contributed to the groups results revenue of 7 million and a net loss of 1 million.
If
The residual excess over the net assets acquired is recognised as goodwill.
Goodwill comprises principally the assembled workforce expected cost savings and synergies.
Radianz
On 29 April 2005 the group acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Radianz Limited Radianz for total consideration of 143 million including acquisition costs of 5 million.
The net assets acquired in the transaction and the goodwill arising were as follows Fair value Book value adjustments Fair value m m m Intangible assets  22 22 Property plant and equipment 55 4 51 Receivables 40  40 Cash and cash equivalents 44  44 Payables 53  53 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets 86 18 104 Goodwill 39 Total consideration 143 From the date of acquisition Radianz has contributed to the groups results 60 million of revenue and a net loss of 30 million.
If
Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 85 Filename 05.3d Time 143434 Date 200506
ACQUISITIONS continued Intangible assets comprising a brand customer lists and customer relationships were recognised at their respective fair values.
The residual excess over the net assets acquired is recognised as goodwill.
Goodwill comprises principally the assembled work force expected cost savings and synergies.
Other
During the year ended 31 March 2006 the group acquired a number of other smaller subsidiary undertakings and businesses including principally SkyNet Systems Limited the CARA Group and Total Network Solutions Limited.
The combined net assets and goodwill arising in respect of these acquisitions were as follows Book and fair value Property plant and equipment 5 Inventories 4 Receivables 26 Cash and cash equivalents 11 Payables 29 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets 17 Goodwill 52 Total consideration 69 If these acquisitions had occurred on 1 April 2005 the groups revenue and prot after tax would have been higher by 15 million and nil respectively.
Year ended 31 March 2005
On 25 February 2005 the group acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Infonet Services Corporation Infonet for total consideration of 520 million including acquisition costs of 10 million 315 million net of cash in the business.
At 31 March 2005 the fair value adjustments relating to the acquisition of Infonet were provisional however no further changes to these adjustments were necessary when the fair values were nalised in the 2006 nancial year.
The net assets acquired in the transaction and the goodwill arising were as follows
Fair value adjustments Fair value m m m Intangible assets  78 78 Property plant and equipment 200 100 100 Receivables 93 19 74 Cash and cash equivalents 205  205 Payables 94 4 90 Provisions and non current liabilities 14 18 32 Minority interest 1  1 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets 389 55 334 Goodwill 186 Total consideration 520 Intangible assets comprising a brand and customer relationships were recognised at their respective fair values.
The residual excess over the net assets acquired is recognised as goodwill.
Goodwill comprises principally the assembled work force expected cost savings and synergies.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 86 Filename 05.3d Time 143434 Date 200506 Checksum tel ACQUISITIONS continued
On 4 February 2005 the group acquired the 74% interest in Albacom SpA Albacom not already held for total consideration of 131 million including deferred consideration of 38 million and acquisition costs of 5 million.
The deferred consideration is dependent upon the nancial performance of Albacom in the 2009 nancial year and the minimum payable is 38 million.
At
31 March 2005 the fair value adjustments relating to the acquisition of Albacom were provisional however no further changes to these adjustments were necessary when the fair values were nalised in the 2006 nancial year.
The net assets acquired in the transaction and the goodwill arising were as follows Fair value Book value adjustments Fair value m m m Intangible assets 190  190 Property plant and equipment 188 11 177 Inventories 5  5 Receivables 206  206 Payables 301 14 315 Provisions and non current liabilities 139  139 Minority interest 2  2 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets 147 25 122 Goodwill 9 Total consideration 131 The residual excess over the net assets acquired was recognised as goodwill.
Goodwill comprises principally the assembled work force expected cost savings and synergies.
Other
During the year ended 31 March 2005 the group acquired a number of other smaller subsidiary undertakings and businesses principally BIC Systems Group Limited.
The combined net assets acquired in the transaction and goodwill arising in respect of these acquisitions were as follows Fair value Book value adjustments Fair value m m m Intangible assets  66 Receivables 3  3 Cash and cash equivalents 5  5 Payables 5  5 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets 3 6 9 Goodwill 10 Total consideration 19 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 87 Filename 05.3d Time 143435 Date 200506
INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Telecommunication licences and other Brands customer lists and relationships
Total m m m m m
At 1 April 2004 202 9  713 924 Additions  319 319 Disposals  5  81 86 Exchange differences 3 1  31 Acquisitions through business combinations At 1 April tel84 1035 1720 Additions  449 449 Disposals  88 Exchange differences 18 8  834 Acquisitions through business combinations At 31 March tel106 1516 2371
At 1 April 2004 7  289 296 Acquisitions 38  45 83 Disposals  65 65 Charge for the year 6  144 150 Exchange differences  22 At 1 April 2005 51  415 466 Charge for the year Acquisitions  15 15 Disposals  8 8 Exchange differences 2  68 At 31 March Carrying amount At 31 March tel95 859 1641 At 31 March tel84 620 1254 Includes additions in 2006 of 401 million 2005 265 million in respect of internally developed computer software.
Impairment tests of goodwill Goodwill is not amortised but tested for impairment at least annually.
For the purpose of impairment testing the groups cash generating units are considered to be the business segments.
Goodwill has been allocated to cash generating units as follows 2006 2005 m m BT Global Services 488 360 BT Retail The recoverable amount of each cash generating unit CGU is based on value in use calculations.
These are determined using cash ow projections derived from nancial budgets approved by the board covering a ve year period.
They reect managements expectation of revenue growth operating costs and margin for each CGU based on past experience.
Cash ows beyond the ve year period have been extrapolated using estimated terminal growth rates ranging from 0% to 2%.
These rates have been determined with regard to projected growth rates for the specic markets in which the CGU participates and are not considered to exceed the long term average growth rates for those markets.
Discount rates applied to the cash ow forecasts are derived from the groups pretax weighted average cost of capital for nonregulated products of 11.4%.
The forecasts are most sensitive to changes in projected revenue growth rates in the rst ve years of the forecast period.
However there is signicant headroom and based on the sensitivity analysis performed we have concluded that no reasonably possible changes in the base case assumptions would cause the carrying amount of the CGUs to exceed their recoverable amount.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 88 Filename 05.3d Time 143436 Date 200506 Checksum tel PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Land and buildings Plant and equipment Assets in course of construction Total m m m m
At 1 April 2004 1029 34963 724 36716
9 495 2185 2689 Acquisition through business combinations Transfers 49 2114 2163 Exchange differences 250 1 53 Disposals and adjustments 120 994 7 1121 31 March 2005 1065 37271 763 39099
17 653 2038 2708 Acquisition through business combinations Transfers 50 1817 1867 Exchange differences 485  89 Disposals and adjustments 39 1757 41 1837 At 31 March 2006 1120 38367 895 40382 Accumulated depreciation At 1 April 2004 346 21277  21623 Charge for the year 49 2645  2694 Acquisition through business combinations 41 444  485 Exchange differences 131  32 Disposals and adjustments 66 988  1054 At 31 March 2005 371 23409  23780 Charge for the year 58 2577  2635 Acquisition through business combinations 14 228  242 Exchange differences 154  55 Disposals and adjustments 32 1730  1762 At 31 March 2006 412 24538  24950 Carrying amount At 31 March 2006 708 13829 895 15432 Engineering stores  57 57 Total carrying amount at 31 March 2006 708 13829 952 15489 At 31 March 2005 694 13862 763 15319 Engineering stores  72 72 Total carrying amount at 31 March 2005 694 13862 835 15tel m m The carrying amount of land and buildings comprised Freehold 311 373 Long leases over 50 years unexpired 136 50 Short leases 261 271 Total carrying amount of land and buildings 708 694 The carrying amount of the groups property plant and equipment includes an amount of 460 million 2005 593 million in respect of assets held under nance leases.
The depreciation charge on those assets for the year ended 31 March 2006 was 134 million 2005 158 million.
2006 2005 m m Additions to property plant and equipment comprised Plant and equipment Transmission equipment 1429 1488 Exchange equipment 80 143 Other network equipment 727 648 Computers and ofce equipment 281 312 Motor vehicles and other 123 34 Land and buildings 68 64 Total additions to property plant and equipment 2708 2689 Decrease increase in engineering stores 15 7 Total additions 2693 2696 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 89 Filename 05.3d Time 143436 Date 200506
INVESTMENTS
2006 2005 m m Non current assets Availableforsale 9 7 Loans and receivables Current assets Availableforsale 2 1149 Held for trading 348 339 Loans and receivables 15 2003 365 3491 The group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 from 1 April 2005.
The comparative period has applied the groups previous accounting policies in calculating the recognition and measurement basis for investments with the exception of adjustments relating to derivatives which are now reclassified as derivative financial instruments see accounting policies.
2006 2005 m m
At 1 April 1156 1376 Additions 195 219 Transfer from associates and joint ventures 86 Revaluation surplus transfer to equity 35 Disposals 1461 439 At 31 March 11 1156 Less Noncurrent availableforsale assets 9 7 Current availableforsale assets 2 1149 The group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 from 1 April 2005.
The comparative period has applied the groups previous accounting policies in calculating the recognition and measurement basis for investments with the exception of adjustments relating to derivatives which are now reclassified as derivative financial instruments see accounting policies.
Availableforsale nancial assets consist mainly of listed corporate debt securities and notes denominated in sterling.
2006 2005 m m Held for trading US Government debt securities 51 46 US Corporate debt securities 29tela The group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 from 1 April 2005.
The comparative period has applied the groups previous accounting policies in calculating the recognition and measurement basis for investments with the exception of adjustments relating to derivatives which are now reclassified as derivative financial instruments see accounting policies.
The investments included above represent listed short term debt securities with quoted market prices.
The group has not designated any nancial assets that are not classied as held for trading as nancial assets at fair value through the income statement.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivable nancial assets mainly consist of term deposits and other xed term debt securities denominated in sterling with a xed coupon and options for early redemption.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 90 Filename 05.3d Time 143437 Date 200506
ASSOCIATES AND JOINT VENTURES The groups share of the assets liabilities revenue and expenses of its interest in associates and joint ventures at 31 March was as follows Associates Joint ventures Total Associates Joint ventures
Non current assets Current assets Non current liabilities    98 98 Current liabilities 21 1 22 10 127 137 Share of net assets Revenue Expenses Taxation 1 3 4 Share of post tax results 45 39 Includes an impairment charge of 25 million recognised in the prior year and included within specific items see note 4.
During the 2006 nancial year the LG Telecom joint venture carrying value 86 million was transferred to availableforsale assets in connection with the early redemption of the groups US dollar convertible 2008 bond.
Details of the groups principal associate at 31 March 2006 are set out on page 127.
TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES 2006 2005 m m Trade receivables 1662 1927 Prepayments 991 423 Accrued income 1254 1423 Other debtors 292 496 4199 4269 Trade receivables are stated after deducting 315 million 2005 338 million for doubtful debts.
The amount charged to the income statement for doubtful debts for the year ended 31 March 2006 was 170 million 2005 150 million.
Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 91 Filename 05.3d Time 143437 Date 200506 Checksum tel LOANS AND OTHER BORROWINGS US dollar 8.875% notes 2030 minimum 8.625% 1580 1413 Sterling 5.75% bonds telSterling 3.5% indexed linked notes telSterling 8.625% bonds telSterling 7.75% notes 2016 minimum 7.5% Euro 7.125% notes 2011 minimum 6.875% US dollar 8.375% notes 2010 minimum 8.125% 1713 1535 US dollar 8.765% bonds 2009 US dollar convertible 2008 0.75%  90 US dollar 7% notes 2007 Sterling 7.375% notes 2006 minimum 7.125% Sterling 12.25% bonds 2006  229 Euro 6.375% notes 2006 minimum 6.125% US dollar 7.875% notes 2005 minimum 7.624% Total listed bonds debentures and notes 7140 10481 Finance leases 845 1100 Commercial paper ce Sterling bank loans due 20072009 average effective interest rate 9.7% 240 240 Sterling oating rate note 20052009 average effective interest rate 4.1% 49 90 Sterling oating rate loan 2006 average effective interest rate 10.3%  92 Sterling oating rate loan 2009 average effective interest rate 4.6% 1003 Preference shares 5 Bank overdrafts of which 171 million had a legally enforceable right of set off  see note 9 181 2 Total other loans and borrrowings 1950 424 Total loans and other borrowings 9935 12005 The group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 from 1 April 2005.
The group previously recognised the currency value of derivatives against the loans and other borrowings balance.
These recognised amounts have been reclassified in the comparative period as derivative financial instruments.
In addition the underlying borrowing is stated based on previously applied UK GAAP at the amount of net proceeds adjusted to amortise any discount over the term of the debt see accounting policies.
The interest rate payable on these notes will be subject to adjustment from time to time if either Moodys or Standard and Poors SandP reduces the rating ascribed to the groups senior unsecured debt below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of SandP.
In this event the interest rate payable on the notes and the spread applicable to the floating notes will be increasedby 0.25% for each ratings category adjustment by each rating agency.
In addition if Moodys or SandP subsequently increase the ratings ascribed to the groups senior unsecured debt then the interest rate then payable on notes and the spread applicable to the floating notes will be decreased by 0.25% for each rating category upgrade by each rating agency but in no event will the interest rate be reduced below the minimum interest rate reflected in the above table.
Hedged in a designated cash flow hedge.
Hedged in a designated cash flow and fair value hedge.
Commercial paper is denominated in sterling 35 million US dollar 66 million and euro 371 million.
The interest rates payable on loans and borrowings disclosed above reect the coupons on underlying issued loans and borrowings and not the interest rates achieved through applying associated currency and interest rate swaps in hedge arrangements.
The carrying values disclosed above for the current year reect balances at amortised cost adjusted for deferred and current fair value adjustments to the relevant loans or borrowings hedged risk in a fair value hedge.
This does not reect the nal principal repayment that will arise after taking account of the relevant derivatives in hedging relationships which is reected in the table below.
Apart from nance leases all borrowings as at 31 March 2006 are unsecured.
2006 2005
Effect of hedging and interest
Carrying amount Effect of hedging and interest
Repayments fall due as follows Within one year or on demand 1940 190 1750 4261 344 4605 Between one and two years 1182 3 1179 788  788 Between two and three years 337  Between three and four years 2 98 Between four and ve years 2467 55 2After ve years 3628 63 3691 5792 289 6081 Total due for repayment after more than one year 7983 123 8106 7744 347 8091 Total repayments 9923 67 9856 12005 691 12696 Fair value adjustments for hedged risk 12 Total loans and other borrowings 9935 12005 Adjustment for hedging and interest reflects the impact of the currency element of derivatives and adjusts the repayments to exclude interest recognised in the carrying amount.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 92 Filename 05.3d Time 143438 Date 200506 Checksum tel LOANS AND OTHER BORROWINGS continued Minimum lease payments Repayment of outstanding lease obligationstel 2005 m m m m Amounts payable under nance leases Within one year 36telIn the second to fth years inclusive 39telAfter ve years 43tel1182 1486 845 1100 Less future nance charges 337 386 Total nance lease obligations 845 1100 845 1100 The groups obligations under nance leases are secured by the lessors title to the leased assets.
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS 2006 2005
Liabilities
Assets
Liabilities
Interest rate swaps  cash ow hedge  405 Other interest rate swaps 49 304 Cross currency swaps  cash ow hedge Cross currency swaps  fair value hedge Forward foreign exchange contracts  cash ow hedge 75 Other forward foreign exchange contracts  3 21 Embedded derivatives  options  2 Analysed as Current 6telNon current  1152 161 847 The group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 from 1 April 2005.
The group previously recognised the currency value of derivatives against the hedged financial instrument or within other receivables and other payables.
These recognised amounts have been reclassified in the comparative period as derivative financial instruments.
As the balances in the comparative period only reflect the currency fair value of those instruments they are not directly comparable with those amounts disclosed in the 2006 financial year see accounting policies.
Details of hedges in which the derivative nancial instruments are utilised are disclosed in note 33.
TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES 2006 2005 m m
Trade payables 3466 2921 Other taxation and social security 521 468 Other creditors 945 1038 Accrued expenses 488 719 Deferred income 1120 1617 6540 6tel m m Non current Other creditors 445 352 Deferred income Non current payables relate to operating lease liabilities and deferred gains on a prior period sale and operating and nance leaseback transaction.
Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 93 Filename 05.3d Time 143439 Date 200506 Checksum tel
Property provisions
Total m m m At 1 April Charged to income statement Unwind of discount 3  3 Utilised in the year 53 40 93 At 31 March 2006 226tel 2005 m m Analysed as Current 70 60 Noncurrent 26tela Property provisions comprise amounts provided for obligations to complete nearly finished new properties and remedial work to be undertaken on properties and the onerous lease provision on rationalisation of the groups property portfolio.
The provisions will be utilised over the remaining lease periods which range from 1 to 25 years.
Other provisions include amounts provided for legal or constructive obligations arising from insurance claims and litigation which will be utilised as the obligations are settled.
Also included are amounts provided for the estimated incremental and directly attributable costs arising from the groups obligation to set up Openreach which will be utilised over two years.
Includes specific items of 68 million for property rationalisation costs and 70 million for the creation of Openreach see note 4.
DEFERRED TAXATION Excess capital allowances Retirement benet obligations Share based payments
Total
At 1 April 2004 1988 1541  224 223 Charge credit to income statement 20 35 7 22 14 Charge to equity  72  72 At 31 March 2005 1968 1434 7 246 281 Deferred tax asset  1434  1434 Deferred tax liability 1968  7 246 1715 At 31 March 2005 1968 1434 7 246 281 Transitional adjustment on adoption of IAS 39  272 272 Charge credit to income statement 16 41 13 132 144 Charge credit to equity  629 5 36 588 As 31 March 2006 1952 764 25 422 741 Deferred tax asset  764  764 Deferred tax liability 1952  25 422 1505 At 31 March 2006 1952 764 25 422 741 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 94 Filename 05.3d Time 143439 Date 200506 Checksum tel DEFERRED TAXATION continued At 31 March 2006 the group had operating losses capital losses and other temporary differences carried forward in respect of which no deferred tax assets were recognised amounting to 21.8 billion.
The groups capital losses and other temporary differences have no expiry date restrictions.
The expiry date of operating losses carried forward is dependent upon the tax law of the various territories in which the losses arise.
A summary of expiry dates for losses in respect of which restrictions apply is set out below
Expiry of losses Restricted losses Americas 286 20122026 Europe 821 20062022 Total restricted losses 1107 Unrestricted losses Operating losses 1475 No expiry Capital losses 18311 No expiry Other 902 No expiry Total unrestricted losses 20688 Total 21795 At the balance sheet date the undistributed earnings of overseas subsidiaries was 8.6 billion.
No deferred tax liabilities have been recognised in respect of those unremitted earnings because the group is in a position to control the timing of the reversal of these temporary differences and it is probable that such differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Temporary differences arising in connection with interests in associates and joint ventures are insignicant.
MINORITY INTERESTS 2006 2005 m m At beginning of year 50 46 Acquisition  3 Share of prots 1 1 Disposal  1 Exchange adjustments 1 1 At end of year 52 50 RECONCILIATION OF MOVEMENTS IN EQUITY 2006 2005 m m Total equity at beginning of year 95 1039 Transition to IAS 32 and IAS 39 209 Prot for the year 1548 1829 Dividends 912 786 Share based payments 65 20 Issue of shares 4 1 Net purchase of treasury shares 344 176 Exchange differences on translation 24 27 Actuarial gains 2122 294 Net fair value movements on cash ow hedges 200 Tax on items taken directly to equity 588 79 Minority interest 2 4 Net movement in equity 1512 1134 Total equity at the end of year 1607 95 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 95 Filename 05.3d Time 143440 Date 200506 Checksum tel SHARE CAPITAL Share capital Share premium m m Balances at 1 April 2004 432 2 Arising on share issues  1 Balances at 31 March 2005 432 3 Arising on share issues  4 Balances at 31 March 2006 432 7 The authorised share capital of the company throughout the years ended 31 March 2006 and 31 March 2005 was 13463 million representing 269260253468 ordinary shares of 5p each.
The allotted called up and fully paid ordinary share capital of the company at 31 March 2006 was 432 million 2005 432 million representing 8635377801 ordinary shares of 5p each 2005 8634629038.
Of the authorised but unissued share capital at 31 March 2006 26 million ordinary shares 2005 26 million were reserved to meet options granted under employee share option schemes.
The share premium account representing the premium on allotment of shares is not available for distribution.
OTHER RESERVES AND RETAINED EARNINGS
Cash ow reserve
Translation reserve
Total other reserves
At 1 April 2004 80  998 918 2439 Prot for the year   1829 Foreign exchange adjustments  27  27 Share based payments   20 Dividends   786 Net purchase of treasury shares 176  176 Actuarial gain   294 Tax on items taken directly to equity  7  7 72 At 31 March 2005 256  20 998 762 1154 Transition to IAS 32 and IAS 39 At 1 April 2005 256 77  20 998 839 1440 Prot for the year   1548 Foreign exchange adjustments  53  53 Share based payments   65 Dividends   912 Net purchase of treasury shares 344  344 Actuarial gain   2122 Net fair value gains  4  4 Gains on available for sale investments  35  35 Fair value loss on net investment hedge  20  20 Recognised in income and expense in the year  204 35 9  248 Tax on items taken directly to equity  45  45 633 At 31 March 2006 600 78  4tela During the year ended 31 March 2006 the company repurchased 165772145 2005 101280000 of its own shares of 5p each representing 2% of the calledup share capital for an aggregate consideration of 365 million 2005 195 million.
At 31 March 2006 290047231 shares 2005 134497000 shares with an aggregate nominal value of 15 million are held as treasury shares at cost.
The cash flow reserve is used to record the effective portion of the cumulative net change in the fair value of cash flow hedging instruments related to hedged transactions that have not yet occurred.
The availableforsale reserve is used to record the cumulative fair value gains and losses on available for sale financial assets.
The cumulative gains and losses are recycled to the income statement on disposal of the assets.
The gross gain in the period amounted to 35 million.
The translation reserve is used to record cumulative translation differences on the assets and liabilities of foreign operations.
The cumulative translation differences are recycled to the income statement on disposal of the foreign operation.
The merger reserve arose on the group reorganisation that occurred in November 2001 and represents the difference between the nominal value of shares in the new parent company BT Group plc and the share capital share premium and capital redemption reserve of the prior parent company British Telecommunications plc.
Other reserves included within this caption relate primarily to unrealised gains and losses on the transfer of assets and group undertakings to a joint venture.
The total impact on reserves of the IAS 32 and IAS 39 transitional adjustments is a charge of 209 million.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 96 Filename 05.3d Time 143440 Date 200506
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS Amounts paid to the groups retirement benet plans are set out in note 29.
There were a number of transactions during the year between the company and its subsidiary undertakings which are eliminated on consolidation and therefore not disclosed.
Key management personnel are deemed to be members of the Operating Committee.
It is this committee which has responsibility for planning directing and controlling the activities of the group.
Key management personnel compensation including the groups directors is shown in the table below 2006 2005 m m Salaries and shortterm benets 5.8 5.2 Post employment benets 1.9 1.1 Share based payments 2.6 1.8 More detailed information concerning directors remuneration shareholdings pension entitlements share options and other long term incentive plans is shown in the audited part of the Report on directors remuneration.
FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENT LIABILITIES Capital expenditure contracted for at the balance sheet date but not yet incurred was 2006 2005 m m Property plant and equipment and software 754 735 Future minimum operating lease payments for the group were as follows 2006 2005 m m Payable in the year ending 31 March 2006  459 2007teltelteltel 414 410 Thereafter 7577 7574 Total future minimum operating lease payments 9782 10184 Operating lease commitments were mainly in respect of land and buildings.
Leases have an average term of 25 years and rentals are xed for an average of 25 years.
At 31 March 2006 other than disclosed below there were no contingent liabilities or guarantees other than those arising in the ordinary course of the groups business and on these no material losses are anticipated.
The group has insurance cover to certain limits for major risks on property and major claims in connection with legal liabilities arising in the course of its operations.
Otherwise the group generally carries its own risks.
The group has provided guarantees relating to certain leases entered into by O2 UK Limited prior to its demerger with O2 on 19 November 2001.
O2 plc has given BT a counterindemnity for these guarantees.
The maximum likely exposure is US72 million 42 million as at 31 March 2006 although this could increase by a further US545 million 314 million in the event of credit default in respect of amounts used to defease future lease obligations.
The guarantee lasts until O2 UK Ltd has discharged all its obligations which is expected to be when the lease ends on 30 January 2017.
The company does not believe there are any pending legal proceedings which would have a material adverse effect on the nancial position or results of operations of the group.
There have been criminal proceedings in Italy against 21 defendants including a former BT employee in connection with the Italian UMTS auction.
Blu in which BT held a minority interest participated in that auction process.
On 20 July 2005 the former BT employee was found not culpable of the fraud charge brought by the Rome Public Prosecutor.
All the other defendents were also acquitted.
The Public Prosecutor is in the process of appealing the courts decision.
If the appeal is successful BT could be held liable with others for any damages.
The company has concluded that it would not be appropriate to make a provision in respect of any such claim.
The European Commission is formally investigating the way the UK Government has set BTs property rates and those paid by Kingston Communications.
The Commission is examining whether the Government has complied with EC Treaty rules on state aid in assessing BTs rates.
BTs rates were set by the Valuation Ofce after lengthy discussions based on well established principles in a transparent process.
In BTs view any allegation of state aid is groundless and BT is condent that the Government will demonstrate the fairness of the UK ratings system.
A nding against HM Government could result in BT having to repay any amount of state aid it may be determined to have received.
The company has concluded that it is not appropriate to make a provision in respect of any such potential nding.
Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 97 Filename 05.3d Time 143441 Date 200506 Checksum tel RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS
The group offers retirement plans to its employees.
The groups main scheme the BT Pension Scheme BTPS is a dened benet scheme where the benets are based on employees length of service and nal pensionable pay.
The BTPS is funded through a legally separate trustee administered fund.
This scheme has been closed to new entrants since 31 March 2001 and replaced by a dened contribution scheme.
Under this dened contribution scheme the income statement charge represents the contribution payable by the group based upon a xed percentage of employees pay.
The total pension costs of the group included within the staff costs in the year was 603 million 2005 540 million of which 552 million 2005 507 million related to the groups main dened benet pension scheme the BTPS.
The increase in the pension cost in the 2006 nancial year principally reects the introduction part way through the 2005 nancial year of Smart Pensions a salary sacrice scheme under which employees elect to stop making employee contributions and for the company to make additional contributions in return for a reduction in gross contractual pay.
As a result there has been a switch between wages and salaries and pension costs of 19 million in the year.
The pension cost applicable to the groups main dened contribution scheme in the year ended 31 March 2006 was 19 million 2005 11 million and 2 million 2005 1 million of contributions to the scheme were outstanding at 31 March 2006.
The group occupies two properties owned by the BTPS scheme on which an annual rental of 2 million is payable.
The BTPS assets are invested in UK and overseas equities UK and overseas properties xed interest and index linked securities deposits and shortterm investments.
At 31 March 2006 the UK equities included 15 million 2005 17 million ordinary shares of the company with a market value of 33 million 2005 36 million.
IAS 19 accounting valuation In accordance with the amendments to IAS 19 Employee Benets the disclosures below are provided prospectively from the 2005 nancial year onwards.
BT has applied the accounting requirements of IAS 19 as follows scheme assets are measured at market value at the balance sheet date scheme liabilities are measured using a projected unit credit method and discounted at the current rate of return on high quality corporate bonds of equivalent term to the liability and actuarial gains and losses are recognised in full in the period in which they occur outside of the income statement in retained earnings and presented in the statement of recognised income and expense.
The nancial assumptions used for the purpose of the actuarial accounting valuations of the BTPS under IAS 19 at 31 March 2006 are Real rates per annum Nominal rates per annumtel 2005 % % % % Rate used to discount liabilities 2.19 2.63 5.00 5.40 Average future increases in wages and salaries 0.75 Average increase in pensions in payment and deferred pensions   2.75 2.70 Ination  average increase in retail price index   2.75 2.70 There is a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 0.5% for the first three years.
The net pension obligation is set out below 2006 2005
Present value of liabilities Decit Assets Present value of liabilities Decit m m m m m m BTPS 35550 38005 2455 29550 34270 4720 Other schemes 640 38187 2547 29628 34435 4807 Deferred tax asset at 30% 764 1434 Net pension obligation 1783 3373 Amounts recognised in the income statement on the basis of the above assumptions in respect of pension obligations are as follows 2006 2005 m m Current service cost 603 540 Total operating charge 603 540 Expected return on pension scheme assets 2070 1918 Interest on pension scheme liabilities 1816 1720 Net nance income 254 198 Total amount charged to the income statement 349 342 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 98 Filename 05.3d Time 143442 Date 200506 Checksum tel RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS continued Actuarial gains and losses have been recognised in the statement of recognised income and expense and the cumulative gain recognised is 2416 million at 31 March 2006 2005 294 million.
The actual return on plan assets was 6925 million 2005 3582 million.
Changes in the present value of the dened benet pension obligation are as follows 2006 2005 m m Opening dened benet pension obligation 34435 32125 Service cost 568 507 Interest cost 1816 1720 Contributions by employees 21 50 Actuarial losses 2733 1370 Obligation on acquisition of subsidiaries  25 Benets paid 1385 1364 Exchange differences 1 2 Closing dened benet pension obligation 38187 34435 The present value of the obligation is derived from long term cash ow projections and is thus inherently uncertain.
Changes in the fair value of plan assets are as follows 2006 2005 m m Opening fair value of plan assets 29628 26963 Expected return 2070 1918 Actuarial gains 4855 1664 Contributions by employer 452 382 Contributions by employees 21 50 Assets on acquisition of subsidiaries  15 Benets paid 1385 1364 Exchange differences 1 Closing fair value of plan assets 35640 29628 The expected long term rate of return and fair values of the assets of the BTPS at 31 March were 2006 2005 Expected long term rate of return per annum Asset fair value Expected long term rate of return per annum Asset fair value % bn % % bn % UK equities 7.4 9.9 28 8.0 9.6 32 NonUK equities 7.4 12.5 35 8.0 9.0 30 Fixedinterest securities 4.9 5.6 16 5.4 4.6 16 Indexlinked securities 4.1 3.2 9 4.4 2.8 10 Property 5.8 4.4 12 6.8 3.6 12 Cash and other 4.0  4.0 The assumption for the expected return in scheme assets is a weighted average based on the assumed expected return for each asset class and the proportions held of each asset class at the beginning of the year.
The expected returns on xed interest and interest linked securities are based on the gross redemption yields at the start of the year.
Expected returns on equities and property are based on a combination of an estimate of the risk premium above yields on government bonds and consensus economic forecasts of future returns.
The longterm expected rate of return on investments does not affect the level of the obligation but does affect the expected return on pension scheme assets within the net nance income.
The history of experience gains and losses are as follows 2006 2005 m m Present value of dened benet obligation 38187 34435 Less Fair value of plan assets 35640 29628 Net pension obligation 2547 4807 Experience adjustment on dened benet obligation 527 437 Percentage of the present value of the dened benet obligation 1.4% 1.3% Experience adjustment on plan assets 4855 1664 Percentage of the plan assets 13.6% 5.6% Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 99 Filename 05.3d Time 143442 Date 200506 Checksum tel RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS continued The group expects to contribute approximately 630 million to the BTPS including 232 million of deciency contributions in the 2007 nancial year.
The mortality assumption has been updated to reect experience and expected future improvements in life expectancy.
The average life expectancy assumptions after retirement at 60 years of age are as follows 2006 2005 Number of years Number of years Male 23.8 23.3 Female 25.4 25.0 Future improvement every 10 years 1.0 0.5 The assumed discount rate salary increases and mortality all have a signicant effect on the IAS 19 accounting valuation.
The following table shows the sensitivity of the valuation to changes in these assumptions.
Impact on decit
0.25 percentage point increase to discount rate 1.4 salary increases 0.3 Additional 1.0 year increase to life expectancy 1.5 Funding valuation A triennial valuation is carried out for the independent scheme trustees by a professionally qualied independent actuary using the projected unit credit method.
The purpose of the valuation is to design a funding plan to ensure that present and future contributions should be sufcient to meet future liabilities.
The triennial valuation as at 31 December 2005 is currently being performed and reviewed in the context of recent regulatory developments and the impact of the Crown Guarantee granted on privatisation in 1984.
Until that concludes contributions will continue to be paid in accordance with the 2002 funding plan.
The contributions for the 2005 and 2006 nancial years were based on the 31 December 2002 valuation.
The funding valuation is performed at 31 December because this is the nancial year end of the BTPS.
The valuation basis for funding purposes is broadly as follows scheme assets are valued at market value at the valuation date and scheme liabilities are measured using a projected unit credit method and discounted at the estimated rate of return reecting the assets of the scheme.
The last three triennial valuations were determined using the following longterm assumptions Real rates per annum Nominal rates per annumteltel valuation valuation valuation valuation valuation valuation %%%%%% Return on existing assets relative to market after allowing for an annual increase in Return on future investments 4.00 4.00 4.25 6.60 7.12 8.42 Average increase in retail price index  2.50 3.00 4.00 Average future increases in wages and salaries 1.5 Average increase in pensions  2.50 3.00 3.754.00 There is a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 1.25% for the first three years.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 100 Filename 05.3d Time 143443 Date 200506 Checksum tel RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS continued At 31 December 2002 the assets of the BTPS had a market value of 22.8 billion 1999 29.7 billion and were sufcient to cover 91.6% 1999 96.8% of the benets accrued by that date after allowing for expected future increases in wages and salaries but not taking into account the costs of providing incremental pension benets for employees leaving under release schemes since that date.
This represents a funding decit of 2.1 billion compared to 1.0 billion at 31 December 1999.
The funding valuation uses conservative assumptions whereas had the valuation been based on the actuarys view of the median estimate basis the funding decit would have been reduced to 0.4 billion.
Although the market value of equity investments had increased and the investment income and contributions received by the scheme exceeded the benets paid by 0.3 billion in the three years ended 31 December 2002 the decit has not improved by the same amount as the liabilities have been calculated on a more prudent basis.
As a result of the triennial funding valuation the group agreed to make employers contributions at a rate of 12.2% of pensionable pay from April 2006 and annual deciency payments of 232 million.
This compared to the employers contribution rate of 11.6% and annual deciency payments of 200 million that were determined under the 1999 funding valuation.
In the year ended 31 March 2006 the group made regular contributions of 396 million 2005 376 million.
Additional special contributions were paid for enhanced pension benets to leavers in the year ended 31 December 2004 of nil 2005 6 million.
Deciency contributions of 54 million were also made 2005 nil as a result of the early payment of 380 million made in the 2004 nancial year that was scheduled for payment in subsequent years.
Under the terms of the trust deed that governs the BTPS the group is required to have a funding plan that should address the decit over a maximum period of 20 years.
The agreed funding plan addresses the decit over a period of 15 years.
The group will continue to make deciency payments until the decit is made good.
The BTPS was closed to new entrants on 31 March 2001 and the age prole of active members will consequently increase.
Under the projected unit credit method the current service cost as a proportion of the active members pensionable salaries is expected to increase as the members of the scheme approach retirement.
Despite the scheme being closed to new entrants the projected payment prole extends over more than 60 years.
EMPLOYEES
2006 2005 Year end Average Year end Average 00telNumber of employees in the group Total employees 104.4 103.0 102.1 99.6 2006 2005 Year end Average Year end Average 00telNumber of employees in the group BT Retail 20.6 19.9 20.4 20.7 BT Wholesale 45.3 44.5 43.6 43.0 BT Global Services 27.8 28.7 28.4 26.0 Total employees 104.4 103.0 102.1 99.6 SHARE BASED PAYMENT PLANS The total charge recognised in the income statement for the year in respect of share based payment plans was 76 million 2005 50 million.
The total value of share options and awards granted in the year ended 31 March 2006 was 64 million 2005 77 million.
The company has an employee share investment plan and savingsrelated share option plans for its employees and those of participating subsidiaries further share option plans for selected employees and an employee stock purchase plan for employees in the United States.
It also has several share plans for executives.
All share based payment plans are equity settled and details of these plans are provided below.
Share option plans BT Group Employee Sharesave plans There is an HM Revenue and Customsapproved savings related share option plan under which employees save on a monthly basis over a three or ve year period towards the purchase of shares at a xed price determined when the option is granted.
This price is usually set at a 20% discount to the market price for ve year plans and 10% for three year plans.
The options must be exercised within six months of maturity of the savings contract otherwise they lapse.
Options are granted annually usually in June.
Similar plans operate for BTs overseas employees.
Employees may cancel sharesave options and remain employed by the group.
In such cases the options so cancelled do not vest and the monthly savings contributions are returned to the employee with interest if applicable.
Such events are accounted for by ceasing to record a share based payments charge from the date of the employees withdrawal from the relevant plan.
Previously recorded compensation expense is not reversed and no charge is made for the accelerated vesting of future options that will not now vest.
Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 101 Filename 05.3d Time 143443 Date 200506 Checksum tel SHARE BASED PAYMENT PLANS continued For options outstanding at 31 March 2006 and 2005 the weighted average exercise prices are shown below.
2006 2005 Number of share options millions
Number of share options millions
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 262 169p 233 180p Granted during the year 59 179p 91 149p Forfeited during the year 20 173p 59 176p Exercised during the year 2 215p Expired during the year 20 216p 3 176p Outstanding at the end of the year 279 166p 262 169p Exercisable at the end of the year  16 218p Options were exercised regularly throughout the year.
The weighted average option price of options exercised during the year was 205p 2005 183p.
The weighted average fair value of savings related share options granted during the year ended 31 March 2006 has been estimated on the date of grant using a binomial option pricing model.
The following weighted average assumptions were used in that model an expected life extending three months later than the rst exercise date share price at date of grant of 223p estimated annualised dividend yield of approximately 5% 2005 5% risk free interest rates of approximately 4% 2005 5% and expected volatility of approximately 25% 2005 25%.
Volatility has been determined by reference to BTs historical volatility over a threeyear period which is expected to reect the share price of BT in the future.
The exercise prices are 192p for Sharesave options exercisable three years after the date of grant and 171p for Sharesave options exercisable ve years after the date of grant.
The weighted average fair value of the share options granted in the year ended 31 March 2006 was 44p 2005 41p for Sharesave options exercisable three years after the date of grant and 55p 2005 52p for Sharesave options exercisable ve years after the date of grant.
Options granted under BTs international sharesave which is a threeyear plan have been valued using the same assumptions.
The weighted average fair value of these share options is 49p 2005 52p.
The exercise price is 171p and the share price at date of grant was 214p.
Global Share Option Plan GSOP There were no options granted under the GSOP in the 2006 nancial year.
The options granted in previous years will be exercisable subject to continued employment and meeting corporate performance targets.
These options were valued using Monte Carlo Simulations.
The weighted average fair value of options granted under the 2005 GSOP was estimated as 36p.
The following weighted average assumptions were used in that model dividend yield of 5% expected volatility of 25% and risk free interest rates of 4%.
Details of this plan are provided in the Report on directors remuneration.
BT Group Legacy Option Plan On the demerger of O2 BTs share option plans ceased to operate and were replaced by similar BT Group Employee Sharesave plans and the BT Group Global Share Option Plan.
The BT Group Legacy Option Plan was launched on 17 December 2001 following the scheme of arrangement and demerger of O2 in November 2001 and is therefore outside the scope of IFRS 2.
Replacement unapproved options over BT Group shares were granted to all participants in the executive option plans who had released their options over British Telecommunications plc shares.
The value of the replacement options was determined by averaging the combined prices of BT Group plc and O2 plc shares over the 20 dealing days following the demerger on 19 November 2001.
This resulted in a factor of 1.3198 being applied to the former option over British Telecommunications plc shares in order to give the number of BT Group shares under the new option.
The option prices of the original options were also adjusted to take account of the different number of shares under option.
The options are exercisable subject to continued employment and meeting corporate performance targets on the third anniversary of the date of grant.
For options outstanding at 31 March 2006 and 2005 in respect of the BT Global Share Option Plan and the BT Group Legacy Option Plan the weighted average exercise prices are shown below.
2006 2005 Number of share options millions
Number of share options millions
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 206 213p 194 216p Granted during the year  31 193p Forfeited during the year 16 205p 18 193p Exercised during the year 3 199p Expired during the year  1 353p Outstanding at the end of the year 187 213p 206 213p Exercisable at the end of the year 57 280p 34 206p BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 102 Filename 05.3d Time 143444 Date 200506 Checksum tel SHARE BASED PAYMENT PLANS continued Outstanding options Options outstanding under all share option plans at 31 March 2006 and 2005 together with their exercise prices and dates were as follows 2006 2005 Option price 2006 Option price 2005 Normal dates of exercise per share millions per share millions BT Group Employee Sharesave plans 2005  218p255p 20 2010 171p 40 Total 279 262 BT Group Legacy Option Plan 20012011 318p602p 14 318p602p 15 Total 14 15 BT Group Global Share Option Plan 20052012 163p263p 45 163p263p 51 20072015 179p215p 28 179p215p 30 Total 173 191 Total outstanding options 466 468 The options outstanding under all share option plans at 31 March 2006 and 2005 have weighted average remaining contractual lives as follows Executive plans 2006 2005 Range of exercise prices
Number of outstanding share options millions
Range of exercise prices
Number of outstanding share options millions
250p  349p 302p 8 65 months 250p  349p 304p 8 77 months 350p  650p 552p 8 53 months 350p  650p 554p 8 65 months Total 187 206 Allemployee plans 2006 2005 Range of exercise prices
Number of outstanding options millions
Range of exercise prices
Number of outstanding options millions
200p  300p 220p 36 18 months 200p  300p 222p 59 22 months Total 279 262 Other share based payment plans Incentive Share Plan Deferred Bonus Plan and Retention Share Plan The BT Group Incentive Share Plan ISP and the BT Group Retention Share Plan RSP were introduced for employees of the group in 2001.
Under the plans company shares are conditionally awarded to participants.
Under the ISP participants are only entitled to these shares in full at the end of a threeyear period if the company has met the relevant predetermined corporate performance measure and if the participants are still employed by the group.
The corporate performance measure is BTs total shareholder return TSR measured against a group of companies from the European Telecom Sector at the beginning of the relevant performance period.
The ISP was operated in the 2006 nancial year with 1382 participants receiving awards over 23183408 shares 2005 1406 participants received awards over 12654013 shares.
Awards under the ISP have been valued using Monte Carlo Simulations.
TSRs were generated for BT and the comparator group at the end of the threeyear performance period using each companys volatility and dividend yield as well as the cross correlations between pairs of stocks.
Simulations were run using averaged one and threeyear volatility and dividend yield for BT and the comparator group.
The weighted average fair value of awards of shares granted under the ISP has been estimated at 124p 2005 98p.
Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 103 Filename 05.3d Time 143444 Date 200506 Checksum tel SHARE BASED PAYMENT PLANS continued Historical dividend yields of 4.8% and 4.1% and volatility of 18% and 24% were used in the oneyear and threeyear models respectively.
Under the RSP the length of retention period before awards vest is exible.
Awards may vest in annual tranches.
The shares are transferred at the end of a specied period only if the participant is still employed by the group.
During the 2006 nancial year 1107330 shares vested in 16 participants in the RSP 2005 1340256 shares vested in 11 participants.
The BT Deferred Bonus Plan DBP was established in 1998 and awards are granted annually to selected employees of the group.
Under this plan shares in the company are transferred to participants at the end of three years if they continued to be employed by the group throughout that period.
On 1 August 2005 1966496 shares 2 August 2004 1280934 shares were transferred to 193 participants 2 August 2004 219 participants at the end of the threeyear deferred period.
At 31 March 2006 24.7 million shares 2005 27.8 million shares in the company were held in trust for employee share plans of which 12.4 million shares 2005 12.7 million shares were held for the ISP 2.9 million shares 2005 2.8 million shares were held for the RSP and 5.9 million shares 2005 7.9 million shares were held for the DBP.
In accordance with the terms of the plans dividends or dividend equivalents earned on the shares during the conditional periods are reinvested in company shares for the potential benet of the participants.
Awards under the DBP and RSP were valued by reference to the weighted average market price of the shares on the date of grant of 223p and 216p respectively.
Employee Share Investment Plan The BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP has been in operation since December 2001.
The ESIP which has been approved by HM Revenue and Customs comprises directshare and allshare.
Under directshare UK employees are given an opportunity to purchase shares partnership shares out of pretax salary up to a maximum value of 1500 per year.
During the 2006 nancial year 6.4 million shares 2005 6.1 million shares including 0.8 million shares 2005 0.2 million shares purchased by dividend reinvestment were purchased by the Trustee of the ESIP on behalf of 14443 2005 13017 employees at a total cost of 13.7 million 2005 11.7 million.
Allshare the free shares element of the ESIP allows BT to provide free shares to UK employees which are held in trust for at least three years.
Employees outside the UK receive cash awards equivalent to the value of the free shares.
In 2006 1% 2005 0.5% of pretax prots amounting to 22 million was allocated to allshare 2005 11 million.
Up to 2% of pretax prots would have been available subject to meeting two corporate performance targets one of these to maintain earnings per share at the same level as in the 2005 nancial year and the other to have ve percent more customers very or extremely satised with BT provided the percentage of customers who are dissatised did not increase compared with the 2005 nancial year.
The earnings per share target was met but not the one for customer satisfaction.
The ESIP replaced the BT Employee Share Ownership Scheme which operated for employee prot sharing until 2001.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan The BT Group Employee Stock Purchase Plan ESPP for employees in the US enables participants to purchase American Depositary Shares ADS quarterly at a price the Initial Base Option Price which is 85% of the fair market price of an ADS at the start of the Initial Enrolment Period or in the case of employees who enrol in the ESPP after the Initial Enrolment Period 85% of the fair market price of an ADS on the last business day of the calendar quarter immediately following enrolment.
From 15 May 2005 to 15 May 2006 1750560 shares 175056 ADSs have been transferred to participants out of treasury under the ESPP from 15 May 2004 to 15 May 2005 934782 shares 93478 ADSs.
The third offer with an Initial Base Option Price of US31.52 ended in December 2005.
A fourth offer was launched in December 2005 with an Initial Base Option Price of US32.53 and will expire in December 2006.
AUDIT SERVICES The auditors remuneration for the year ended 31 March 2006 for the group was 5593000 2005 4396000.
The audit fees payable to the companys auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP for the company and UK subsidiary undertakings statutory accounts were 3351000 2005 2454000.
The audit fee of the company was 37700 2005 35000.
The following fees for audit and nonaudit services were paid or are payable to the companys auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP for the years ended 31 March 2006 and 31 March 2005.
2006 2005 Audit services Statutory audit 5538 4148 Regulatory audit 1065 1423 6603 5571 Further assurance services Corporate nance advice 317 989 Other 311 110 628 1099 Tax services 1775 2912 Other services 216 434 Total 9222 10016 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 104 Filename 05.3d Time 143444 Date 200506
AUDIT SERVICES continued Total fees paid or payable to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP in the UK for non audit services in the year ended 31 March 2006 were 3015000 2005 5171000.
In order to maintain the independence of the external auditors the Board has determined policies as to what non audit services can be provided by the companys external auditors and the approval processes related to them.
Under those policies work of a consultancy nature will not be offered to the external auditors unless there are clear efciencies and value added benets to the company.
BTs regulatory obligations require it to publish audited regulatory nancial statements.
The fees for regulatory work principally reect the audit fees associated with those regulatory nancial statements.
The fees for tax services include tax compliance and tax advisory services.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT The group adopted IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement with effect from 1 April 2005.
Financial information was previously prepared under UK GAAP for the nancial year ended 31 March 2005.
Where applicable information for the comparative period has been separately disclosed below in order to comply with the previous requirements of UK GAAP.
The group issues or holds nancial instruments mainly to nance its operations for the temporary investment of shortterm funds and to manage the currency and interest rate risks arising from its operations and from its sources of nance.
In addition various nancial instruments for example trade receivables and trade payables arise directly from the groups operations.
The group nances its operations primarily by a mixture of issued share capital retained prots deferred taxation longterm loans and shortterm loans principally by issuing commercial paper supported by a committed borrowing facility.
The group borrows in the major longterm debt markets in major currencies.
Typically but not exclusively the bond markets provide the most costeffective means of longterm borrowing.
The group uses derivative nancial instruments primarily to manage its exposure to market risks from changes in interest and foreign exchange rates against these borrowings.
The derivatives used for this purpose are principally interest rate swaps cross currency swaps and forward currency contracts.
The group also uses nancial instruments to hedge some of its currency exposures arising from its overseas shortterm investment funds and other nonUK assets liabilities and forward purchase commitments.
The nancial instruments used comprise borrowings in foreign currencies and forward currency contracts and interest and cross currency swaps.
The group does not hold or issue derivative nancial instruments for trading purposes.
All transactions in derivative nancial instruments are undertaken to manage the risks arising from underlying business activities.
The groups prole of borrowings and shortterm funds is managed with consideration of the cash ow from operations.
These borrowings and short term funds are managed by the centralised treasury operation.
The types of nancial instrument used for investment of shortterm funds are prescribed in group treasury policies with limits on the exposure to any one organisation.
Short term investment in nancial instruments is partially undertaken on behalf of the group by substantial external fund managers who are limited to dealing in debt instruments and certain dened derivative instruments and are given strict guidelines on credit diversication and maturity proles.
The group has a centralised treasury operation whose primary role is to manage liquidity funding investment and the groups nancial risk including risk from volatility in currency and interest rates and counterparty credit risk.
The treasury operation is not a prot centre and the objective is to manage risk at optimum cost.
The Board sets the policy for the groups centralised treasury operation and its activities are subject to a set of controls commensurate with the magnitude of the borrowings and investments under its management.
Counterparty credit risk is closely monitored and managed within controls set by the Board.
During the year ended 31 March 2006 the groups net debt note 10 reduced from 7.9 billion to 7.5 billion mainly due to operational and working capital inows.
During the 2006 nancial year two substantial notes matured namely the 2005 US dollar 7.875% notes and 2006 Euro 6.375% notes amounting to 3.8 billion and were primarily funded from current nancial assets and cash and cash equivalents.
The group utilised its commercial paper programme during the year which was supported by a committed borrowing facility as well as raising a sterling oating rate borrowing of 1 billion.
During the year ended 31 March 2005 the groups net debt reduced from 8.5 billion to 7.9 billion mainly from working capital inows and proceeds from the sale of investments.
During the 2005 nancial year the group restructured some of its swaps portfolio.
As a result the group terminated cross currency and interest rate swaps with a total nominal of 2.9 billion. terminated.
This resulted in the group paying 107 million in reducing gross debt and receiving a net 14 million of interest receipts.
The interest receipts and payments on restructuring were included within deferred income and other debtors respectively and were to be amortised to the income statement over the term of the underlying hedged debt.
Upon adoption of IAS 32 and IAS 39 from 1 April 2005 a portion of the interest payments on restructuring was written off to reserves.
There has been no change in the nature of the groups risk prole between 31 March 2006 and the date of these nancial statements.
Interest rate risk management The group has interest bearing nancial assets and nancial liabilities.
The groups policy is to ensure that at least 70% of net debt is at xed rates.
In order to manage this prole the group has entered into interest rate swap agreements with commercial banks and other institutions to vary the amounts and periods for which interest rates on borrowings are xed.
Under interest rate swaps the group agrees with other parties to exchange at specied intervals the differences between xed rate and oating rate interest amounts calculated by reference to an agreed notional principal amount.
Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 105 Filename 05.3d Time 143445 Date 200506 Checksum tel FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT continued The majority of the groups longterm borrowings have been and are subject to xed sterling interest rates after applying the impact of hedging instruments.
At 31 March 2006 the group had outstanding interest rate swap agreements with notional principal amounts totalling 5.1 billion compared to 5.3 billion at 31 March 2005.
At 31 March 2006 the groups xedoating interest rate prole after hedging on net debt was 8614 2005 955.
Based on the composition of net debt at 31 March 2006 a one percentage point increase in interest rates would increase the groups annual net nance expense by approximately 10 million.
This is consistent with the position at 31 March 2005.
Foreign exchange risk management The purpose of the groups foreign currency hedging activities is to protect the group from the risk that the eventual net inows and net outows will be adversely affected by changes in exchange rates.
Most of the groups current revenue is invoiced in pounds sterling and most of its operations and costs arise within the UK.
The groups foreign currency borrowings which totalled 5.4 billion at 31 March 2006 are used to nance its operations.
The borrowings have been predominantly swapped to sterling.
Cross currency swaps and forward currency contracts have been entered into to reduce the foreign currency exposure on the groups operations and the groups net assets.
The group also enters into forward currency contracts to hedge foreign currency investments interest expense capital purchases and purchase and sale commitments on a selective basis.
The commitments hedged are principally US dollar and euro denominated.
As a result of these policies the groups exposure to foreign currency arises mainly on the residual currency exposure on its nonUK investments in its subsidiaries and on imbalances between the value of outgoing and incoming international calls.
A 10% strengthening in sterling against major currencies would cause the groups net assets at 31 March 2006 to fall by less than 150 million with an insignicant effect on the groups prots.
This is consistent with the position at 31 March 2005.
At 31 March 2006 the group had outstanding contracts to sell or purchase foreign currency with a total gross notional principal of 6.4 billion 2005 9.8 billion.
The majority of these instruments were cross currency swaps with a remaining term ranging from 1 to 25 years.
The values of forward currency contracts included in the gross notional principal at 31 March 2006 were 809 million 2005 427 million for purchases of currency and 781 million 2005 782 million for sales of currency.
The forward currency contracts had a term remaining ranging from three to 364 days.
Credit risk management The group considers that it is not exposed to major concentrations of credit risk.
The group however is exposed to creditrelated losses in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to nancial instruments but does not expect any counterparties to fail to meet their obligations.
The group limits the amount of credit exposure to any one counterparty.
Where multiple transactions are undertaken with a single counterparty or group of related counterparties the group may enter into a netting arrangement to reduce the groups exposure to credit risk.
Currently the group makes use of standard International Swaps and Derivative Association ISDA documentation.
In addition where management have a legal right of set off and the ability and intention to settle net the relevant asset and liabilities are netted within the balance sheet.
The group seeks collateral or other security where it is considered necessary.
The maximum credit risk exposure of the groups nancial assets at 31 March 2006 is represented by the amounts reported under the corresponding balance sheet headings.
Liquidity risk management The group ensures its liquidity is maintained by entering into long and short term nancial instruments to support operational and other funding requirements.
The groups liquidity and funding management process includes projecting cash ows and considering the level of liquid assets in relation thereto monitoring balance sheet liquidity and maintaining a diverse range of funding sources and backup facilities.
Liquid assets surplus to immediate operating requirements of the group are generally invested and managed by the centralised treasury function.
Requirements of group companies for operating nance are met whenever possible from central resources. he group manages liquidity risk by maintaining adequate committed borrowing facilities.
During the year the group utilised its commercial paper programme which was supported by a committed borrowing facility of up to 1535 million 2005 145 million.
Of this total 1500 million of the borrowing facility is available for a period of ve years.
Renancing risk is managed by limiting the amount of borrowing that matures within any specied period.
Price risk management The group has limited exposure to equity securities price risk on investments held by the group.
Hedging activities The group entered into a combination of interest rate and cross currency swaps designated as a combination of fair value and cash ow hedges in order to hedge certain risks associated with the the groups US dollar and euro borrowings.
The risks being hedged consist of currency cash ows associated with future interest and principal payments and the fair value risk of certain elements of borrowings arising from uctuations in currency rates and interest rates.
At 31 March 2006 the group had outstanding interest rate swap agreements in cash ow hedges against borrowings with a total notional principal amount of 3.2 billion.
The fair value of these interest rate swaps at the balance sheet date comprised liabilities of 405 million.
The interest rate swaps have a remaining term ranging from four to 25 years to match the underlying hedged cash ows arising on the borrowings consisting of annual and semiannual interest payments.
The interest receivable under these swap contracts are at a weighted average rate of 4.6% and interest payable are at a weighted average rate of 5.9%.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 106 Filename 05.3d Time 143445 Date 200506 Checksum tel FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT continued At 31 March 2006 the group had outstanding cross currency swap agreements in cash ow and fair value hedges against borrowings with a total notional principal amount of 4.8 billion.
The fair value of these cross currency swaps at the balance sheet date comprised 32 million assets and 433 million liabilities.
The cross currency swaps have a remaining term ranging from one to 25 years to match the underlying hedged borrowings consisting of annual and semiannual interest payments.
The interest receivable under these swap contracts are at a weighted average rate of 8.0% and interest payable are at a weighted average rate of 8.5%.
Forward currency contracts have been designated as cash ow hedges of currency cash ows associated with certain euro and US dollar step up interest payments on bonds.
At 31 March 2006 the group had outstanding forward currency contracts with a total notional principal amount of 77 million.
The fair value of the forward currency contracts at the balance sheet date comprised an asset of 1 million and had a remaining term of between three and 11 months after which they will be rolled into new contracts.
The hedged interest cash ows arise on a semiannual basis and extend over a period of up to 12 years.
Spot movements on forward currency contracts have been designated as cash ow hedges of currency cash ows associated with certain euro and US dollar commercial paper issues.
At 31 March 2006 the group had outstanding forward currency contracts with a total notional principal amount of 434 million.
The fair value of the forward currency contracts at the balance sheet date comprised assets of 6 million and had a remaining term of between one and two months to match the cash ows on maturity of the underlying commercial paper.
Spot movements on forward currency contracts have been designated as cash ow hedges against spot movements on currency cash ows associated with the forecast purchase of xed assets and invoice cash ows arising on certain dollar denominated supplies.
At 31 March 2006 the group had outstanding forward currency contracts with a total notional principal amount of 6 million assets and 197 million liabilities and a remaining term of less than one month after which they will be rolled into new contracts.
The forecast cash ows are anticipated to arise over a period of one month to six years from the balance sheet date.
The group has hedged spot movements on currency cash ows associated with US dollar denominated investments using forward currency contracts.
At 31 March 2006 the group had outstanding forward currency contracts with a total notional principal amount of 759 million.
The fair value of the forward foreign currency contracts at the balance sheet date comprised liabilities of 5 million and had a remaining term of less than one month.
Other derivatives At 31 March 2006 the group recognised the fair value of an option contained in a supplier contract which required separate recognition.
The option allows the supplier to acquire a certain share in one of the groups investments based on the volume of trade.
In addition two embedded derivatives expired during the year.
The rst related to an option exercisable on the groupsUS dollar convertible bond see note 5 and the second related to a put option whose value was based on an underlying interest differential between sterling xed and oating interest rates.
At 31 March 2006 the group held certain foreign currency forward and interest rate swap contracts that were not in hedging relationships in accordance with IAS 39.
Foreign currency forward contracts were economically hedging operational purchases and sales and had a notional principal amount of 16 million assets and 101 million liabilities as at 31 March 2006 and a maturity period of under 12 months.
Interest rate swaps not in hedging relationships under IAS 39 had a notional principal amount of 1.9 billion at 31 March 2006 and mature between 2014 and 2030.
The interest receivable under these swap contracts are at a weighted average rate of 6.1% and interest payable are at a weighted average rate of 7.7%.
The volatility arising from these swaps is recognised through the income statement but is limited due to a natural offset in their valuation movements.
Fair value of nancial instruments The following table discloses the carrying amounts and fair values of all of the groups nancial instruments which are not carried at an amount which approximates to its fair value on the balance sheet at 31 March 2006 and 2005.
The carrying amounts are included in the group balance sheet under the indicated headings.
The fair value of the nancial instruments are the amounts at which the instruments could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties other than in a forced liquidation or sale.
In particular the fair values of listed investments were estimated based on quoted market prices for those investments.
The carrying amount of the shortterm deposits and investments approximated to their fair values due to the short maturity of the investments held.
The carrying amount of trade receivables and payables approximated to their fair values due to the short maturity of the amounts receivable and payable.
The fair value of the groups bonds debentures notes nance leases and other longterm borrowings has been estimated on the basis of quoted market prices for the same or similar issues with the same maturities where they existed and on calculations of the present value of future cash ows using the appropriate discount rates in effect at the balance sheet dates where market prices of similar issues did not exist.
The fair value of the groups outstanding swaps and foreign exchange contracts where the estimated amounts calculated using discounted cash ow models that the group would receive or pay in order to terminate such contracts in an arms length transaction taking into account market rates of interest and foreign exchange of the balance sheet date.
Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 107 Filename 05.3d Time 143446 Date 200506 Checksum tel FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT continued Carrying amount Fair valuetel 2005 m m m m
Financial liabilities Listed bonds debentures and notes 7140 10481 7946 11793 Finance leases 845 1100 885 1108 Other loans and borrowings 1950 424 1976 452
Current and non current assets Current and non current liabilities 1152 847 1152 1692 The net fair values of derivatives under previously reported UK GAAP amounted to 1435 million in the 2005 financial year which compares to 1495 million reported in the table above being 197 million assets less 1692 million liabilities.
Under UK GAAP the fair value excluded interest accruals which were carrying amounts reported within accrued income and accrued expenses.
Financial liabilities The following tables set out the exposure of nancial liabilities to market pricing interest cash ow risk and currency risk.
The maturity prole of nancial liabilities reects the contractual repricing dates.
Listed bonds debentures and notes Effect of hedging and interest
Finance leases Effect of hedging and interest
Other
Effect of hedging and interest
Current and non current trade and other payables
Fixed rate interest Pound sterling 2022 4077 6099 108  10tel US dollar 4037 4037  66 66 Total xed rate interest nancial liabilities 6849 750 6099 108  108 712 8 704 Floating rate interest Pound sterling 29tel9 559 1238 3 1235 Euro  169  169 Total oating rate interest nancial liabilities 29tel9 728 1238 3 1235 Total interest bearing nancial liabilities 7140 59 7081 845 9 836 1950 11 1939 Noninterest bearing nancial liabilities Pound sterling  5056 298 Euro  923 US dollar  402 Other  82 Total 7140 59 7081 845 9 836 1950 11 1939 6463 298 Maturity prole of interest bearing nancial liabilities based on contractual repricing dates Less than one year 700 682 1382 737 9 728 1810 11 1799 Between one and two years 624 624 Between two and three years  140  140 Between three and four years 120 120 Between four and ve years 2503 7 2510 Greater than ve years 3193 4 3189 108  108 Total interest bearing nancial liabilities 7140 59 7081 845 9 836 1950 11 1939 Weighted average effective xed interest rates %%%%%% Pound sterling 7.3 8.8 10.4 10.4 9.1 6.4 Euro 7.6   2.6 US dollar 8.8   4.7 Adjustment for hedging and interest reflects the effect of currency derivatives reclassifies the carrying amount to reflect interest derivatives and excludes interest and fair value adjustments for hedged risk recognised in carrying amounts.
The carrying amount excludes 1120 million of current and 40 million of noncurrent trade and other payables which relate to nonfinancial liabilities and includes current tax liabilities.
The carrying amount excludes 9 million of current and 24 million of noncurrent provisions which relate to nonfinancial liabilities.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 108 Filename 05.3d Time 143447 Date 200506 Checksum tel FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT continued The oating rate nancial liabilities bear interest rates xed in advance for periods ranging from one day to one year by reference to LIBOR.
Financial assets The following tables set out the exposure of nancial assets to market pricing and interest cash ow risk and currency risk.
The maturity prole of nancial assets reects the contractual repricing dates.
Current investments Effect of hedging and interest
Noncurrent investments Cash and cash equivalents Effect of hedging and interest Adjusted cash and cash equivalents Trade and other receivables m m m m m m m m Fixed rate interest Pound sterling 3  3  19  19 Euro  6  6 Total xed rate nancial assets 3  3  25  25 Floating rate interest Pound sterling 14 342 356  1127 422 1549 Euro  215  215 Other  76  76 Total oating rate nancial assets 362 6 356  1940  1940 Total interest bearing nancial assets 365 6 359  1965  1965 Noninterest bearing nancial assets Pound sterling  12  1955 Euro  1  647 US dollar  2  269 Other  2  74 Total 365 6 359 17 1965  1965 2945 Adjustment for hedging and interest reflects the effect of currency derivatives reclassifies the carrying amount to reflect interest derivatives and excludes interest recognised in carrying amounts.
The carrying amount excludes 1254 million of current trade and other receivables which relate to nonfinancial assets.
The maturity prole of interest bearing nancial assets based on contractual repricing dates is less than one year.
The oating rate nancial assets bear interest rate in their respective currencies xed in advance for periods ranging from one day to one year by reference to LIBOR and EURIBOR.
Additional nancial instrument disclosures required under UK GAAP for the 2005 nancial year The following information is provided in accordance with the requirements of FRS 13 Derivatives and other nancial instruments disclosures.
The nancial information excludes all of the groups shortterm receivables and payables.
Financial liabilities After taking into account the various interest rate swaps and forward foreign currency contracts entered into by the group the interest rate prole of the groups nancial liabilities at 31 March 2005 was Fixed rate nancial liabilities Floating rate nancial liabilities Financial liabilities on which no interest is paid Total Currency m m m m Total Sterling 7488 5101  12589 For the xed rate nancial liabilities the average interest rates and the average periods for which the rates are xed are Weighted average interest rate Weighted average period for which rate is xed Currency % Years Sterling 8.8 11 The oating rate nancial liabilities bear interest at rates xed in advance for periods ranging from one day to one year by reference to LIBOR.
The maturity prole of nancial liabilities is as given in note 18.
Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 109 Filename 05.3d Time 143447 Date 200506 Checksum tel FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT continued Financial assets After taking into account the various interest rate swaps and forward foreign currency contracts entered into by the group the interest rate prole of the groups nancial assets at 31 March 2005 was Fixed rate Floating rate Financial assets nancial Financial on which no assets assets interest is paid Total Currency m m m m Sterling 106 4697 8 4811 Euro  11 Other  44 Total 106 4697 13 4816 The sterling xed rate nancial assets yield interest at a weighted average of 4.4% for a weighted average period of 22 months.
The oating rate nancial assets bear interest at rates xed in advance for periods up to one year by reference to LIBOR.
Fair values of nancial assets held for trading Net gain included in prot and loss account 18 Fair value of nancial assets held for trading at 31 March 546 The net gain was derived from government bondscommercial paper and similar debt instruments.
The average fair value of nancial assets held during the year ended 31 March 2005 did not differ materially from the year end position.
Hedges
Gains and losses on instruments used for hedging are not recognised until the exposure that is being hedged is itself recognised.
Unrecognised and deferred gains and losses on instruments used for hedging and those recognised in the years ended 31 March 2005 are as follows Gains Losses m m Gains and losses recognised in the year but arising in previous years unrecognised at the balance sheet date 47 799 carried forward in the year end balance sheet pending recognition in the prot and loss account expected to be recognised in the following year unrecognised at balance sheet date 36 51 carried forward in the year end balance sheet pending recognition in the prot and loss account Excluding gains and losses on hedges accounted for by adjusting the carrying amount of a fixed asset.
Currency exposures The table below shows the currency exposures of the groups net monetary assets liabilities in terms of those transactional exposures that give rise to net currency gains and losses recognised in the prot and loss account.
Such exposures comprise the monetary assets and monetary liabilities of the group that are not denominated in the operating or functional currency of the operating unit involved other than certain nonsterling borrowings treated as hedges of net investments in nonUK operations.
At
31 March 2005 these exposures were as follows Sterling US dollar Euro Other Total m m m m m Functional currency of group operation Sterling  53 6 1 48 Euro 2  2 Total 2 53 6 1 46 The amounts shown in the table above take into account the effect of any currency swaps forward contracts and other derivatives entered into to manage those currency exposures.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 110 Filename 05.3d Time 143448 Date 200506
EXPLANATION OF TRANSITION TO IFRS These are the groups rst consolidated nancial statements prepared in accordance with EUadopted IFRS.
The accounting policies set out on pages 65 to 72 have been applied in preparing the nancial statements for the year ended 31 March 2006 the comparative information for the year ended 31 March 2005 and the preparation of an opening balance sheet at 1 April 2004 the groups date of transition.
IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement and IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation have not been applied to the comparative periods because the group has taken a transitional exemption and adopted these standards prospectively from 1 April 2005.
In preparing its opening IFRS balance sheet the group has made adjustments to amounts previously reported in its nancial statements under UK GAAP.
IFRS and UK GAAP are not directly comparable.
An explanation of how the transition from previous UK GAAP to IFRS has affected the groups nancial position is set out below.
31 March 2005 1 April 2004 Notes m m Total equity under UK GAAP 3901 3112 Adjustments to equity to conform with IFRS net of deferred tax Employee benets a 4092 4390 Share based payments b7 Goodwill and other intangibles c16 Dividends d 551 454 Leases e 288 215 Total reduction in equity 3806 4151 Total equity decit under IFRS 95 1039 Notes m Prot for the year under UK GAAP 1821 Adjustments to prot to conform with IFRS net of deferred tax Employee benets a86 Share based payments b 21 Goodwill and other intangibles c16 Leases e 73 Total adjustment to prot for the year 8 Prot for the year under IFRS 1829 Under IAS 7 Cash Flow Statements movements in cash and cash equivalents are reconciled.
Under UK GAAP movements in cash balances only are reconciled.
The change in the presentation of the cash ow statement under IAS 7 has no impact on the cash ow generated by the group.
Effect of IAS 32 and IAS 39 transitional adjustment note f 31 March
1 April m m m Non current assets Derivative nancial instruments 18 5 23 Current assets Trade and other receivables 4269 275 3994 Derivative nancial instruments 143 31 174 Loans and receivables 2003 45 2048 Availableforsale investments 1149 2 1151 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 6763 861 5902 Derivative nancial instruments 375 321 696 Loans and other borrowings 4261 111 4372 Non current liabilities Loans and other borrowings 7744 194 7938 Deferred tax liabilities 1715 272 1443 Derivative nancial instruments 472 524 996 Reserves 387 209 596 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 111 Filename 05.3d Time 143448 Date 200506 Checksum tel EXPLANATION OF TRANSITION TO IFRS continued First Time adoption exemptions applied IFRS 1 Firsttime Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards sets out the transitional rules which must be applied when IFRS is applied for the rst time.
The group is required to select accounting policies in accordance with IFRS valid at its rst IFRS reporting date and apply those policies retrospectively.
The standard sets out certain mandatory exceptions to retrospective application and certain optional exemptions.
The exemptions adopted by the group are as set out below.
Business combinations the group has elected not to apply IFRS 3 Business Combinations retrospectively to business combinations that occurred before the date of transition 1 April 2004.
Employee benets the group has elected to recognise all cumulative actuarial gains and losses from employee benets schemes at the date of transition.
All subsequent actuarial gains and losses have been recognised in full in the period in which they occur in the statement of recognised income and expense in accordance with IAS 19 Employee Benets as amended on 16 December 2004.
Share based payments the group has elected to apply IFRS 2 Share Based Payment retrospectively to all equity instruments granted after 7 November 2002 and which were not fully vested as at 1 January 2005.
Cumulative translation differences the group has elected to reset the foreign currency translation reserve to zero at the transition date.
Any gains and losses on subsequent disposals of foreign operations will exclude any translation differences arising prior to the date.
Financial instruments the group has chosen to utilise the exemption from the requirements to restate comparative information for IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement and hence these standards have been applied prospectively as of 1 April 2005.
NOTES TO EXPLAIN THE EFFECTS OF IFRS IN THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS a Employee benets Under UK GAAP the group previously measured pension commitments and other related postretirement benets in accordance with SSAP 24 Accounting for Pension Costs with additional disclosures provided in accordance with FRS 17 Retirement
Under IFRS the group measures pension commitments and other related postretirement benets in accordance with IAS 19 Employee Benets.
Under IAS 19 the income statement charge is split between an operating charge and a net nance charge.
The net nance charge relates to the unwinding of the discount applied to the liabilities of the scheme offset by the expected return on the assets of the scheme based on conditions prevailing at the start of the year.
Actuarial gains and losses are recognised immediately in reserves.
Under SSAP 24 the asset on the balance sheet represented the timing differences between the pension charge recognised in the prot and loss account and the payments made to the pension scheme.
Under IAS 19 the liability on the balance sheet represents the decit in the pension scheme.
The scheme assets are valued at market value and the liabilities are discounted using a high quality corporate bond rate.
Under SSAP 24 pension charges for the year ended 31 March 2005 were 465 million including a charge for the amortisation of the SSAP 24 decit in the BTPS and an interest credit relating to the balance sheet prepayment.
Under IAS 19 the total charges for the year ended 31 March 2005 were 342 million split between an operating charge and net nance income.
Accordingly for the year ended 31 March 2005 there is an additional 75 million charge to operating prot and 198 million of net nance income has been recognised under IAS 19.
A related deferred tax charge of 37 million has also been recognised.
The net effect has been an increase in prot of 86 million.
A pension liability has been recognised at 31 March 2005 of 4807 million and a deferred tax asset of 1434 million offset by the reversal of provisions of 44 million for 31 March 2005.
The pension prepayment on the UK GAAP balance sheet of 1118 million has also been reversed including the associated deferred tax liability.
The net effect has been a reduction in equity at 31 March 2005 of 4092 million.
A pension liability has been recognised at 1 April 2004 of 5136 million and a deferred tax asset of 1541 million offset by the reversal of provisions of 36 million.
The pension prepayment of 1172 million has also been reversed including the associated deferred tax liability.
The net effect has been a reduction in equity at 1 April 2004 of 4390 million.
Under UK GAAP an expense was recognised for the award of share options and shares based on their intrinsic value the difference between the exercise price and the market value at the date of the award.
The majority of BTs share based payments are made under all employee Save As You Earn plans which were exempt under UK GAAP and the intrinsic value of many of the senior management schemes is nil.
Under IFRS 2 Share Based Payment an expense is recognised in the income statement for all share based payments both awards of options and awards of shares.
This expense is based on the fair value at the date of grant of the award using an option pricing model and is charged to the income statement over the related performance period.
The adoption of IFRS 2 has resulted in an increased operating charge for the year ended 31 March 2005 of 28 million. related deferred tax benet of 7 million has also been recognised with the net effect being a decrease in prot of 21 million.
The credit entry for the share based payments is recognised directly in reserves as the awards are equity settled.
The net effect has been an increase in equity of 7 million at 31 March 2005.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 112 Filename 05.3d Time 143448 Date 200506
EXPLANATION OF TRANSITION TO IFRS continued c Goodwill and other intangible assets UK GAAP required goodwill to be amortised over its expected useful economic life.
Under IFRS 3 Business Combinations goodwill is no longer amortised but held at its carrying value on the balance sheet and tested annually for impairment.
In addition IAS 38 Intangible Assets requires other intangible assets arising on acquisitions after the transition date to be separately identied and amortised over their useful economic life often a shorter period than previously used for goodwill.
As a result intangible assets such as customer relationships and trademarks need to be separately valued and recognised on business combinations and then amortised over their useful economic lives.
The UK GAAP goodwill amortisation charge in the year to 31 March 2005 of 16 million has been reversed.
The other intangible assets arising from acquisitions since 1 April 2004 are being amortised over their estimated useful economic lives.
Computer software that is not an integral part of the associated hardware is classied as an intangible asset under IAS 38.
Under UK GAAP the groups policy was to categorise all capitalised software as tangible xed assets.
This has resulted in a balance sheet reclassication of 615 million as at 31 March 2005 but has had no impact on prot or equity.
Under UK GAAP the dividend charge was recognised in the prot and loss account in the period to which it related.
Under IAS 10 Events After The Balance Sheet Date dividends are not recognised in the income statement but directly in reserves.
In addition the nal dividend is recognised only when it has been declared and approved by the company in a general meeting.
The nal dividend liabilities for the 2005 and 2004 nancial years of 551 million and 454 million respectively have been reversed at 31 March 2005 and 1 April 2004 as the associated dividends had not been approved at those dates.
Under IAS 17 Leases there is a requirement to view leases of land separately from leases of buildings.
Furthermore there is a requirement to recognise operating lease charges as an expense on a straight line basis.
As a result the building elements of a small number of properties have been reclassied from operating leases under UK GAAP to nance leases under IFRS and lease rentals under the groups 2001 sale and operating leaseback transaction are recognised on a straight line basis under IFRS.
For those properties reclassied as nance leases prot before tax for the year ended 31 March 2005 has been reduced by approximately 3 million as a result of the recognition of depreciation and nance lease interest charges and the removal of the UK GAAP operating lease charges.
Recognising the operating lease charges on a straight line basis has further reduced the prot before tax for the year ended 31 March by 101 million.
A deferred tax benet of 31 million has also been recognised with the net effect being a 73 million reduction in prot.
Those properties reclassied as nance leases have been capitalised and are included within property plant and equipment at the lower of the present value of the minimum lease payments or the fair value of the lease asset which was 93 million at 1 April 2004 and 90 million at 31 March 2005 respectively.
The associated nance lease obligation has also been recognised being 105 million and 107 million at 1 April 2004 and 31 March 2005 respectively.
The excess of the sales proceeds over the previous carrying value has deferred and is being recognised in the income statement over the lease term.
The deferred gain included in deferred income at 1 April 2004 and 31 March 2005 was 44 million and 42 million respectively.
Where the operating lease rentals are recognised on a straight line basis the difference between the amounts recognised in the income statement and the lease payments is included in other creditors and amounted to 251 million and 352 million at 1 April 2004 and 31 March 2005 respectively.
A deferred tax liability of 100 million and 123 million at 1 April 2004 and 31 March 2005 has been recognised.
The net effect of the above has been a reduction in equity of 215 million and 288 million at 1 April 2004 and 31 March 2005 respectively.
Under UK GAAP the group previously measured nancial assets and liabilities in accordance with the principles of FRS 4 Capital Instruments FRS 5 Reporting the Substance of Transactions and SSAP 20 Foreign Currency Translation.
Current asset investments were recognised at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Debt instruments were stated at the amount of the net proceeds adjusted to amortise any discount over the term of the debt.
Debt and current asset investments were further adjusted for the effect of the currency element of swaps and forward contracts used as a hedge against these instruments.
The group also provided disclosures in accordance with FRS 13 Derivatives and Other Financial Instruments Disclosures setting out the objectives policies and strategies for holding or issuing nancial instruments and the fair value of nancial instruments held at the balance sheet date.
IAS 39 requires all derivative nancial instruments to be recorded at fair value on the balance sheet.
The fair value of derivative nancial instruments recognised on the balance sheet on transition at 1 April 2005 was a net liability of 1.5 billion.
This fair value included a net liability of 0.7 billion which was previously recognised under UK GAAP reecting the currency element of nancial instruments and accrued interest associated with derivatives.
The additional net liability of 0.8 billion arising on transition resulted in a corresponding net decrease to equity.
Future market interest rate and currency movements will give rise to adjustments to these fair values.
Where hedge accounting cannot be applied under the prescriptive rules of IAS 39 changes in fair values of derivative nancial instruments will impact the income statement.
In addition the majority of the gains and losses associated with terminated derivative nancial instruments that were deferred under UK GAAP have been reclassied to reserves in accordance with the transitional rules of IFRS 1 resulting in an additional net increase to equity of 0.3 billion.
Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 113 Filename 05.3d Time 143449 Date 200506
EXPLANATION OF TRANSITION TO IFRS continued Certain nancial assets and nancial liabilities are required to be recorded at amortised cost under IAS 39.
Under UK GAAP the majority of this amortised cost value was reected on the balance sheet but elements were separately recorded in current assets and current liabilities.
These amounts have been reclassied on transition to either nancial assets or loans and borrowings to recognise the respective instruments at amortised cost.
The adjustments described above on adoption of IAS 32 and IAS 39 have resulted in an overall reduction in total equity as at 1 April 2005 of 481 million 209 million net of deferred taxation.
There are a number of other minor adjustments and reclassications which include The groups share of results of associates and joint ventures is presented net of tax and nance expense on the face of the income statement.
Previously under UK GAAP the groups share of associates and joint ventures interest and tax was included in the relevant interest and tax line of the income statement.
Liquid investments with maturities of less than three months at acquisition are classied within cash and cash equivalents under IAS 7 Cash Flow Statements rather than as current asset investments under UK GAAP.
Cash ow statements prepared in accordance with IAS 7 Cash Flow Statements have a different presentational format.
Although the underlying cash ows remain the same as previously reported the cash ow statement reects movements in cash and cash equivalents.
In addition certain leases are non classied as nance leases which had previously been treated as operating leases.
Under UK GAAP loans and borrowings and current asset investments were held at foreign currency rates prescribed in the hedging instrument where hedging had been applied in accordance with the groups accounting policies.
Under IAS 21 The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchanges Rates such forward rate adjustments are required to be disclosed separately and have therefore been reclassied.
On adoption of IAS 39 from 1 April 2005 such forward rate adjustments form part of the overall fair value of derivative nancial instruments.
Foreign exchange gains and losses on certain intercompany loans are recognised in the income statement.
Under UK GAAP these amounts were recognised in reserves.
Prots on the sale of property xed assets are classied within other operating income on the face of the income statement.
Under UK GAAP these amounts had previously been disclosed after operating prot.
The group has historically recognised revenue arising from calls to our premium rate numbers on a gross basis with amounts paid to service providers recorded separately within operating costs.
In light of the transition to IFRS and changing market practice we have reviewed the presentation of these arrangements.
We have decided to change our presentation to a net basis for these calls where we provide basic transmission and connectivity only.
For those calls where we add value by providing interactivity and a more signicant and valuable part of the service the associated revenue will continue to be reported on a gross basis.
Whilst reducing revenue and operating costs this change has had no impact on reported prot cash ows or the balance sheet.
The impact on revenue and operating costs was 194 million for the year ended 31 March 2005.
UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES The groups consolidated nancial statements are prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRS which differ in certain respects from those applicable in the United States.
For BT there are no differences between IFRS as adopted for use in the EU and IFRS as published by the IASB.
I DIFFERENCES BETWEEN IFRS AND UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES US GAAP The following are the main differences between IFRS and US GAAP which are relevant to the groups consolidated nancial statements.
Under IFRS the sale of BTs property portfolio is treated as a disposal and the vast majority of the subsequent leaseback is an operating lease.
Under US GAAP as BT has a continuing interest in the properties these properties are recorded on the balance sheet at their net book value a leasing obligation is recognised and the gain on disposal is deferred until the properties are sold and vacated by BT and the corresponding lease obligation is terminated.
Rental payments made by BT are reversed and replaced by a nance lease interest charge and a depreciation charge.
Under IFRS pension costs are accounted for in accordance with IAS 19.
Under US GAAP pension costs are determined in accordance with the requirements of US Statements of Financial Accounting Standards SFAS Nos.
87 Employers Accounting for Pensions and 88 Employers Accounting for Settlements and Curtailments of Dened Benet Plans and for Termination Benets.
Differences between the IFRS and US GAAP amounts arise primarily due to differences in the recognition of actuarial gains and losses and the application of different measurement dates.
Under IFRS actuarial gains and losses are recognised in the statement of recognised income and expense whereas under US GAAP actuarial gains and losses are amortised over the average remaining service period.
Under US GAAP if the accumulated benet obligation ABO exceeds the fair value of plan assets the employer is required to recognise a liability that is at least equal to the unfunded ABO.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 114 Filename 05.3d Time 143449 Date 200506
UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued c Capitalisation of interest Under IFRS the group has chosen not to capitalise interest.
Under US GAAP the estimated amount of interest incurred whilst constructing major capital projects is included in property plant and equipment and depreciated over the lives of the related assets.
The amount of interest capitalised is determined by reference to the average interest rates on outstanding borrowings.
At 31 March 2006 under US GAAP gross capitalised interest of 350 million 2005  349 million was subject to depreciation over periods of 3 to 25 years determined by the nature of the related asset.
The group exercised the exemption available under IFRS 1 to adopt IAS 32 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement from 1 April 2005.
The comparative periods are therefore presented in accordance with UK GAAP.
Under UK GAAP investments are held on the balance sheet at historical cost.
Gains and losses on instruments used for hedges are not recognised until the exposure being hedged is recognised.
Certain derivative nancial instruments which qualify for hedge accounting under UK GAAP do not qualify or were not designated as hedges under US GAAP.
From 1 April 2005 the group adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 which gave rise to differences in accounting treatments applied under US GAAP SFAS No.
133 Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities.
On adoption of IAS 39 all derivative nancial instruments and the fair value of the hedged risks where a hedged item is in a fair value hedge were recognised as a one time transition adjustment to equity and resulted in a transitional difference between US GAAP and IFRS.
Under IFRS certain cash ow hedges result in a hedged nonnancial asset or liability being adjusted from the equity reserve for the applicable hedged amount.
US GAAP does not allow the amounts taken to equity to be transferred to the initial carrying amount of the nonnancial asset or liability.
The amounts remain in equity and are recognised in earnings as the nonnancial asset is depreciated or disposed.
The group did not claim hedge accounting under US GAAP for certain items designated as hedges under IFRS.
As a result certain gains or losses on derivatives held in the cash ow reserve or translation reserve are credited or charged to the income statement under US GAAP.
In addition under IFRS the hedged risk associated with a hedged item is fair valued where the item has been designated in a fair value hedge.
As hedge accounting has not been claimed for those items under US GAAP this fair value adjustment will not be reected.
These differences will reverse out as the derivatives or hedged items mature are sold or expire.
The fair value and book value of derivative instruments as at 31 March 2006 and 31 March 2005 is disclosed in note 33.
IFRS prescribes four investment categories namely held for trading availableforsale loans and receivables and held to maturity.
US GAAP prescribes only three categories namely held for trading availableforsale and held to maturity.
Whilst the held for trading and available for sale categories are similar under both GAAPs items held in loans and receivables under IFRS are generally classied as held to maturity under US GAAP.
Under US GAAP on the sale of a foreign enterprise foreign exchange differences within the cumulative translation adjustment CTA are included in net income in arriving at a gain or loss on disposal.
Although IFRS also requires inclusion of the cumulative translation differences held in reserves as part of the calculation of gains or losses on disposal they were reset to zero on transition to IFRS on 1 April 2004.
Under both IFRS and US GAAP provision for deferred income tax is required on a full provision basis in accordance with IAS 12 Income taxes and SFAS No.
109 Accounting for Income Taxes.
Under IFRS deferred tax is recorded for temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that taxable prots will be available against which the deductible temporary difference can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets not recognised are disclosed in note 22.
Under US GAAP deferred taxes are recorded on all temporary differences and a valuation allowance is established in respect of those deferred tax assets where it is more likely than not that some portion will remain unrealised.
Additionally assets and liabilities are presented separately where the timing of further recognition does not match and deferred tax balances are split where applicable between current and non current.
Deferred tax adjustments in the IFRS to US GAAP reconciliation are primarily the result of the deferred tax impact of the other US GAAP adjustments made in the reconciliation.
However tax adjustments also arise in respect of the timing of recognition of deferred tax on share options and current tax benets.
At 31 March 2006 total deferred tax liabilities were 1767 million primarily in respect of accelerated capital allowances and total deferred tax assets were 1454 million primarily in respect of pension obligations.
The total valuation allowance recognised for deferred tax assets was as follows 2006 2005 Movement in year m m m Capital losses 5493 4436 1057 Operating losses not utilised 775 860 85 Total 6539 6001 538 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 115 Filename 05.3d Time 143449 Date 200506
UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued g Impairment of property plant and equipment Certain network assets previously impaired did not meet the US GAAP criteria for impairment under SFAS No.
144 Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of LongLived Assets.
US GAAP requires that an entity assess whether impairment has occurred based on the undiscounted future cash ows.
An impairment exists if the sum of these cash ows is less than the carrying amount of the asset.
The impairment loss recognised in the income statement is based on the assets fair value being either market value or the sum of discounted future cash ows.
The assets that were not impaired under US GAAP are continuing to be depreciated over their remaining useful lives.
Under IFRS longterm contracts to design build and operate software solutions are accounted for under IAS 18 Revenue under which revenue is recognised as earned over the contract period.
Under US GAAP these contracts are accounted for as multiple element arrangements under EITF 0021 and SOP 972 Software Revenue Recognition.
As vendor specic objective evidence to support the fair value of the separate elements to be delivered is unavailable revenue of 109 million under certain contracts is deferred in the 2006 nancial year 2005 162 million.
There was no impact on net income due to the deferral of costs on these contracts.
Total deferred revenue and costs recorded under US GAAP at 31 March 2006 was 348 million 2005 239 million.
Under IFRS 2 Share Based Payment share options are fair valued at their grant date and the cost is charged to the income statement over the relevant vesting periods.
BT early adopted SFAS No.
123 R ShareBased Payment on 1 April 2005 using the modied prospective transition method.
Previously the company adopted the disclosureonly provisions in SFAS No.
123 Accounting for Stock Based Compensation and accounted for share options in accordance with APB Opinion No.
25 Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees.
Under the transition method compensation cost recognised during the year ended 31 March 2006 includes a compensation cost for all share based payments granted prior to but not yet vested at 1 April 2005 based on the grant date fair value estimated in accordance with the original provisions of SFAS 123 and b compensation cost for all share based payments granted subsequent to 1 April 2005 based on the grant date fair value estimated in accordance with the original provisions of SFAS 123 R.
Results for prior periods have not been restated.
As required by SFAS 123R the following table illustrates the effects on income from continuing operations income before tax net income and basic and diluted earnings per share in respect of the 2005 nancial year when sharebased payment arrangements were accounted for under Accounting Principles Board Opinion No.25.
There were no impacts from adoption on the cash ows of the Group.
Net income as reported 1297 Sharebased employee compensation cost included in net income 26 Sharebased employee compensation cost that would have been included in net income if the fairvaluebased method had been applied to all awards 37 Deferred tax 3 Pro forma net income as if the fairvaluebased method had been applied to all awards 1289 Basic and diluted earnings per share as reported were 15.2p and 15.1p respectively.
Pro forma basic and diluted earnings per share as if the fairvaluebased method had been applied to all awards were 15.1p and 15.0p respectively.
The group wrote off goodwill arising from the purchase of subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures on acquisition prior to 1 April 1998 against retained earnings.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions completed after 1 April 1998 was capitalised and amortised on a straight line basis over its useful economic life.
Following transition to IFRS goodwill is no longer amortised but tested annually for impairment and the amount of goodwill previously recorded at the transition date was carried forward under
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 116 Filename 05.3d Time 143450 Date 200506
UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued Under US GAAP up to 31 March 2002 goodwill arising on the acquisition of subsidiaries associates and joint ventures was capitalised as an intangible asset and amortised over its useful life.
BT adopted SFAS No.
142 on 1 April 2002 and goodwill is no longer amortised but tested annually for impairment.
There was no goodwill impairment charge in the year ended 31 March 2006 2005 nil.
In the 2003 nancial year a provision in connection with the rationalisation of the groups London ofce property portfolio was recorded.
Under US GAAP in accordance with SFAS No 146 these costs are not recognised until the group fully exits and therefore ceases to use the affected properties.
All these properties were exited by 31 December 2004.
Under IFRS contingent consideration in respect of acquisitions is recorded when the outcome of the contingency is considered more likely than not.
Under US GAAP the consideration is recorded when the contingent event has occurred.
Under US GAAP the fair value of termination benets for employees who are to be retained beyond their minimum contractual retention period is recognised on a straight line basis over the future service period.
Under IFRS these costs are recognised when the employees agree to leave the group.
II NET INCOME AND SHAREHOLDERS EQUITY RECONCILIATION STATEMENTS The following statements summarise the material estimated adjustments gross of their tax effect which reconcile net income and shareholders equity from that reported under IFRS to that which would have been reported had US GAAP been applied.
Net income Years ended 31 March Note Prot attributable to equity shareholders of the parent under IFRS 1547 1830 Adjustment for Sale and leaseback of properties a 18 21 Pension costs b 220 333 Capitalisation of interest c 16 13 Financial instruments d 436 415 Foreign exchange e 39 Impairment of property plant and equipment g 38 24 Share based payment i 1 13 Property rationalisation provision k  5 Termination benets m  20 Deferred taxation f 3 3 860 1057 Tax effect of US GAAP adjustments 203 240 Net income as adjusted for US GAAP 1063 1297 Basic earnings per American Depositary Share as adjusted for US GAAP Diluted earnings per American Depositary Share as adjusted for US GAAP Each American Depositary Share is equivalent to ten ordinary shares.
Shareholders equity At 31 March Note Total parent shareholders equity under IFRS 1555 45 Adjustment for Sale and leaseback of properties a 1067 1049 Pension costs b 1228 636 Capitalisation of interest c 164 178 Goodwill j 107 113 Financial instruments d 3 371 Impairment of property plant and equipment g 40 77 Current liabilities c 7 Deferred taxation f 53 56 Tax effect of US GAAP adjustments 314 157 Shareholders equity as adjusted for US GAAP 158 584 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 117 Filename 05.3d Time 143450 Date 200506 Checksum tel UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued
The following reclassications would need to be made in addition to those disclosed elsewhere and in the above reconciliation of shareholders equity in order to present amounts in accordance with US GAAP. r A pensions intangible asset of 31 million 2005  55 million would be recognised separately from retirement obligations. r The current portion of pension obligations of 630 million 2005  459 million would be shown as a current liability. overdrafts. r Trade and other receivables and trade and other payables would be 348 million higher 2005  239 million  see note h. note a.
135 million higher and long term borrowings would be 12 million lower 2005  230 million higher in respect of nancial instruments.
III CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS The group cash ow statements are presented in accordance with IAS 7.
The statements prepared under IAS 7 present substantially the same information as that required under SFAS No.
95 Statement of Cash Flows.
If the cash ow statement had been prepared in accordance with SFAS No 95 the net increase in cash and cash equivalents would have been higher by 179 million 2005 unchanged.
This is because under IAS 7 bank overdrafts are classied as a movement in cash and cash equivalents while under US GAAP the movements in bank overdrafts are classied as a nancing activity.
IV PENSION COSTS The following position for the main pension scheme BTPS is computed in accordance with US GAAP pension accounting rules under SFAS No.
87 and SFAS No.
88 the effect of which is shown in the above reconciliation statements.
The liabilities of the BTPS represent substantially all of the groups pension obligations.
The pension cost determined under SFAS No.
87 was calculated by reference to an expected longterm rate of return on scheme assets of 7.11% 2005  7.27%.
The components of the net periodic pension cost for the main pension scheme comprised Service cost 538 507 Interest cost 1784 1745 Expected return on scheme assets 2042 1897 Amortisation of prior service costs 24 24 Amortisation of loss 215 263 Net periodic pension cost under US GAAP 519 642 The information required to be disclosed in accordance with SFAS No.
132R Employers Disclosures about Pensions and Other Post Retirement Benets concerning the funded status of the main scheme at 31 March 2005 and 31 March 2006 based on the valuations at 1 January 2005 and 1 January 2006 respectively is given below.
Minimum liability intangible asset and other comprehensive income Plan assets at fair value 34293 29169 Accumulated benet obligation 37850 33160 Minimum liability 3557 3991 Net amount recognised at end of year 2604 2535 Minimum additional liability 953 1456 Intangible asset as at 31 March Unrecognised prior service cost 31 55 Accumulated other comprehensive income 922 1401 Changes in benet obligation Benet obligation at the beginning of the year 34336 32448 Service cost 538 507 Interest cost 1783 1745 Employee contributions 21 50 Actuarial movement 3438 943 Other changes  7 Benets paid or payable 1385 1364 Translation 1 Benet obligation at the end of the year 38730 34336 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 118 Filename 05.3d Time 143451 Date 200506 Checksum tel UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued The benet obligation and pension cost for the main pension scheme were determined using the following assumptions at 1 January 2004 2005 and 2006 per annum % per annum % per annum % Discount rate 4.7 5.3 5.5 Rate of future pay increases 3.4 3.6 3.6 Rate of future pension increases 2.6 2.6 2.6 Contributions expected to be paid to the BTPS during the 2007 nancial year are estimated at 630 million including 232 million of deciency contributions.
Estimated future benet payments are as follows Year ending 31 March 2007 1421 Year ending 31 March 2008 1458 Year ending 31 March 2009 1512 Year ending 31 March 2010 1577 Year ending 31 March 2011 1655 1 April 2011 to 31 March 2016 9tel m m Changes in scheme assets Fair value of scheme assets at the beginning of the year 29169 26675 Actual return on scheme assets 6039 3419 Employer contributions Employee contributions 21 50 Other changes  7 Benets paid or payable 1385 1364 Translation 1 Fair value of scheme assets at the end of the year 34293 29tel m m Funded status under US GAAP Projected benet obligation in excess of scheme assets 4437 5167 Unrecognised prior service costs Other unrecognised net actuarial losses 1802 2577 Net amount recognised under US GAAP 2604 2535 The employer contributions for the year ended 31 March 2006 includes special contributions of 54 million 2005  6 million.
Unrecognised prior service costs on scheme benefit improvements are being amortised over periods of 15 or 16 years commencing in the years of the introduction of the improvements.
Asset allocation The Trustees of the main pension scheme approve the target asset allocation as well as deviation limits.
The objective of the investment activities is to maximise investment returns within an acceptable level of risk taking into consideration the liabilities of the main pension scheme.
Year ended 31 December 2005 Fair value bn %
Equities 20.3 59 58 Fixed interest bonds 5.4 16 16 Index linked securities 3.2 9 9 Property 4.2 12 12 Cash and other 1.2 4 5 Year ended 31 December 2004 Fair value bn %
Equities 18.3 63 63 Fixed interest bonds 4.4 15 16 Index linked securities 2.7 9 9 Property 3.8 13 12 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 119 Filename 05.3d Time 143452 Date 200506 Checksum tel UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued The assumption for the expected return in scheme assets is a weighted average based on an assumed expected return for each asset class and the proportions held of each asset class at the beginning of the year.
The expected returns on bonds are based on the gross redemption yields at the start of the year.
Expected returns on equities and property are based on a combination of an estimate of the risk premium above yields on government bonds and consensus economic forecasts of future returns.
The expected return of 7.11% per annum used for the calculation of pension costs for the year ended 31 March 2006 is consistent with that adopted for IAS 19.
V INCOME STATEMENT IN US GAAP FORMAT The group income statements on page 73 comply with IFRS and the directors believe they are in the most appropriate format for shareholders to understand the results of our business.
We believe that it is important to show our results before deducting specic items because these items predominantly relate to corporate transactions rather than the trading activities of the group.
For SEC reporting purposes this presentation may be considered non GAAP and therefore the group has also prepared the following income statement which meets the SEC reporting format set forth in Item 10 of Regulation SX.
The numbers disclosed in the following income statement are prepared under IFRS.
Revenue 19514 18429 Operating expenses Payroll costs 4066 3832 Depreciation and amortisation 2884 2844 Payments to telecommunication operators 4045 3725 Other operating expenses 6251 5587 Total operating expenses 17246 15988 Net operating income 2268 2441 Other income net 228 551 Net interest expense 472 599 Income taxes 492 525 Equity in earnings losses of investees 16 39 Minority interests 1 1 Net income 1547 1830 Earnings per share  basic 18.4p 21.5p Earnings per share  diluted 18.1p 21.3p VI US GAAP DEVELOPMENTS In November 2005 the FASB issued Financial Staff Position FSP FAS 1151 and FAS 1241 The Meaning of OtherThan Temporary Impairment and Its Application to Certain Investments which nullies certain requirements of Emerging Issues Task Force EITF Issue No.
031 The Meaning of OtherThanTemporary Impairment and Its Application to Certain Investments and supersedes EITF Abstracts Topic No.
D44 Recognition of OtherThanTemporary Impairment Upon the Planned Sale of a Security whose Cost Exceeds Fair Value.
The guidance in this FSP is applied to reporting periods beginning after 15 December 2005.
BT does not expect that the adoption of this guidance will have a material effect on its nancial position results of operations or cash ows.
In May 2005 the FASB issued SFAS No.
154 Accounting Changes and Error Corrections  a replacement of APB Opinion No. and FASB Statement No.
SFAS No.
154 requires retrospective application of prior periodsnancial statements for changes in accounting principles.
SFAS No.
154 applies to accounting periods beginning after 15 December 2005.
The adoption of SFAS
154 is not expected to have a material effect on the results or net assets of the group.
In February 2006 the FASB issued FASB Staff Position No.
FAS 123R4 Classication of Options and Similar Instruments Issued as Employee Compensation That Allow for Cash Settlement upon the Occurrence of a Contingent Event FSP FAS 123R FSP FAS 123R4 addresses the classication of options and similar instruments issued as employee compensation that allow for cash settlement upon the occurrence of a contingent event.
An option or similar instrument that is classied as equity but subsequently becomes a liability because the contingent cash settlement event is probable of occurring shall be accounted for similar to a modication from an equity to liability award.
The application of this FSP did not have a material impact on the results or net assets of the group.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements 120 Filename 05.3d Time 143452 Date 200506
UNITED STATES GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES continued In February 2006 the FASB issued SFAS No.
155 Accounting for Certain Hybrid Financial Instruments  an amendment of FASB Statements No.
133 and 140 that amends SFAS No.
133 Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities and
140 Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishments of Liabilities.
This Statement resolves issues addressed in SFAS No.
133 Implementation Issue No.
D1 Application of Statement 133 to Benecial Interests in Securitised Financial Assets.
The Statement permits fair value remeasurement for any hybrid nancial instrument that contains an embedded derivative that otherwise would require bifurcation.
Additionally it claries which interestonly strips and principalonly strips are not subject to the requirements of SFAS No.
SFAS No.
155 also establishes a requirement to evaluate interests in securitised nancial assets to identify interests that are freestanding derivatives or that are hybrid nancial instruments that contain an embedded derivative requiring bifurcation.
It claries that concentrations of credit risk in the form of subordination are not embedded derivatives.
Also SFAS No.
155 amends SFAS No.
140 to eliminate the prohibition on a qualifying specialpurpose entity from holding a derivative nancial instrument that pertains to a benecial interest other than another derivative nancial instrument.
SFAS No.
155 is effective for BT for all nancial instruments acquired or issued after 31 March 2007.
BT is currently evaluating the impact of this statement.
In March 2006 the FASB issued SFAS No.
156 Accounting for Servicing of Financial Assets an amendment of FASB Statement
140 that amends SFAS No.
140 Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishments of Liabilities with respect to the accounting for separately recognised servicing assets and servicing liabilities.
SFAS No.
156 is effective for BT on 1 April 2007.
BT does not anticipate that the adoption of this new statement at the required effective date will have a signicant effect on its results of operations nancial position or cash ows.
Notes to the consolidated nancial statements BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 121 Filename 05.3d Time 143452 Date 200506
Term used in UK annual report US equivalent or denition Accounts Financial statements Associates Equity investees Capital allowances Tax depreciation Capital redemption reserve Other additional capital Finance lease Capital lease Financial year Fiscal year Freehold Ownership with absolute rights in perpetuity Gearing Leverage Inland calls Local and longdistance calls Interests in associates and joint ventures Securities of equity investees Loans to associates and joint ventures Indebtedness of equity investees not current Own work capitalised Costs of labour engaged in the construction of plant and equipment for internal use Provision for doubtful debts Allowance for bad and doubtful accounts receivable Provisions Longterm liabilities other than debt and specic accounts payable Statement of recognised income and expense Comprehensive income Reserves Shareholders equity other than paidup capital Share premium account Additional paidin capital or paidin surplus not distributable GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND US EQUIVALENTS BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Glossary of terms and US equivalents 122 Filename 05.3d Time 143452 Date 200506 Checksum tel PARENT COMPANY AUDIT OPINION Independent auditors report to the members of BT Group plc We have audited the parent company nancial statements of BT Group plc for the year ended 31 March 2006 which comprise the balance sheet accounting policies and the related notes.
These parent company nancial statements have been prepared under the accounting policies set out therein.
These parent company nancial statements are set out on pages 124 to 126.
We have also audited the information in the Report on directors remuneration that is described as having been audited.
We have reported separately on the group nancial statements of BT Group plc for the year ended 31 March 2006.
This separate report is set out on page 63.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditors The directors responsibilities for preparing the annual report the Report on directors remuneration and the parent company nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice are set out in the Statement of directors responsibilities.
Our responsibility is to audit the parent company nancial statements and the part of the Report on directors remuneration to be audited in accordance with relevant legal and regulatory requirements and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
This report including the opinion has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Section 235 of the Companies Act 1985 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving this opinion accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
We report to you our opinion as to whether the parent company nancial statements give a true and fair view and whether the parent company nancial statements and the part of the Report on directors remuneration to be audited have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
We report to you whether in our opinion the information given in the Report of the directors is consistent with the parent company nancial statements.
The information given in the Report of the directors includes that specic information presented in the Operating and nancial review that is cross referred from the Report of the directors.
We also report to you if in our opinion the company has not kept proper accounting records if we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or if information specied by law regarding directors remuneration and other transactions is not disclosed.
We read other information contained in the Annual Report and Form 20F and consider whether it is consistent with the audited parent company nancial statements.
The other information comprises only the Financial headlines Chairmans message Chief Executives statement the Operating and nancial Review the Report of the directors the Report of the audit committee the Report of the nomination committee and the unaudited part of the Report on directors remuneration.
We consider the implications for our report if we become aware of any apparent misstatements or material inconsistencies with the parent company nancial statements.
Our responsibilities do not extend to any other information.
Basis of audit opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland issued by the Auditing Practices
An audit includes examination on a test basis of evidence relevant to the amounts and disclosures in the parent company nancial statements and the part of the Report on directors remuneration to be audited.
It also includes an assessment of the signicant estimates and judgments made by the directors in the preparation of the parent company nancial statements and of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the companys circumstances consistently applied and adequately disclosed.
We planned and performed our audit so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered necessary in order to provide us with sufcient evidence to give reasonable assurance that the parent company nancial statements and the part of the Report on directors remuneration to be audited are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or other irregularity or error.
In forming our opinion we also evaluated the overall adequacy of the presentation of information in the parent company nancial statements and the part of the Report on directors remuneration to be audited.
Opinion
In our opinion s the parent company nancial statements give a true and fair view in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice of the state of the companys affairs as at 31 March 2006 s the parent company nancial statements and the part of the Report on directors remuneration to be audited have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and s the information given in the Report of the directors is consistent with the parent company nancial statements.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors
17 May 2006 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF BT GROUP PLC Financial Statements of BT Group PLC BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 123 Filename 05.3d Time 143452 Date 200506 Checksum tel BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Financial Statements of BT Group PLC 124 BT GROUP PLC ACCOUNTING POLICIES I ACCOUNTING BASIS The nancial statements are prepared under the historical cost convention as modied by the revaluation of certain nancial instruments in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and applicable United Kingdom accounting standards UK GAAP.
As permitted by Section  of the Companies Act 1985 the companys prot and loss account has not been presented.
The BT Group plc consolidated nancial statements for the year ended 31 March 2006 contain a consolidated statement of cash ows.
Consequently the company has taken advantage of the exemption in FRS 1 Revised 1996 Cash Flow Statements not to present its own cash ow statement.
The company has taken advantage of the exemption in FRS 8 Related Party Disclosures not to disclose transactions with other members of the BT Group.
The BT Group plc consolidated nancial statements for the year ended 31 March 2006 contain nancial instrument disclosures which comply with FRS 25 Financial Instruments Disclosure and Presentation.
Consequently the company has taken advantage of the exemption in FRS 25 not to present separate nancial instrument disclosures for the company.
II CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICIES The company has adopted FRS 17 Retirement benets FRS 20 Share based payment FRS 21 Events after the balance sheet date FRS 23 The effects of changes in foreign exchange rates FRS 25 Financial instruments Disclosure and Presentation FRS 26 Financial instruments Measurement and FRS 28 Corresponding amounts in these nancial statements.
The adoption of each of these standards represents a change in accounting policy and the comparative gures have been restated accordingly except where the exemption to restate comparatives have been taken.
As a result of adopting FRS 21 the companys prot for the year ended 31 March 2005 increased by 454 million to 1024 million.
Accrued dividend income of 454 million for the 2004 nancial year was reversed and recognised in the 2005 nancial year.
In addition the nal dividends for the 2005 and 2004 nancial years of 551 million and 454 million respectively have been reversed as the associated dividends had not been approved at those dates.
None of the other new accounting standards had any effect on the companys prot or net assets.
III INVESTMENTS Fixed asset investments which comprises investments in subsidiary undertakings are stated at cost and reviewed for impairment if there are indicators that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
IV TAXATION Full provision is made for deferred taxation on all timing differences which have arisen but not reversed at the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is regarded as more likely than not that there will be sufcient taxable prots from which the underlying timing differences can be deducted.
The deferred tax balances are not discounted.
V DIVIDENDS Dividend distributions are recognised as a liability in the year in which the dividends are approved by the companys shareholders.
Interim dividends are recognised when they are paid nal dividends when authorised in general meetings by shareholders.
VI SHARE CAPITAL Ordinary shares are classied as equity.
Repurchased shares of the company are recorded in the balance sheet as treasury shares and presented as a deduction from shareholders equity at cost.
VII CASH Cash includes cash in hand bank deposits repayable on demand and bank overdrafts.
Filename 05.3d Time 143453 Date 200506 Checksum tel BT GROUP PLC COMPANY BALANCE SHEET Fixed assets Investments in subsidiary undertaking 9971 9971 Total xed assets 9971 9971 Current assets
Investments
Cash at bank and in hand 22 118 Total current assets 26 141 Creditors amounts falling due within one year Net current liabilities assets 31 113 Total assets less current liabilities 9940 10084 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 432 432 Share premium account 7 3 Capital redemption reserve 2 2 Prot and loss account 9499 9647 Total equity shareholders funds 9940 10084 Debtors consists of amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings of 3 million 2005 22 million.
The company holds an availableforsale asset with a book value and market value of 1 million 2005 1 million.
Creditors consists of amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings of 27 million 2005 17 million and other creditors of 30 million 2005 11 million.
Capital and reserves are shown on page 126.
The nancial statements of the company on pages 124 to 126 were approved by the board of the directors on 17 May 2006 and were signed on its behalf by Sir Christopher Bland
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Hanif Lalani Group Finance Director Financial Statements of BT Group PLC BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 125 Filename 05.3d Time 143453 Date 200506 Checksum tel BT GROUP PLC COMPANY BALANCE SHEET continued Capital Prot Share Share premium redemption and loss capital account reserve account gh
Balances at 1 April 585 10021 Prot for the nancial year  1024 1024 Dividends paid  786 786 Net purchase of treasury shares  176 176 Arising on share issues  1  1 At 31 March 647 10084 Prot for the nancial year  1108 1108 Dividends paid  912 912 Net purchase of treasury shares  344 344 Arising on share issues  4  4 At 31 March 499 9940 The authorised share capital of the company throughout the years ended 31 March 2006 and 31 March 2005 was 13463 million representing 269260253468 ordinary shares of 5p each.
The allotted called up and fully paid ordinary share capital of the company at 31 March 2006 was 432 million 2005 432 million representing 8635377801 ordinary shares of 5p each 2005 8634629038.
Of the authorised but unissued share capital at 31 March 2006 26 million ordinary shares 2005 26 million were reserved to meet options granted under employee share option schemes.
The share premium account representing the premium on allotment of shares is not available for distribution.
The profit for the financial year dealt with in the profit and loss account of the company and after taking into account dividends from subsidiary undertakings was 1108 million 2005 restated 1024 million.
As permitted by Section 230 of the Companies Act 1985 no profit and loss account of the company is presented.
During the year ended 31 March 2006 the company repurchased 165772145 2005 101280000 of its own shares of 5p each representing 2% 2005 1% of the calledup share capital for an aggregate consideration of 365 million 2005 195 million.
At 31 March 2006 290047231 shares 2005 134497000 shares with an aggregate nominal value of 15 million are held as treasury shares at cost.
The movement in the availableforsale reserve in the year was nil.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Financial Statements of BT Group PLC 126 Filename 06.3d Time 143510 Date 200506 Checksum tel BT Group plc is the parent company of the group.
Brief details of its principal operating subsidiaries and associate at 31 March 2006 other than the company all of which were unlisted unless otherwise stated were as follows Subsidiary undertakings Activity Group interest in allotted capital
Albacom SpA Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Italy British Telecommunications plc Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary UK BT Americas Inc.
Communication related services systems integration and products provider 100% common International BT Australasia Pty Limited Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary 100% preference
BT C and S I France SA de Systems integration and application development 100% ordinary France BT Cableships Limited Cableship owner 100% ordinary International BT Centre Nominee 2 Limited Property holding company 100% ordinary UK BT Communications Ireland Limited Telecommunication service provider 100% ordinary Ireland BT Communications Management Limited Telecommunication service provider 100% ordinary UK BT ESPANA Compania de Servicios Globales de Telecommunicaciones S.
Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Spain BT Fleet Limited Fleet management company 100% ordinary UK BT France SAS Communications related services and products provider 100% ordinary France BT Germany GmbH and Co.
Communications related services and products provider 100% ordinary Germany BT Global Services Limited International telecommunication network systems provider 100% ordinary UK BT Holdings Limited Investment holding company 100% ordinary UK BT Hong Kong Limited Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary 100% preference Hong Kong BT Limited International telecommunication network systems provider 100% ordinary International BT Nederland NV Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Netherlands BT Subsea Cables Limited Cable maintenance and repair 100% ordinary UK BT US Investments LLC Investment holding company 100% ordinary USA Communications Networking Services UK Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary UK Communications Global Network Services Limited cd Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary International Farland BV cd Provider of transborder bre network across BTs partners in Europe 100% ordinary International Infonet Services Corporation Global managed network service provider 100% common USA Infonet USA Corporation Global managed network service provider 100% common USA Radianz Americas Inc Global managed network service provider 100% common USA Syntegra Limited Systems integration and application development 100% ordinary UK Syntegra Groep BV Systems integration and application development 100% ordinary Netherlands The group comprises a large number of companies and it is not practical to include all of them in this list.
The list therefore only includes those companies that have a significant impact on the profit or assets of the group.
A full list of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates will be annexed to the companys next annual return filed with the Registrar of Companies.
The proportion of voting rights held corresponds to the aggregate interest percentage held by the holding company and subsidiary undertakings.
All overseas undertakings are incorporated in their country of operations.
Subsidiary undertakings operating internationally are all incorporated in England and Wales except Farland BV BT Americas Inc. and Communications Global Network Services Limited which are incorporated in the Netherlands the USA and Bermuda respectively.
Held through intermediate holding company.
In August 2005 Syntegra SA changed its name to BT CandSI France SA.
In March 2006 Syntegra USA Inc was merged into BT Americas Inc.
Share capital Associate Activity Issued
Country of operations Tech Mahindra Limited Telecommunications services provider 101413455 43%
Issued share capital comprises ordinary or common shares unless otherwise stated.
Incorporated in the country of operations.
Held through an intermediate holding company.
In February 2006 Mahindra British Telecom Limited changed its name to Tech Mahindra Limited.
SUBSIDIARY UNDERTAKINGS AND ASSOCIATE Subsidiary undertakings and associate BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 127 Filename 06.3d Time 143512 Date 200506 Checksum tel Year ended 31 March 2006 Unaudited Quarters 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Revenue 4731 4767 4882 5134 19514 Other operating income Operating costs 4137 4234 4265 4610 17246 Operating prot 63tel2495 Net nance expense 142 100 129 101 472 Share of post tax prots of associates and joint ventures 5335 16 Prot on disposal of joint venture  1 1 Prot before taxation 49tel2040 Prot for the period 37tel1548 Basic earnings per share 4.4p 4.4p 4.9p 4.7p 18.4p Diluted earnings per share 4.4p 4.3p 4.8p 4.6p 18.1p Prot before specic items and taxation 51tel2177 Basic earnings per share before specic items 4.5p 5.0p 4.9p 5.1p 19.5p Diluted earnings per share before specic items 4.5p 4.9p 4.8p 5.0p 19.2p Year ended 31 March 2005 Unaudited Quarters 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Revenue 4519 4554 4536 4820 18429 Other operating income Operating costs 3990 3909 3896 4193 15988 Operating prot 57tel2992 Net nance expense 155 154 149 141 599 Share of post tax losses prots of associates and joint ventures 7 3 35 6 39 Prot before taxation 41tel2354 Prot for the period 30tel1829 Basic earnings per share 3.5p 5.0p 7.7p 5.2p 21.5p Diluted earnings per share 3.5p 5.0p 7.7p 5.1p 21.3p Prot before specic items and taxation 42tel2080 Basic earnings per share before specic items 3.6p 4.8p 4.8p 4.9p 18.1p Diluted earnings per share before specic items 3.6p 4.7p 4.7p 4.8p 17.9p QUARTERLY ANALYSIS OF REVENUE AND PROFIT BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Quarterly analysis of revenue and prot 128 Filename 06.3d Time 143512 Date 200506 Checksum tel IFRS 2006 2005 Financial ratios Basic earnings per share before specic items  pence 19.5 18.1 Basic earnings per share  pence 18.4 21.5 Return on capital employed before specic items % 16.8 16.5 Interest cover before net pension nance income times 3.6 3.4 Expenditure on research and development Research and development expense 326 257 Amortisation of capitalised software development costs 160 95
Expenditure on property plant and equipment and software Plant and equipment Transmission equipment 1429 1488 Exchange equipment 80 143 Other network equipment 727 648 Computers and ofce equipment 281 312 Motor vehicles and other 572 349 Land and buildings 68 64 3157 3004 Increase decrease in engineering stores 15 7 Total expenditure on property plant and equipment 3142 3011 Increase decrease in payables 202 45 Cash outow on purchase of property plant and equipment and software 2940 3056 The ratio is based on profit before taxation and net finance expense to average capital employed.
Capital employed is represented by total assets less current liabilities excluding corporation tax current borrowings derivative financial liabilities and finance lease creditors less cash and cash equivalents derivative financial assets and investments.
The number of times net finance expense before net pension finance income is covered by total operating profit.
Interest cover including net pension finance income is 5.6 times 2005 4.5 times.
FINANCIAL STATISTICS Years ended 31 March Financial statistics BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 129 Filename 06.3d Time 143513 Date 200506
UK GAAPtel 2002 Financial ratios Basic earnings per share on continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items  pence 18.1 16.9 14.4 9.0 Basic earnings loss per share on continuing activities  pence 21.4 16.4 31.4 34.6 Basic earning loss per share  pence 21.4 16.4 31.4 12.1 Return on capital employed % 15.5 Interest cover times 3.5 2.0 0.6tel 2002 m m m m Expenditure on research and development Total expenditure 257 334teltel m m m m Expenditure on property plant and equipment and software Plant and equipment Transmission equipment 1488 1324 1277 1373 Exchange equipment 14telOther network equipment 64telComputers and ofce equipment 31telMotor vehicles and other 34telLand and buildings 004 2653 2454 3110 Increase decrease in engineering stores 7 20 9 10 Total continuing activities 3011 2673 2445 3100 Total discontinued activities  808 Total expenditure on property plant and equipment 3011 2673 2445 3908 Increase decrease in payables Cash outow on purchase of property plant and equipment and software 3056 2684 2580 4069 The ratio is based on profit before tax goodwill amortisation and interest on longterm borrowings to average capital employed.
The number of times net interest payable is covered by total operating profit before goodwill amortisation.
Return on capital employed before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was 16.0% 2004  15.3% Interest cover before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was 3.6 times 2004  3.3 times FINANCIAL STATISTICS Years ended 31 March BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Financial statistics 130 Filename 06.3d Time 143513 Date 200506 Checksumteltel 2003 2002
Business voiceISDN 7797 8358 8824 9062 9030 Business broadband 55tel42 Total Business connections UK 8353 8780 9111 9208 9072 Residential voiceISDN 17912 19520 19870 20065 20027 Residential broadband 2028 1Total Residential connections UK 19940 20850 20550 20358 20093 Total voiceISDN connections 25709 27878 28694 29127 29057 Total broadband connections 2584 175telTotal Retail connections UK 28293 29630 29661 29566 29165
Broadband non BT ISPs 5009 3180 1248 361 59 Wholesale Line Rental 2874 1Full and shared loops LLU na Total Wholesale connections UK 8239 4247 1636 455 115 Total broadband Wholesale Retail and LLU 7949 4973 2226 803 167 Mobility connections 000 na Call growth decline % growth decline in UK xed geographic and xed to mobile volumes minutes 10 13 7 4 5 Average Revenue Per Consumer Household People employed Worldwide Year ended 31 March % Consumer contracted revenues Networked IT services sales order value worldwide m 5391 7161 7012 4411 3321 Rolling 12 month consumer revenue less mobile polos divided by average number of primary lines Includes line rental broadband select services and packages OPERATIONAL STATISTICS Operational statistics BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 131 Filename 06.3d Time 143514 Date 200506
133 Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 134 Listings 134 Share and ADS prices 134 Capital Gains Tax CGT Rights issue Demerger of O2 135 Analysis of shareholdings 135 Dividends 135 Dividend mandate 136 Dividend investment plan 136 Global Invest Direct 136 Total shareholder return 136 Results announcements 136 Individual Savings Accounts ISAs 137 ShareGift 137 Unclaimed Assets Register 137 Exchange rates 137 Share buy back 137 Memorandum and Articles of Association
Articles
140 Material contracts 140 Taxation US Holders Taxation of dividends Taxation of capital gains Passive foreign investment company status US information reporting and backup withholding UK stamp duty UK inheritance and gift taxes in connection with ordinary shares andor ADSs 142 Limitations affecting security holders 142 Documents on display 142 Publications 143 Electronic communication 143 Shareholder communication Private shareholders Institutional investors and analysts ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FOR SHAREHOLDERS BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Additional information for shareholders 132 Filename 06.3d Time 143514 Date 200506
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARDLOOKING STATEMENTS Certain statements in this annual report are forwardlooking and are made in reliance on the safe harbour provisions of the US Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
These statements relate to analyses and other information which are based on forecasts of future results and estimates of amounts not yet determinable.
These statements include without limitation those concerning BTs transformation strategy and its ability to achieve it expected cost savings growth of and opportunities available in the communications industry and BTs positioning to take advantage of those opportunities expectations regarding competition market shares prices and growth expectations regarding the convergence of technologies growth and opportunities in new wave business such as networked IT services broadband and mobility BTs network development and plans for the 21st century network plans for the launch of new products and services network performance and quality the impact of regulatory initiatives on operations including the regulation of the UK xed wholesale and retail businesses and the impact of the Undertakings to Ofcom under the Enterprise Act BTs possible or assumed future results of operations andor those of its associates and joint ventures BTs future dividend policy capital expenditure and investment plans adequacy of capital nancing plans demand for and access to broadband and the promotion of broadband by thirdparty service providers and those preceded by followed by or that include the words aims believes expects anticipates intends will should or similar expressions.
Although BT believes that the expectations reected in these forwardlooking statements are reasonable it can give no assurance that these expectations will prove to have been correct.
Because these statements involve risks and uncertainties actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forwardlooking statements.
Factors that could cause differences between actual results and those implied by the forwardlooking statements include but are not limited to material adverse changes in economic conditions in the markets served by BT and its lines of business future regulatory actions and conditions in its operating areas including competition from others selection by BT and its lines of business of the appropriate trading and marketing models for its products and services technological innovations including the cost of developing new products networks and solutions and the need to increase expenditures for improving the quality of service the anticipated benets and advantages of new technologies products and services including broadband and other new wave initiatives not being realised developments in the convergence of technologies prolonged adverse weather conditions resulting in a material increase in overtime staff or other costs the timing of entry and protability of BT and its lines of business in certain communications markets signicant changes in market shares for BT and its principal products and services uctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates and general nancial market conditions affecting BTs performance.
Certain of these factors are discussed in more detail elsewhere in this annual report including without limitation in Group risk factors. otherwise.
Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 133 Filename 06.3d Time 143514 Date 200506
LISTINGS
The principal listing of BT Groups ordinary shares is on the London Stock Exchange.
American Depositary Shares ADSs each representing 10 ordinary shares have been issued by JPMorgan Chase Bank as Depositary for the American Depositary Receipts ADRs evidencing the ADSs and are listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
ADSs also trade but are not listed on the London Stock Exchange.
Trading on the New York Stock Exchange is under the symbol BT.
SHARE AND ADS PRICES Pence per ordinary share US per
High pence
High
Low
Years ended 31 March Year ended 31 March 2005 1 July  30 September 2004 197.50 177.50 36.80 32.66 1 October  31 December 2004 206.00 180.50 40.07 32.61 1 January  31 March 2005 216.25 196.50 40.93 37.71 Year ended 31 March 2006 1 July  30 September 2005 235.00 215.50 41.59 39.01 1 October  31 December 2005 224.75 202.50 39.56 35.34 1 January  31 March 2006 234.50 203.75 41.04 35.96
November 2005 216.75 203.50 37.69 35.34 December 2005 224.75 212.00 39.29 37.05 February 2006 214.50 204.15 37.54 36.23 The pre19 November 2001 prices shown have been adjusted for the rights issue and demerger that occurred in the 2002 financial year.
The prices are the highest and lowest closing middle market prices for BT ordinary shares as derived from the Daily Ofcial List of the London Stock Exchange and the highest and lowest closing sales prices of ADSs as reported on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape.
Fluctuations in the exchange rate between the pound sterling and the US dollar affect the dollar equivalent of the pound sterling price of the companys ordinary shares on the London Stock Exchange and as a result are likely to affect the market price of the ADSs on the New York Stock Exchange.
CAPITAL GAINS TAX CGT The rights issue in June 2001 and the demerger of O2 in November 2001 adjusted the value for capital gains tax purposes of BT shares.
Rights issue An explanatory note on the effects of the rights issue on the CGT position relating to BT shareholdings is available from the Shareholder Helpline see page 143.
Demerger of O2  capital gains tax calculation The conrmed ofcial opening prices for BT Group and O2 shares on 19 November 2001 following the demerger were 285.75p and 82.75p respectively.
This means that of the total combined value of 368.50p 77.544% is attributable to BT Group and 22.456% to O2.
Accordingly for CGT calculations the base cost of BT Group shares and O2 shares is calculated by multiplying the acquisition cost of a BT shareholding by 77.544% and 22.456% respectively.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Additional information for shareholders 134 Filename 06.3d Time 143515 Date 200506
ANALYSIS OF SHAREHOLDINGS Ordinary shares of 5p each
Number of holdings
Number of shares held millions
1600  9999 169048 12.2 489 5.7 10000  99999 5220 0.4 100 1.2 5000000 and above abcd
1382342 100.0 8635 100.0 24 million shares were held in trust by Ilford Trustees Jersey Limited for allocation to employees under the employee share plans.
Under the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan 58.57 million shares were held in trust on behalf of 83102 participants who were beneficially entitled to the shares.
132 million shares were held in the corporate nominee BT Group EasyShare on behalf of 116643 beneficial owners.
268 million shares were represented by ADSs.
Analysis by size of holding is not available for this holding.
290 million shares were held as treasury shares.
14.6% of the shares were in 1359282 individual holdings of which 111955 were joint holdings and 85.4% of the shares were in 23060 institutional holdings.
So far as the company is aware the company is not directly or indirectly owned or controlled by another corporation or by the UK Government or any other foreign government or by any other natural or legal person severally or jointly.
There are no arrangements known to the company the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change in control of the company.
At 12 May 2006 there were 8635453557 ordinary shares outstanding including 289613278 shares held as treasury shares.
At the same date approximately 27 million ADSs equivalent to 270 million ordinary shares or approximately 3.11% of the total number of ordinary shares outstanding on that date were outstanding and were held by 2792 record holders of ADRs.
At 31 March 2006 there were 3615 shareholders with a US address on the register of shareholders.
DIVIDENDS
Since shortly after its incorporation in 1984 British Telecommunications plc paid interim dividends annually in February and nal dividends in September.
However as part of BTs debt reduction and restructuring plans neither a nal dividend for the year ended 31 March 2001 nor an interim dividend for the year ended 31 March 2002 was paid to shareholders.
A nal dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2005 was paid on 5 September 2005 to shareholders on the register on 5 August 2005 and an interim dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2006 was paid on 13 February 2006 to shareholders on the register on 31 December 2005.
The dividends paid or payable on BT shares and ADSs for the last ve years are shown in the following table.
The dividends on the ordinary shares exclude the associated tax credit.
The amounts shown are not those that were actually paid to holders of ADSs.
For the tax treatment of dividends paid see Taxation of dividends below.
Dividends have been translated from pounds sterling into US dollars using exchange rates prevailing on the date the ordinary dividends were paid.
Per ordinary share Per ADS Per ADS Years ended 31 March
Final pence
Interim
Final
Total
Interim
US
Final
US
Total
US
Qualifying holders of ADSs on record as of 18 August 2006 are entitled to receive the final dividend which will be paid on 18 September 2006 subject to approval at the annual general meeting.
The US dollar amount of the final dividend of 76 pence per ADS to be paid to holders of ADSs will be based on the exchange rate in effect on 11 September 2006 the date of payment to holders of ordinary shares.
As dividends paid by the company are in pounds sterling exchange rate uctuations will affect the US dollar amounts received by holders of ADSs on conversion by the Depositary of such cash dividends.
DIVIDEND MANDATE Any shareholder wishing dividends to be paid directly into a bank or building society account should contact the Shareholder Helpline see page 143.
Dividends paid in this way will be paid through the Bankers Automated Clearing System BACS.
Alternatively a form may be downloaded from the Dividends page of our website at sitesharesandperformance Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 135 Filename 06.3d Time 143517 Date 200506 Checksum tel DIVIDEND INVESTMENT PLAN The Dividend investment plan replaced the share dividend plan for shareholders following the 1999 interim dividend.
Under the Dividend investment plan cash from participants dividends is used to buy further BT shares in the market.
Shareholders could elect to receive additional shares in lieu of a cash dividend for the following dividends Date paid Price per share pence 2001 interim 12 February 2001 621.80 2002 nal 9 September 2002 191.19 2003 interim 10 February 2003 178.23 2003 nal 8 September 2003 184.41 2004 interim 9 February 2004 175.98 2004 nal 6 September 2004 183.69 2005 interim 7 February 2005 209.95 2005 nal 5 September 2005 220.25 2006 interim 13 February 2006 214.50 GLOBAL INVEST DIRECT Details of the direct purchase plan run by the ADR Depositary JPMorgan Chase Bank Global Invest Direct including reinvestment of dividends are available from JPMorgan Chase Bank on 1tel toll free within the USA or 1tel from outside the USA or on written request to the ADR Depositary.
TOTAL SHAREHOLDER RETURN Total Shareholder Return TSR is the measure of the returns that a company has provided for its shareholders reecting share price movements and assuming reinvestment of dividends.
It is therefore a good indicator of a companys overall performance.
Over the last ve years as shown in the rst TSR chart below BTs TSR as adjusted for the rights issue and demerger was negative 25% compared to a FTSE 100 TSR of positive 25%.
This was primarily due to a fall in BTs share price which like many stocks in the telecoms media and technology TMT sector declined in the early part of the period.
In the period between the demerger on 19 November 2001 and 31 March 2006 BTs TSR was negative 6% compared to negative 15% for the FTSEurorst 300 Telco Index and positive 31% for the FTSE 100.
BT has also outperformed the FTSEurorst 300 Telco Index in the last 12 months with a return of 13.4% compared to 1.6% for that index.
31 Mar tel Mar 31 Mar 31 Mar 31 Mar 31 Mar BTs total shareholder return TSR performance vs the FTSE 100 over the five financial years to 31 March 2006 1 April 2001  100 Source Datastream The graph shows the relative TSR performance adjusted for the rights issue and demerger of our mobile business in the 2002 financial year of BT and the FTSE 100.
BT FTSE 100
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
BTs TSR performance vs the FTSEurofirst 300 Telco Index since demerger 19 November 2001  100 Source Datastream The graph shows the relative TSR performance of BT and the FTSEurofirst 300 Telco Index since demerger.
BT FTSEurofirst 300 Telco RESULTS ANNOUNCEMENTS Expected announcements of results 1st quarter 27 July 2006 2nd quarter and half year 9 November 2006 3rd quarter and nine months February 2007 4th quarter and full year May 2007 2007 annual report and accounts published June 2007 INDIVIDUAL SAVINGS ACCOUNTS ISAs Information about investing in BT shares through an ISA may be obtained from Halifax Share Dealing Limited Trinity Road Halifax W. orkshire HX1 2RG telephonetel.
ISAs are also offered by other organisations.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Additional information for shareholders 136 Filename 06.3d Time 143519 Date 200506 Checksum tel
The Orr Mackintosh Foundation operates a charity share donation scheme for shareholders with small parcels of shares whose value makes it uneconomic to sell them.
Details of the scheme are available from ShareGift at www. haregift. rg or telephonetel or can be obtained from the Shareholder Helpline.
UNCLAIMED ASSETS REGISTER BT is among a growing number of companies which subscribe to the Unclaimed Assets Register which provides a search facility for nancial assets such as shareholdings and dividends which have become separated from their owners.
The Register donates a proportion of its public search fees to charity via ShareGift.
For further information on the Unclaimed Assets Register visit site or telephonetel.
EXCHANGE RATES BT publishes its consolidated nancial statements expressed in pounds sterling.
The following tables detail certain information concerning the exchange rates between pounds sterling and US dollars based on the noon buying rate in New York City for cable transfers in pounds sterling as certied for customs purposes by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York the Noon Buying Rate.
Year ended 31 Marchtel 2005 2006
The average of the Noon Buying Rates in effect on the last day of each month during the relevant period.
Month
November
December
January
February
March
April
On 12 May 2006 the most recent practicable date for this annual report the Noon Buying Rate was US1.89 to 1.00.
SHARE BUY BACK The following table gives details of the purchase by BT of its own shares during the 2006 nancial year.
Calendar month Total number of shares purchased Average price paid per share pence  net of dealing costs Total number of shares purchased as part of publicly announced plans or programmes Maximum number of shares that may yet be purchased under the plans or programmes April 2005 Nil NA Nil 774250000 May 500000 213 500000 773750000 June 11250000 220 11250000 762500000 July Nil NA Nil 850000000 August 24000000 220 24000000 826000000 September 19500000 221 9500000 806500000 October 6500000 221 6500000 800000000 November 22772145 210 22772145 777227855 December 28500000 218 28500000 748727855 January 2006 2500000 219 2500000 746227855 February 27950000 211 27950000 718277855 March 22300000 222 22300000 695977855 Total 165772145 217.5 165772145 695977855 Purchases from April to June 2005 were made in accordance with a resolution passed at the AGM held on 14 July 2004.
Purchases from August 2005 to March 2006 were made in accordance with a resolution passed at the AGM on 13 July 2005.
There are no plans or programmes BT has determined to terminate prior to expiration or under which BT does not intend to make further purchases.
Authority was given to purchase up to 859 million shares on 14 July 2004 and 850 million shares on 13 July 2005.
These authorities expire at the close of the following AGM or 15 months following the date of approval if earlier.
The authority given in July 2004 expired on 13 July 2005.
MEMORANDUM AND ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION The following is a summary of the principal provisions of BTs memorandum and articles of association Memorandum and Articles a copy of which has been led with the Registrar of Companies.
Memorandum
The Memorandum provides that the companys principal objects are among other things to carry on any business of running operating managing and supplying telecommunication systems and systems of any kind for conveying receiving storing processing or transmitting sounds visual images signals messages and communications of any kind.
Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 137 Filename 06.3d Time 143519 Date 200506
Articles
In the following description of the rights attaching to the shares in the company a holder of shares and a shareholder is in either case the person entered on the companys register of members as the holder of the relevant shares.
Shareholders can choose whether their shares are to be evidenced by share certicates i. i. uncerticated form in CREST the electronic settlement system in the UK.
Subject to the restrictions described below on a show of hands every shareholder present in person or by proxy at any general meeting has one vote and on a poll every shareholder present in person or by proxy has one vote for each share which they hold.
Voting at any meeting of shareholders is by a show of hands unless a poll is demanded by the chairman of the meeting or by at least ve shareholders at the meeting who are entitled to vote or their proxies or by one or more shareholders at the meeting who are entitled to vote or their proxies and who have between them at least 10% of the total votes of all shareholders who have the right to vote at the meeting.
No person is unless the Board decide otherwise entitled to attend or vote at any general meeting or to exercise any other right conferred by being a shareholder if he or any person appearing to be interested in those shares has been sent a notice under section 212 of the Companies Act 1985 which confers upon public companies the power to require information with respect to interests in their voting shares and he or any interested person has failed to supply to the company the information requested within 14 days after delivery of that notice.
These restrictions end seven days after the earlier of the date the shareholder complies with the request satisfactorily or the company receives notice that there has been an approved transfer of the shares.
Whenever the share capital of the company is split into different classes of shares the special rights attached to any of those classes can be varied or withdrawn either i with the sanction of an extraordinary resolution passed at a separate meeting of the holders of the shares of that class or ii with the consent in writing of the holders of at least 75% in nominal value of the issued shares of that class.
At any separate meeting the necessary quorum is two persons holding or representing by proxy not less than onethird in nominal amount of the issued shares of the class in question but at any adjourned meeting any person holding shares of the class or his proxy is a quorum.
The company can issue new shares and attach any rights and restrictions to them as long as this is not restricted by special rights previously given to holders of any existing shares.
Subject to this the rights of new shares can take priority over the rights of existing shares or existing shares can take priority over them or the new shares and the existing shares can rank equally.
The company may by ordinary resolution i consolidate and divide all or any of its share capital into shares of a larger amount ii divide all or part of its share capital into shares of a smaller amount iii cancel any shares which have not at the date of the ordinary resolution been taken or agreed to be taken by any person and reduce the amount of its share capital by the amount of the shares cancelled and iv increase its share capital.
The company may also i buy back its own shares and ii by special resolution reduce its share capital any capital redemption reserve and any share premium account.
The companys shareholders can declare dividends by passing an ordinary resolution provided that no dividend can exceed the amount recommended by the directors.
Dividends must be paid out of prots available for distribution.
If the directors consider that the prots of the company justify such payments they can pay interim dividends on any class of shares of the amounts and on the dates and for the periods they decide.
Fixed dividends will be paid on any class of shares on the dates stated for the payments of those dividends.
The directors can offer ordinary shareholders the right to choose to receive new ordinary shares which are credited as fully paid instead of some or all of their cash dividend.
Before they can do this the companys shareholders must have passed an ordinary resolution authorising the directors to make this offer.
Any dividend which has not been claimed for ten years after it was declared or became due for payment will be forfeited and will belong to the company unless the directors decide otherwise.
If the company is wound up whether the liquidation is voluntary under supervision of the court or by the court the liquidator can with the authority of an extraordinary resolution passed by the shareholders divide among the shareholders all or any part of the assets of the company.
This applies whether the assets consist of property of one kind or different kinds.
For this purpose the liquidator can place whatever value the liquidator considers fair on any property and decide how the division is carried out between shareholders or different groups of shareholders.
The liquidator can also with the same authority transfer any assets to trustees upon any trusts for the benet of shareholders which the liquidator decides.
The liquidation of the company can then be nalised and the company dissolved.
No past or present shareholder can be compelled to accept any shares or other property under the Articles which could give that shareholder a liability.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Additional information for shareholders 138 Filename 06.3d Time 143519 Date 200506
Certicated shares of the company may be transferred in writing either by an instrument of transfer in the usual standard form or in another form approved by the Board.
The transfer form must be signed or made effective by or on behalf of the person making the transfer.
The person making the transfer will be treated as continuing to be the holder of the shares transferred until the name of the person to whom the shares are being transferred is entered in the register of members of the company.
The Board may refuse to register any transfer of any share held in certicated form s which is in favour of more than four joint holders or s unless the transfer form to be registered is properly stamped to show payment of any applicable stamp duty and delivered to the companys registered ofce or any other place the Board decide.
The transfer must have with it the share certicate for the shares to be transferred any other evidence which the Board ask for to prove that the person wanting to make the transfer is entitled to do this and if the transfer form is executed by another person on behalf of the person making the transfer evidence of the authority of that person to do so.
Transfers of uncerticated shares must be carried out using a relevant system as dened in the Uncerticated Securities Regulations 1995 the Regulations.
The Board can refuse to register a transfer of an uncerticated share in the circumstances stated in the Regulations.
If the Board decide not to register a transfer of a share the Board must notify the person to whom that share was to be transferred no later than two months after the company receives the transfer or instruction from the operator of the relevant system.
The Board can decide to suspend the registration of transfers for up to 30 days a year by closing the register of shareholders.
The register must not be closed without the consent of the operator of a relevant system as dened in the Regulations in the case of uncerticated shares.
BT may sell any shares after advertising its intention and waiting for three months if the shares have been in issue for at least ten years during that period at least three dividends have become payable on them and have not been claimed and BT has not heard from the shareholder or any person entitled to the dividends by transmission.
The net sale proceeds belong to BT but it must pay those proceeds to the former shareholder or the person entitled to them by transmission if that shareholder or that other person asks for them.
Every year the company must hold an annual general meeting.
The Board can call an extraordinary general meeting at any time and under general law must call one on a shareholders requisition.
The only limitation imposed by the Articles on the rights of nonresident or foreign shareholders is that a shareholder whose registered address is outside the UK and who wishes to receive notices of meetings of shareholders or documents from BT must give the company an address within the UK to which they may be sent.
Directors remuneration Excluding remuneration referred to below each director will be paid such fee for his services as the Board decide not exceeding 50000 a year and increasing by the percentage increase of the UK Retail Prices Index as dened by Section  Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 for any 12month period beginning 1 April 1999 or an anniversary of that date.
The company may by ordinary resolution decide on a higher sum.
This resolution can increase the fee paid to all or any directors either permanently or for a particular period.
The directors may be paid their expenses properly incurred in connection with the business of the company.
The Board can award extra fees to a director who holds an executive position acts as chairman or deputy chairman serves on a Board committee at the request of the Board or performs any other services which the Board consider extend beyond the ordinary duties of a director.
The directors may grant pensions or other benets to among others any director or former director or persons connected with them.
However BT can only provide these benets to any director or former director who has not been an employee or held any other ofce or executive position in the company or any of its subsidiary undertakings or to relations or dependants of or people connected to those directors or former directors if the shareholders approve this by passing an ordinary resolution.
Directors votes A director need not be a shareholder but a director who is not a shareholder can still attend and speak at shareholders meetings.
Unless the Articles say otherwise a director cannot vote on a resolution about a contract in which the director has a material interest this will also apply to interests of a person connected with the director.
The director can vote if the interest is only an interest in BT shares debentures or other securities.
A director can however vote and be counted in a quorum in respect of certain matters in which he is interested as set out in the Articles.
Subject to the relevant legislation the shareholders can by passing an ordinary resolution suspend or relax among other things the provisions relating to the interest of a director in any contract or arrangement or relating to a directors right to vote and be counted in a quorum on resolutions in which he is interested to any extent or ratify any particular contract carried out in breach of those provisions.
Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 139 Filename 06.3d Time 143520 Date 200506
Directors interests If the legislation allows and the director has disclosed the nature and extent of the interest to the Board the director can i have any kind of interest in a contract with or involving BT or in which BT has an interest or with or involving another company in which BT has an interest ii have any kind of interest in a company in which BT has an interest including holding a position in that company or being a shareholder of that company iii hold a position other than auditor in BT or another company in which BT has an interest on terms and conditions decided by the Board and iv alone or through some rm with which the director is associated do paid professional work other than as auditor for BT or another company in which BT has an interest on terms and conditions decided by the Board.
A director does not have to hand over to BT any benet received or prot made as a result of anything permitted to be done under the Articles.
When a director knows that they are interested in a contract with BT they must tell the other directors.
Retirement of directors Provisions of the legislation which read with the Articles would prevent a person from being or becoming a director because that person has reached the age of 70 do not apply to the company.
At every annual general meeting any director who was elected or last reelected a director at or before the annual general meeting held in the third year before the current year shall retire by rotation.
Any director appointed by the directors automatically retires at the next following annual general meeting.
A retiring director is eligible for reelection.
Directors borrowing powers To the extent that the legislation and the Articles allow the Board can exercise all the powers of the company to borrow money to mortgage or charge its business property and assets present and future and to issue debentures and other securities and give security either outright or as collateral security for any debt liability or obligation of the company or another person.
The Board must limit the borrowings of the company and exercise all the companys voting and other rights or powers of control exercisable by the company in relation to its subsidiary undertakings so as to ensure that the aggregate amount of all borrowings by the group outstanding net of amounts borrowed intragroup among other things at any time does not exceed 35 billion.
MATERIAL CONTRACTS Excluding contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business no contracts have been entered into in the two years preceding the date of this document by BT or another member of the group which are or may be material to the group or contain a provision under which a member of the group has an obligation or entitlement which is or may be material to BT or such other member of the group.
TAXATION US HOLDERS This is a summary only of the principal US federal income tax and UK tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs by US Holders as dened below who hold their ordinary shares or ADSs as capital assets.
It does not address all aspects of US federal income taxation and does not address aspects that may be relevant to persons who are subject to special provisions of US federal income tax law including US expatriates insurance companies taxexempt organisations banks regulated investment companies nancial institutions securities brokerdealers traders in securities who elect a marktomarket method of accounting persons subject to alternative minimum tax investors that directly indirectly or by attribution own 10% or more of the outstanding share capital or voting power of BT persons holding their ordinary shares or ADSs as part of a straddle hedging transaction or conversion transaction persons who acquired their ordinary shares or ADSs pursuant to the exercise of options or otherwise as compensation or persons whose functional currency is not the US dollar amongst others.
Those holders may be subject to US federal income tax consequences different from those set forth below.
For the purposes of this summary a US Holder is a benecial owner of ordinary shares or ADSs that for US federal income tax purposes is a citizen or individual resident of the United States a corporation or other entity taxable as a corporation for US federal income tax purposes created or organised in or under the laws of the United States or any political subdivision thereof an estate the income of which is subject to US federal income taxation regardless of its source or a trust if a US court can exercise primary supervision over the administration of the trust and one or more United States persons are authorised to control all substantial decisions of the trust.
If a partnership holds ordinary shares or ADSs the US tax treatment of a partner generally will depend upon the status of the partner and the activities of the partnership.
A partner in a partnership that holds ordinary shares or ADSs is urged to consult its own tax advisor regarding the specic tax consequences of owning and disposing of the ordinary shares or ADSs.
In particular this summary is based on i current UK tax law and the practice of Her Majestys Revenue and Customs HMRC and US law and US Internal Revenue Service IRS practice including the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended existing and proposed Treasury regulations rulings judicial decisions and administrative practice all as currently in effect and available ii the United KingdomUnited States Convention relating to estate and gift taxes and iii the United KingdomUnited States Tax Convention that entered into force on 31 March 2003 and the protocol thereto the Convention all as in effect on the date of this annual report all of which are subject to change or changes in interpretation possibly with retroactive effect.
US Holders should consult their own tax advisors as to the applicability of the Convention and the consequences under UK US federal state and local and other laws of the ownership and disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Additional information for shareholders 140 Filename 06.3d Time 143520 Date 200506
Taxation of dividends Under current UK tax law BT will not be required to withhold tax at source from dividend payments it makes.
For US federal income tax purposes a distribution will be treated as ordinary dividend income.
The amount of the distribution includible in gross income of a US Holder will be the US dollar value of the distribution calculated by reference to the spot rate in effect on the date the distribution is actually or constructively received by a US Holder of ordinary shares or by the Depositary in the case of ADSs.
A US Holder who converts the British pounds into US dollars on the date of receipt generally should not recognise any exchange gain or loss.
A US Holder who does not convert the British pounds into US dollars on the date of receipt generally will have a tax basis in the British pounds equal to their US dollar value on such date.
Foreign currency gain or loss if any recognised by the US Holder on a subsequent conversion or other disposition of the British pounds generally will be US source ordinary income or loss.
Dividends paid by BT to a US Holder will not be eligible for the US dividends received deduction that may otherwise be available to corporate shareholders.
For purposes of calculating the foreign tax credit limitation dividends paid on the ordinary shares or ADSs will be treated as income from sources outside the United States and generally will constitute passive income or for certain Holders nancial services income for tax years beginning before 1 January 2007 and for tax years beginning after 31 December 2006 will be treated as passive category income or general category income.
The rules relating to the determination of the foreign tax credit are very complex.
US Holders who do not elect to claim a credit with respect to any foreign taxes paid in a given taxable year may instead claim a deduction for foreign taxes paid.
A deduction does not reduce US federal income tax on a dollar for dollar basis like a tax credit.
The deduction however is not subject to the limitations applicable to foreign credits.
There will be no right to any UK tax credit or to any payment from HMRC in respect of any tax credit on dividends paid on ordinary shares or ADSs.
Certain US Holders including individuals are eligible for reduced rates of US federal income tax currently at a maximum rate of 15% in respect of qualied dividend income received in taxable years beginning before 1 January 2009.
For this purpose qualied dividend income generally includes dividends paid by a nonUS corporation if among other things the US Holders meet certain minimum holding periods and the nonUS corporation satises certain requirements including that either i the shares or ADSs with respect to which the dividend has been paid are readily tradeable on an established securities market in the United States or ii the nonUS corporation is eligible for the benets of a comprehensive US income tax treaty such as the Convention which provides for the exchange of information.
BT currently believes that dividends paid with respect to its ordinary shares and ADSs should constitute qualied dividend income for US federal income tax purposes.
Each individual US Holder of ordinary shares or ADSs is urged to consult his own tax advisor regarding the availability to him of the reduced dividend tax rate in light of his own particular situation and regarding the computations of his foreign tax credit limitation with respect to any qualied dividend income paid by BT to him as applicable.
Taxation of capital gains Unless a US Holder of ordinary shares or ADSs is resident in or ordinarily resident for United Kingdom tax purposes in the United Kingdom or unless a US Holder of ordinary shares or ADSs carries on a trade profession or vocation in the United Kingdom through a branch agency or permanent establishment in the UK and the ordinary shares andor ADSs have been used held or acquired for purposes of that trade the holder should not be liable for UK tax on capital gains on a disposal of ordinary shares and or ADSs.
A US Holder who is an individual and who has ceased to be resident or ordinarily resident for tax purposes in the United Kingdom on or after 17 March 1998 or who falls to be regarded as resident outside the United Kingdom for the purposes of any double tax treaty Treaty nonresident on or after 16 March 2005 and continues to not be resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom or continues to be Treaty nonresident for a period of less than ve years of assessment and who disposes of his ordinary shares or ADSs during that period may also be liable on his return to the United Kingdom to United Kingdom tax on capital gains subject to any available exemption or relief even though he is not resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom or is Treaty nonresident at the time of disposal.
For US federal income tax purposes a US Holder generally will recognise capital gain or loss on the sale exchange or other disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs in an amount equal to the difference between the US dollar value of the amount realised on the disposition and the US Holders adjusted tax basis determined in US dollars in the ordinary shares or ADSs.
Such gain or loss generally will be US source gain or loss and will be treated as longterm capital gain or loss if the ordinary shares have been held for more than one year at the time of disposition.
Longterm capital gains recognised by an individual US Holder generally are subject to US federal income tax at preferential rates.
The deductibility of capital losses is subject to signicant limitations.
Passive foreign investment company status A nonUS corporation will be classied as a Passive Foreign Investment Company for US federal income tax purposes a PFIC for any taxable year if at least 75% of its gross income consists of passive income or at least 50% of the average value of its assets consist of assets that produce or are held for the production of passive income.
BT currently believes that it did not qualify as a PFIC for the taxable year ending 31 March 2006.
If BT were to become a PFIC for any taxable year US Holders would suffer adverse tax consequences.
These consequences may include having gains realised on the disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs treated as ordinary income rather than capital gains and being subject to punitive interest charges on certain dividends and on the proceeds of the sale or other disposition of the ordinary shares or ADSs.
Furthermore dividends paid by BT would not be qualied dividend income which may be eligible for reduced rates of taxation as described above.
US Holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the potential application of the PFIC rules to BT.
Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 141 Filename 06.3d Time 143520 Date 200506
US information reporting and backup withholding Dividends paid on and proceeds received from the sale exchange or other disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs may be subject to information reporting to the IRS and backup withholding at a current rate of 28% which rate may be subject to change.
Certain exempt recipients such as corporations are not subject to these information reporting requirements.
Backup withholding will not apply however to a US Holder who provides a correct taxpayer identication number or certicate of foreign status and makes any other required certication or who is otherwise exempt.
Persons that are United States persons for US federal income tax purposes who are required to establish their exempt status generally must furnish IRS Form W9 Request for Taxpayer Identication Number and Certication.
Holders that are not United States persons for US federal income tax purposes generally will not be subject to US information reporting or backup withholding.
However such holders may be required to provide certication of nonUS status in connection with payments received in the United States or through certain USrelated nancial intermediaries.
Backup withholding is not an additional tax.
Amounts withheld as backup withholding may be credited against a holdersUS federal income tax liability.
A holder may obtain a refund of any excess amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules by timely ling the appropriate claim for refund with the IRS and furnishing any required information.
UK stamp duty A transfer of an ordinary share will generally be subject to UK stamp duty or UK stamp duty reserve tax SDRT at 0.5% of the amount or value of any consideration provided rounded up in the case of stamp duty to the nearest 5.
SDRT is generally the liability of the purchaser.
It is customarily also the purchaser who pays UK stamp duty.
A transfer of an ordinary share to or to a nominee or agent of a person whose business is or includes issuing depositary receipts gives rise to a 1.5% charge to stamp duty or SDRT of either the amount of the consideration provided or the value of the share issued rounded up in the case of stamp duty to the nearest 5.
No UK stamp duty will be payable on the transfer of an ADS assuming it is not registered in the UK provided that the transfer documents are executed and always retained outside the UK.
Transfers of ordinary shares into CREST will generally not be subject to stamp duty or SDRT unless such a transfer is made for a consideration in money or moneys worth in which case a liability to SDRT will arise usually at the rate of 0.5% of the value of the consideration.
Paperless transfers of ordinary shares within CREST are generally liable to SDRT at the rate of 0.5% of the value of the consideration.
CREST is obliged to collect SDRT from the purchaser of the shares on relevant transactions settled within the system.
UK inheritance and gift taxes in connection with ordinary shares andor ADSs The rules and scope of domicile are complex and action should not be taken without advice specic to the individuals circumstances.
A lifetime gift or a transfer on death of ordinary shares andor ADSs by an individual holder who is US domiciled for the purposes of the UKUS Estate and Gift Tax Convention and who is not a UK national as dened in the Convention will not generally be subject to UK inheritance tax if the gift is subject to US federal gift or US estate tax unless the tax is not paid.
LIMITATIONS AFFECTING SECURITY HOLDERS There are no limitations under the laws of the United Kingdom restricting the right of nonresidents to hold or to vote shares in the company.
DOCUMENTS ON DISPLAY All reports and other information that BT les with the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC may be inspected at the SECs public reference facilities at Room 1580 100 F Street NE Washington DC 20549 USA.
These reports may be accessed via the SECs website at www. ec.
PUBLICATIONS
BT produces a series of reports on the companys nancial economic compliance social and environmental performance.
Most of these reports as well as the EAB Annual Report on BTs compliance with the Undertakings are available to shareholders on request and can be accessed on the internet at siteaboutbt More detailed disclosures on BTs implementation of social ethical and environmental policies and procedures are available online through our fully and independently veried social and environment report at sitebetterworld Document Publication date Annual Review and Notice of Meeting May Annual Report and Form 20F May Social and Environment Report May EAB Annual Report May Quarterly results releases July November February and May Current Cost Financial Statements September Statement of Business Practice July 2004 For printed copies when available contact the Shareholder Helpline on Freefonetel or alternatively contact the Registrar in the UK at the address on page 143.
BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Additional information for shareholders 142 Filename 06.3d Time 143521 Date 200506
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION Shareholders can now choose to receive their shareholder documents electronically rather than by post.
Shareholders may elect to receive documents in this way by going to sitesignup and following the online instructions or by calling the Shareholder
SHAREHOLDER COMMUNICATION BT is committed to communicating openly with each of its stakeholder audiences in the manner most appropriate to their requirements.
All investors can visit our website at sitesharesandperformance for more information about BT.
There are direct links from this page to sites providing information particularly tailored for shareholders institutional investors and analysts industry analysts and journalists.
An electronic copy of this document is available at siteannualreport Private shareholders If private shareholders have any enquiries about their shareholding they should contact the Registrar the address can be found below.
Lloyds TSB Registrars maintain BT Groups share register and the separate BT Group EasyShare register.
They also provide a Shareholder Helpline service on Freefonetel.
Institutional investors and analysts Institutional investors and equity research analysts may contact Investor Relations on tel
Industry analysts may contact tel
Shareholder Helpline Tel Freefonetel
Textphone Freefonetel From outside the UK Tel 44tel Fax tel71 Textphone 44tel email email The Registrar ADR Depositary Lloyds TSB Registrars The Causeway Worthing West Sussex BN99 6DA United Kingdom
JPMorgan Chase Bank NA PO Box 3408 South Hackensack NJ 076063408 United States Tel 1tel toll free or 1tel from outside the USA email email Website site General enquiries BT Group plc BT Centre 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ United Kingdom tel
From overseas Tel 44tel Fax 44tel A full list of BT contacts and an electronic feedback facility is available at sitetalk Additional information for shareholders BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 143 Filename 06.3d Time 143521 Date 200506 Checksum tel The information in this document that is referred to in the following table shall be deemed to be led with the Securities and Exchange Commission for all purposes Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 1 Identity of directors senior management and advisors Not applicable 2 Offer statistics and expected timetable Not applicable 3 Key information 3A Selected nancial data Selected nancial data 22 Additional information for shareholders Exchange rates 137 3B Capitalisation and indebtedness Not applicable 3C Reasons for the offer and use of proceeds Not applicable 3D Risk factors Business review Group risk factors 20 4 Information on the company 4A History and development of the company Contents page
Business review
Introduction 7 How BT operates 7 Acquisitions and disposals Acquisitions and disposals prior to the 2006 nancial year 13 Acquisitions and disposals in the 2006 nancial year 13
Financial review
Capital expenditure 38 Acquisitions 38 4B Business overview Business review 6
Financial review
Line of business results 31 Our commitment to society 19 Operational statistics 131 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 133 4C Organisational structure Business review Introduction 7 Subsidiary undertakings and associate 127 4D Property plants and equipment Business review
Property 18 Financial statistics 129 5 Operating and nancial review and prospects 5A Operating results Financial review 26 Consolidated nancial statements Accounting policies 65 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 133 5B Liquidity and capital resources Financial review 26 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 133 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Loans and other borrowings 92 Financial commitments and contingent liabilities 97 Financial instruments and risk management 105 5C Research and development patents and licences Business review Pursue protable growth in new wave markets Build on our networked IT services capability 8 Research and development and IT support 18 Financial statistics 129 5D Trend information Financial review 26 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 133 5E Offbalance sheet arrangements Financial review Offbalance sheet arrangements 37 CROSS REFERENCE TO FORM 20F BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Cross reference to Form 20F 144 Filename 06.3d Time 143522 Date 200506 Checksum tel Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 5F Tabular disclosure of contractual obligations Financial review Capital resources 37 6 Directors senior management and employees 6A Directors and senior management Board of directors and Operating Committee 40 6B Compensation Report on directors remuneration 50 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Retirement benet plans 98 Share based payment 101 6C Board practices Board of directors and Operating Committee 40 Report of the directors The Board Directors 42 Report on directors remuneration 50 6D Employees Financial review Group results 29 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Employees 101 Operational statistics 131 6E Share ownership Report on directors remuneration 50 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Share based payment 101 7 Major shareholders and related party transactions 7A Major shareholders Report of the directors Substantial shareholdings 44 Additional information for shareholders Analysis of shareholdings 135 7B Related party transactions Report of the directors The Board Interest of management in certain transactions 44 Report on directors remuneration 50 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Related party transactions 97 7C Interests of experts and counsel Not applicable 8 Financial information 8A Consolidated statements and other nancial information See Item 18 below.
Business review
Legal proceedings 17
Financial review
Dividends 35 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Financial commitments and contingent liabilities 97 Additional information for shareholders Dividends 135 Dividend investment plan 136 Memorandum and Articles of Association
Dividends 138 8B Signicant changes Financial review Capital resources 37 9 The offer and listing 9A Offer and listing details Additional information for shareholders Share and ADS prices 134 9B Plan of distribution Not applicable 9C Markets Additional information for shareholders Listings 134 9D Selling shareholders Not applicable 9E Dilution Not applicable 9F Expenses of the issue Not applicable Cross reference to Form 20F BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 145 Filename 06.3d Time 143523 Date 200506 Checksum tel Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 10 Additional information 10A Share capital Not applicable 10B Memorandum and articles of association Additional information for shareholders Memorandum and Articles of Association 137 10C Material contracts Additional information for shareholders Material contracts 140 10D Exchange controls Additional information for shareholders Limitations affecting security holders 142 10E Taxation Additional information for shareholders Taxation US Holders 140 10F Dividends and paying agents Not applicable 10G Statement by experts Not applicable 10H Documents on display Additional information for shareholders Documents on display 142 10I Subsidiary information Not applicable 11 Quantitative and qualitative Financial review disclosures about market risk Treasury policy 36 Financial risk management 37 Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Accounting Policies Financial instruments 68 Financial instruments and risk management 105 12 Description of securities other than equity securities Not applicable 13 Defaults dividend arrearages and delinquencies Not applicable 14 Material modications to the rights of security holders and use of proceeds Not applicable 15 Controls and procedures Report of the directors US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 46 16A Audit committee nancial expert Report of the directors US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 46 16B Code of ethics Report of the directors US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 46 16C Principal accountants fees and services Consolidated nancial statements Notes to the nancial statements Audit services 104 Report of the Audit Committee Report of the Audit Committee 48 16E Purchases of equity securities by the issuer and afliated purchasers Additional information for shareholders Share buy back 137 17 Financial statements Not applicable 18 Financial statements Report of the independent auditors 63 Consolidated nancial statements 64 Notes to the consolidated nancial statements United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 114 Quarterly analysis of revenue and prot 128 BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 Cross reference to Form 20F 146 Filename 06.3d Time 143523 Date 200506 Checksum tel Cross reference to Form 20F BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2006 147 Accounting policies 6572 Acquisitions 8487 Acquisitions and disposals 13 Additional information for shareholders 132143 Articles of Association 138140 Associates and joint ventures 35 91 Audit Committee Report of the 48 Audit services 104105 Balance sheet 24 25 38 76 Board of directors and Operating Committee 4041 BT Global Services 7 33 7778 BT Retail 7 3132 7778 BT Wholesale 7 3233 7778 Business review 621 Capital expenditure 24 31 33 38 97 Capital gains tax 134 Capital resources 37 Cash and cash equivalents 24 69 75 76 83 Cash ow statement Group 24 75 Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 133 Chairmans message 3 Chief Executives statement 45 Competition and the UK economy 15 Consolidated Financial Statements 64121 Create longterm partnerships with our customers 12 Critical accounting policies 39 Cross reference to form 20F 144146 Deferred taxation 9495 Derivative nancial instruments 68 93 111 115 Directors remuneration report on 5061 Directors responsibility statement of 62 Directors Report of the 4247 Dividend investment plan 136 Dividend mandate 135 Documents on display 142 Earnings per share 2 22 23 28 30 35 39 73 8283 116 120 Electronic communication 143 Employees plans 103 Environment 19 39 Exchange rates 137 Foreign exchange 66 69 106 Financial commitments and contingent liabilities 97 Financial data selected 2225 Financial headlines 2 Financial instruments and risk management 105 Financial review 2639 Financial review introduction 27 Financial risk management 37 Financial statements for BT Group plc 123126 Financial statistics 129130 Financing 36 Free cash ow 3 36 84 Geographical information 38 Global Invest Direct 136 Glossary of terms and US equivalents 122 Group income statement summarised 28 Group results 2930 Group risk factors 2021 IFRS and United States generally accepted accounting principles differences between 114117 Income statement group 2223 28 73 Independent auditors Report of the 63 Individual savings accounts ISAs 136 Intangible assets 24 66 76 78 80 88 113 International Financial Reporting Standards Adoption of 28 111 Investments 34 35 90 125 Legal proceedings 17 Line of business results 31 Listings 134 Loans and other borrowings 24 37 69 76 83 9293 Material contracts 140 Maximise the return from our traditional business 1112 Memorandum 137 Minority interests 23 24 25 28 73 74 95 Net debt 2 24 36 37 8384 105 Nominating Committee Report of the 49 Offbalance sheet arrangements 37 Operating and nancial review 621 Operating and nancial review Introduction 7 Operating costs 22 30 34 73 80 Operating prot 22 23 25 3031 73 78 Operational statistics 131 Other operating income 2223 34 73 79 128 Other reserves and retained earnings 96 Our commitment to society 1920 Our customers 78 Our strategy 8 Outlook 8 Pensions 3 18 21 38 53 58 98101 Prot before taxation 2 28 35 73 75 82 128 Property plant and equipment 24 33 36 38 67 70 75 76 78 Provisions 68 76 94 Publications 142 Pursue protable growth in new wave markets 812 Quarterly analysis of revenue and prot 128 Reconciliation of movements in equity 95 Regulation competition and prices 1317 Regulatory nancial information 38 Related party transactions 97 Relationship with HM Government 16 Resources 1719 Results announcements 136 Retirement benet plans 98101 Return on capital employed 38 129 130 Segmental analysis 7779 Selected nancial data introduction 22 Share and ADS prices 134 Share buy back 137 Share capital 24 44 68 96 124 Sharebased payment 101 ShareGift 137 Shareholder communication 143 Shareholdings analysis of 135 Specic items 28 34 73 80 83 Statement of recognised income and expenses Group 74 Subsidiary Undertakings joint ventures and associates 127 Taxation US Holders 140142 Total shareholder return 56 103 136 Trade and other payables 75 76 93 Trade and other receivables 75 76 91 Transform our networks systems and services for the twentyrst century 12 Transition to IFRS Explanation of 111114 Treasury Policy 36 Unclaimed Assets Register 137 US GAAP 25 39 114120 US GAAP developments 39 65 120121 BT Group plc Registered office 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ Registered in England and Wales No.
