Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Delivering today Investing for tomorrow BT Group plc Registered ofce 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ Registered in England and Wales No.
Produced by BT Group Designed by Paufey London Typeset by Greenaways Printed in England by Pindar plc Printed on elemental chlorinefree paper sourced from sustainable forests site BT Group plc Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 BT is one of Europes leading providers of telecommunications services.
Its principal activities include local national and international telecommunications services highervalue broadband and internet products and services and IT solutions.
In the UK BT serves over 20 million business and residential customers with more than 29 million exchange lines as well as providing network services to other operators.
Contents
Financial headlines 2 Chairmans message 3 Chief Executives statement 4 Operating and nancial review 6 Business review 6 Fiveyear nancial summary 24 Financial review 26 Our commitment to society 47 Board of directors and Operating Committee 49 Report of the directors 51 Corporate governance 52 Report on directors remuneration 58 Statement of directors responsibility 72 Report of the independent auditors 73 Consolidated nancial statements 74 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 124 Subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates 134 Quarterly analysis of turnover and prot 135 Financial statistics 136 Operational statistics 137 Risk factors 138 Additional information for shareholders 140 Glossary of terms and US equivalents 154 Cross reference to Form 20F 155 Index 158 BT Group plc is a public limited company registered in England and Wales with listings on the London and New York stock exchanges.
This is the annual report for the year ended 31 March 2004.
It complies with UK regulations and is the annual report on Form 20F for the Securities and Exchange Commission to meet US regulations.
This annual report has been sent to shareholders who have elected to receive a copy.
A separate annual review and summary nancial statement for the year ended 31 March 2004 has been issued to all shareholders.
In this annual report references to BT Group BT the group the company we or our are to BT Group plc which includes the continuing activities of British Telecommunications plc and its subsidiaries and lines of business or any of them as the context may require.
References to the nancial year are to the year ended 31 March of each year eg the 2004 nancial year refers to the year ended 31 March 2004.
Unless otherwise stated all nonnancial statistics are at 31 March 2004.
Please see cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 141.
BT was incorporated in England and Wales on 30 March 2001 as Newgate Telecommunications Limited with the registered number The company changed its name to BT Group plc on 11 September 2001.
Following the demerger of mmO in November 2001 the continuing activities of BT were transferred to BT Group.
BT Groups registered ofce address is 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ.
Group turnover of 18.5 billion and New wave turnover of 3.4 billion up 30% and Prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 2.0 billion up 10% and Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 16.9 pence up 19% and Net debt reduced from 9.6 billion to 8.4 billion and Dividends of 8.5 pence per share for the year up 31% Years ended 31 March Continuing activities In  million unless otherwise statedtel Group turnover 18519 18727 18447 Exceptional operating costs 33 48 3990 Total operating prot loss 2839 2901 1489 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 38 1700 169 Loss on sale of group undertakings 2 9 148 Prot on sale of property xed assets 14 11 1089 Amounts written off investments  7 535 Prot loss before taxation 1948 3157 2493 Prot loss after taxation 1409 2698 2878 Basic earnings loss per share 16.4p 31.2p 34.8p Dividends per share 8.5p 6.5p 2.0p Prot before goodwill amortisation exceptional items and taxation 2016 1829 1273 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 16.9p 14.2p 8.8p Net cash inow from operating activities 5389 6023 5023 Capital expenditure on property plant and equipment 2673 2445 3100 The nancial information above is discussed in the Financial review on pages 26 to 46 together with the reasons for focusing on the results from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
The Consolidated nancial statements are on pages 74 to 134.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 2 Financial headlines Group turnover m years ended 31 March from continuing activities Net debt m as at 31 March Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items pence years ended 31 March from continuing activities Your company has continued to make good progress this year  delivering strong nancial results while continuing to transform the business.
New wave revenues grew by 30% to 3387 million.
Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items grew by 19% to 16.9 pence almost doubling in two years.
While continuing to invest for the future we generated free cash ow of over 2 billion and reduced net debt to 8.4 billion  a reduction of two thirds on the level of three years ago.
Our business Your company continues to make progress by innovating in our traditional markets and by growing revenues in all the new wave markets  ICT information and communications technology broadband mobility and managed services  in which we operate.
We continue to invest where we believe it will make the greatest difference while achieving rigorous standards of cost efciency and smarter working practices.
Returns to shareholders Although longterm shareholder return remains the key measure of our success our share price performance this year has not been strong.
Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items have risen well but this has yet to be reected in our share price.
However total shareholder return also includes the dividend and here the news for shareholders is positive.
We are recommending a full year dividend of 8.5 pence per share.
Reecting BTs commitment to a progressive dividend policy the dividend pay out ratio for the 2004 nancial year was around 50% of earnings before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
The full year dividend is 31% up on last year and over four times higher than two years ago.
We are targeting a 60% pay out ratio in 200506.
The strong cash ow generated by the group also enabled us to begin a share buy back programme in the 2004 nancial year.
This is being funded from cash generated over and above that required to meet our debt target of 7 billion in 200607 after paying dividends and taking into account any acquisitions or disposals.
Regulation
The recently announced strategic review of telecommunications by the UK regulator Ofcom is important and welcome to BT.
The review will cover within the 21 key strategic questions to be addressed the possibility of the structural separation of BT.
Your company believes this is not in the interests of shareholders customers or employees and will argue in favour of a strong and integrated BT.
Wider responsibilities It is important that companies such as BT live up to their responsibilities in the wider communities in which we operate.
Im proud to report that in the 2004 nancial year we were the highest placed telecommunications company in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index for the third year in a row.
Our goal is to help everyone benet from improved communications and to spread the benets of new technology as widely as possible.
This is demonstrated for example by our wide deployment of broadband technology throughout the UK and by the BT Education Programme which has enabled more than two million young people to participate in a dramabased campaign designed to help them improve their communications skills.
Strategic progress and outlook The strong growth in new wave turnover our ICT order book and broadband shows that our strategy is working.
We remain committed to that strategy and are condent in our ability to deliver our key strategic goals.
Weve come a long way since May 2001 when your Board announced a radical plan to reduce debts manage costs and improve customer satisfaction.
Weve established a solid platform for future growth and success.
None of this could have happened without the loyalty and support of our shareholders customers suppliers and employees.
Given the continued support of all our stakeholders we will build on this success and accelerate the transformation of our business.
Sir Christopher Bland
19 May 2004 Chairmans message 3 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 We live in an era of greater customer choice than we have ever seen before.
This choice is good for customers and good for our industry.
Changes in technology are leading to changes in peoples behaviour.
People are for example spending more time on the internet and sending information by email where once they would have used the phone or fax.
This transformation is putting converged services at the heart of our offering enabling our customers to communicate wherever they happen to be.
As we move from a narrowband to a broadband world we are offering a new mix of products and services in new markets  ICT broadband mobility and managed services.
Technology substitution is also having a signicant impact in our traditional voice markets where xedtoxed voice revenues were down in both the consumer and business markets.
This is both a challenge and an opportunity.
We have to respond to those changes in technology the market and behaviour at the same time as working to accelerate them.
We have to be absolutely focused on defending and reinventing our traditional markets through imaginative sales and marketing through delivering the right products at the right prices.
And we have to follow our customers where they want to go offering them new exible services that match their changing personal and business needs.
Customer satisfaction Our passion for customers is at the heart of everything we do.
A year ago we launched our brand promise to make every customer experience simple and complete.
This is essential to driving down customer dissatisfaction which remains a critical goal for us.
In the 2004 nancial year we reduced dissatisfaction by 22%.
As customer dissatisfaction is driven down so is the cost of failure.
A great customer experience  and cost savings  really can be two sides of the same coin.
Getting things right for customers the rst time keeps them loyal contributes to cost effectiveness and boosts our reputation.
New wave business ICT used to be an aspiration its now a reality.
We had a superb year with ICT orders worth more than 7 billion  up 59% on just a year ago.
The three deals we signed with the NHS for example  expected to be worth more than 2.1 billion  indicate our strength in this market.
I believe that we have something very special to offer  the ability to act as the telco inside our customers organisations.
We offer our customers businesses and other large organisations including local and national government  the chance to enhance their productivity through expert management of their information systems desktop to desktop.
And we have a full range of networkcentric ICT solutions depending on what our customers want from full service assurance across their ICT infrastructure through monitoring levels of service throughout their operations to validation of their networks data centres and desktops.
Broadband
Its been a tremendous year for broadband as well.
People were sceptical when we said wed reach two million DSL wholesale lines by the summer of 2004.
What nobody expected was that we would achieve two million in February 2004.
As at 14 May 2004 we had 2.45 million  and climbing.
The UK is now moving towards the top of the broadband league.
And our programme for upgrading our exchanges to broadband has been extremely effective in bringing the benets of this amazing technology to some of the remoter parts of the UK.
In April 2004 we announced a rollout plan that will bring broadband to 99.6% of the UKs homes and businesses.
The announcement in May 2004 that we will redesign and reduce the cost of our local loop unbundling product should encourage investment in broadband infrastructure and promote innovation.
Its
In the consumer broadband market weve teamed up with Yahoo to offer compelling worldclass content and launched a suite of new products that will enable customers to get the most from broadband.
A couple of years ago we were among the rst to offer a broadband connection for less than 30 a month.
This year weve broken the 20 barrier with an entrylevel broadband product for just 19.99 a month.
Mobility
We also stepped back into the consumer mobility market with BT Mobile Home Plan and we established the high street presence that will enable us to offer converged products and services in the future.
Again our goal is to offer communications exibility enabling our customers to communicate the information they choose in the way that they choose using whatever communications device they choose.
In May 2004 we announced that we will be working with Vodafone UK to dismantle the barriers between xed and mobile services by offering fully converged xedmobile services in the business and Chief Executives statement 4 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 consumer mobile markets.
Our customers will benet from being able to communicate and access the same information and services however and wherever they want whether they are connected to a xed network or on the move.
For our larger business customers we also offer convergence managing their xed and mobile communications seamlessly.
And the growth of WiFi wireless broadband suggests that it could well be one of those technologies which rapidly becomes a part of our customers lives.
Once theyve experienced it they nd it hard to imagine life without it.
Traditional business Given the impact of new technology and increasing competition voice call volumes may no longer be the absolute guide to the health of the company that they once were but they remain a fundamental part of our business and we are bringing an innovative approach to product development sales and marketing in the voice calls business.
Robust defence doesnt mean retreat it means seizing new opportunities.
BT Together for example has been a major success with around nine million customers.
During the year we announced that we will be abolishing the standard rate for our existing customers from 1 July 2004 and launched an enhanced range of option packages.
In the business calls market BT Business Plan has had similar success  customer numbers were up from 20000 to 175000 in the year.
And BT Local Business is demonstrating that getting close to our customers can deliver signicant revenue benets.
Cost leadership Cost leadership is vital to the accelerating transformation of BT.
We can and must operate as efciently and effectively as possible benchmarking our costs against those of other European telecommunications companies.
Most recently these comparisons showed that our costs are better than average for large telecommunications companies but that we still have some way to go to achieve bestinclass costs.
In the last three years weve made major reductions in the costs of our operations and weve identied a further 1 billion that can be achieved.
Our Hands Off Access Network HOAN project for example is helping to improve network efciency by minimising manual network intervention and reducing the need for exchange visits.
This is not about cutting corners or compromising on service but about nding innovative costeffective new ways to meet customers needs.
And over the next few years well be creating the 21st century network.
We are transforming our networks converging them on to a modern single multipurpose platform that will enable us to reduce costs meet customers changing needs and improve customer satisfaction.
The 21st century network will offer higher performance in return for lower operating costs.
Our people Of course without the commitment and hard work of BT people our strategy would be nothing more than words on the page.
A year ago we introduced our new values trustworthy helpful inspiring straightforward heart.
Since then our people have translated those values into action driving down customer dissatisfaction defending the traditional business and winning business in new markets.
Were very proud of what theyve done and of what they are continuing to do.
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive 19 May 2004 5 Chief Executives statement BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 The Business review is divided into the following sections 7 Introduction 7 Group structure 10 Group strategy 10 Keep a relentless focus on improving customer satisfaction 10 Put broadband at the heart of BT 12 Create mobility services and solutions 12 Transform our network for the twentyrst century 13 Achieve competitive advantage through cost leadership 13 Lead the world in networkcentric ICT solutions 15 Reinvent our traditional business 16 Motivate our people and live the BT values 17 Research and development and IT support 17 Regulation competition and prices 23 Relationship with HM Government 23 Legal proceedings Please see cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 141.
All customer numbers are given as at 31 March 2004 unless stated otherwise.
EBITDA  Earnings before interest taxation depreciation and amortisation.
The denition reconciliation and reasons for disclosing EBITDA are discussed in the Financial review.
Operating and financial review
Business review
6 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Introduction BT Group plc is the listed holding company for an integrated group of businesses that provides voice and data services in the UK and overseas particularly in Europe but also in the Americas and the Asia Pacic region.
British Telecommunications plc is a wholly owned subsidiary of BT Group plc and holds virtually all businesses and assets of the BT group.
Our aim is to increase shareholder value through service excellence an effective brand our largescale networks and our existing customer base and also through innovation in products services and solutions.
These increasingly build on our strengths in ICT information and communications technology broadband IP internet protocol and solutions.
BT is the UKs largest communications service provider by market share to the residential and business markets supplying over 20 million customers with a wide range of communications products and services including voice data internet and multimedia services and offering a comprehensive range of managed and packaged communications solutions.
Our core portfolio covers traditional telephony products such as calls analoguedigital lines and private circuits.
New wave revenue generation is focused on ICT broadband mobility and managed services.
In the UK wholesale market we provide network services and solutions  including broadband ADSL asymmetric digital subscriber line interconnect transit and private circuits  to other operators.
We serve around 500 communications companies xed and mobile network operators and service providers.
We aim to build complete communications packages and work with our customers to help them succeed in their businesses.
Our aim in these markets is to continue to increase protable revenues from data and advanced broadband and internet services which will further reduce our dependence on revenues and prot generated by traditional xedline voice services.
In the year ended 31 March 2004 the 2004 nancial year 93% of our revenues were derived from operations within the UK.
Outside the UK we supply managed services and solutions to multisite organisations worldwide.
Our
Building on our existing relationships with large multi site organisations in the UK and internationally we provide global reach and a complete range of ICT solutions and services.
Our extensive global communications network and strong strategic partnerships enable us to serve customers in the key commercial centres of Europe North America and the Asia Pacic region.
In Europe this network links more than 270 towns and cities across 19 countries to our UK network and beyond into the Americas and the Asia Pacic region.
Our global communications services portfolio ranges from desktop and network equipment and software transport and connectivity managed LAN local area network WAN wide area network and IPVPN internet protocol virtual private network services applications hosting storage and security services through to business transformation and change management.
Governance
BTs policy is to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity in all our operations in line with our published statement of business practice  The Way We Work.
This includes a commitment to maintaining the highest standards of corporate governance throughout the group see Corporate governance.
Corporate social responsibility BT is committed to enhancing its positive impact on society through leadership in CSR corporate social responsibility.
In our view a well managed CSR programme supports the delivery of strategy and is in the best interests of customers shareholders employees and the community see Our commitment to society.
From Oftel to Ofcom The UK regulatory environment changed in 2003 when on 25 July the Communications Act came into force bringing in a new regulator  the Ofce of Communications Ofcom  and a new regulatory framework.
See Regulation competition and prices for more information on Ofcoms duties and powers and the Communications Act.
Group structure
Telephone services in almost all of the UK were until 1981 provided by the Post Ofce which was a government department until 1969 when it was established as a state public corporation.
In 1981 the postal and telecommunications services of the Post Ofce became the responsibility of two separate corporations with British Telecommunications  under the trading name of British Telecom  taking over the telecommunications business.
As a result of the Telecommunications Act 1984 British Telecommunications plc was incorporated in England and Wales as a public limited company wholly owned by the UK Government.
In November 1984 the UK Government offered 3012 million ordinary shares 50.2% of the total issued ordinary shares to the public.
British Telecom shares made their debut on the London Stock Exchange on 3 December 1984.
From April 1991 British Telecommunications plc traded as BT.
In December 1991 the UK Government sold over half its remaining shares in BT retaining a holding of about 22%.
It sold this residual holding in July 1993.
In 1985 Cellnet the mobile phone operator was launched as a joint venture between British Telecom and Securicor which held 40% of the company.
BT acquired full control of Cellnet now O UK  part of mmO plc by acquiring Securicors minority holding in November 1999.
7 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 In January 2000 BT and ATandT established Concert as a 5050 joint venture serving customers around the world and transferred their transborder assets and operations to Concert.
2002 restructuring During the 2002 nancial year we substantially completed a radical restructuring programme the key elements of which were and the UKs largestever rights issue  raising 5.9 billion and the demerger of the majority of BTs mobile businesses and the disposal of signicant noncore businesses and assets and the unwind of Concert BTs joint venture with and the creation of customerfocused lines of business.
This restructuring resulted in a signicant reduction of our debt levels.
Demerger of mmO On 19 November 2001 we completed the demerger of mmO comprising what were BTs whollyowned mobile assets in Europe.
Concert
On 1 April 2002 we completed the unwind of Concert.
The assets taken back into our ownership have been rationalised and integrated with our existing operations with the aim of optimising performance of the business and simplifying the product set for our customers.
Acquisitions and disposals prior to the 2004 nancial year Between the 1999 and 2002 nancial years we made a number of signicant acquisitions including a stake in JPhone Communications and Japan Telecom and control of Viag Interkom in Germany.
During the 2002 nancial year reecting the change in the groups strategy we disposed of a number of businesses and assets including Yell  our international directories and ecommerce business and our stakes in Japan Telecom JPhone Communications and Airtel  the Spanish wireless operator.
In January 2003 we completed the sale of our 26% stake in Cegetel Groupe SA the leading alternative xedline operator in France to Vivendi Universal for 2.6 billion in cash.
After accounting for goodwill written back from reserves BT realised a prot of approximately 1.5 billion before an exceptional interest charge of 0.3 billion on closing out xed interest rate swaps.
Also in the 2003 nancial year we disposed of a number of noncore investments including our stakes in BSkyB Mediaset Blu and SmarTone.
Acquisitions and disposals in the 2004 nancial year In July 2003 BT received full repayment of loan notes issued by Yell plc the principal and accrued interest totalling 109 million.
The notes redeemable in 2013 and accruing interest at LIBOR became repayable in full on the IPO initial public offering of Yell.
In December 2003 BT issued bonds worth 99 million maturing in December 2008 which are exchangeable into our 16.6% holding in LG Telecom LGT shares.
LGT is a wireless telecommunications service provider in the Republic of Korea.
At a 17.5% premium to LGTs current share price at the time of issue and a coupon of 0.75% this was an efcient way to monetise our shareholding in LGT.
In December 2003 we sold our 7.8% stake in Inmarsat Ventures  a provider of global mobile satellite communication services  for a total cash consideration of 67 million.
In January 2004 we acquired the UK operations of NSB Retail Systems a supplier of software products and services to the retail market for a consideration of 17 million.
We also became NSBs exclusive distributor in the UK and Ireland.
Also in January 2004 we announced an offer for the entire issued and to be issued share capital of Transcomm plc at a price of 15.5 pence per share valuing the company at 16 million.
Transcomm is one of the leading providers of dataonly wireless services in the UK.
In March 2004 the offer was declared wholly unconditional and in April 2004 more than 90% of Transcomms shareholders had accepted the offer enabling us compulsorily to purchase the remaining shares in the company.
How BT operates BT consists principally of three lines of business BT Retail BT Wholesale and BT Global Services.
BT Retail and BT Wholesale operate almost entirely within the UK addressing the consumer major corporate business and wholesale markets and offer a broad spectrum of communications products and services.
BT Global Services is BTs managed services and solutions provider serving the needs of global multisite corporations and European multisite organisations.
These three lines of business are focused on providing a simple and complete experience for our customers.
8 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Group turnover by customer segment % year ended 31 March 2004 Wholesale UK and global carrier Major corporate 22% 32% 14% 32%
Business
Consumer includes the external turnover of BT Retail from consumer customers.
Major corporate includes the external turnover of BT Retail from major corporate customers and the external turnover of BT Global Services excluding the global carrier business.
Business includes the external turnover of BT Retail from SME customers.
Wholesale includes the external turnover of BT Wholesale and BT Global Services global carrier business.
Further analysis of group turnover by customer segment and between new wave and traditional turnover is provided in the Financial review.
Consumer customers As at 31 March 2004 BT had approximately 19 million UK consumer customers with more than 20 million residential customer lines exchange line connections.
In the 2004 nancial year consumer revenues declined by 2% to 5974 million.
Our strategy in the consumer market is to defend traditional revenues and market share vigorously through innovative service offerings backed by innovative marketing and excellent quality of service at the same time as driving for new wave revenues particularly in the areas of ICT broadband and mobility.
Underlying 12 month rolling average revenue per customer household net of mobile termination charges was 268 in the 2004 nancial year compared with 271 in the 2003 nancial year.
In the consumer market new wave revenues grew by 135% from 95 million in the 2003 nancial year to 223 million in the 2004 nancial year driven principally by broadband.
The number of UK consumer DSL digital subscriber line lines grew by 132%.
Business customers As at 31 March 2004 we had over one million business customers worldwide with more than nine million exchange lines.
In the 2004 nancial year major corporate revenues increased by 2% to 5909 million.
The increase in new wave turnover of 21% to 2452 million was driven by ICT broadband and by mobility not only in the UK but also globally.
Our strategy in the major corporate market is to drive a continued migration from traditional voiceonly services to managed ICT solutions.
This enables us to build closer and more integrated relationships with our customers enabling them to manage their communications spend more effectively and gain competitive advantage in their markets.
In the SME market companies with between one and 500 employees our strategy is to provide business customers with tailored communications products and services that enable them to manage their business more simply and efciently.
Although we increased the number of BT Business Plan customers the contraction of the xedcall market and regulation driven price cuts in our telephony services reduced our traditional turnover.
This reduction was only partially offset by robust and continued turnover growth in new wave services.
Overall in the SME market during the 2004 nancial year revenues reduced by 4% to 2600 million.
Wholesale customers In the 2004 nancial year turnover from our wholesale activities totalled 4002 million a decline of 3%.
In the UK external turnover from BT Wholesale activities was 3445 million in the 2004 nancial year compared with 3525 million in the 2003 nancial year.
New wave revenues were 361 million up 54% on the 2003 nancial year.
This growth has been achieved through broadband and the provision of tailored managed services to UK wholesale customers.
In the coming year our strategic emphasis for growth will continue to move from the capitalintensive products of our traditional portfolio to broadband ICT and mobility.
We aim to provide the right solution be it application service or product for our wholesale customers in order that we can continue to build our new wave revenues.
In our global carrier business revenues were 557 million in the 2004 nancial year down from 585 million in the 2003 nancial year.
Our global carrier business customers include other xedline telecommunications operators mobile operators and selected internet service providers.
Report structure For the purposes of this Business reviewwe are reporting on each of our strategic priorities.
For nancial reporting purposes we continue to report by line of business see Financial review.
Other businesses As at 31 March 2004 we held stakes in a number of other businesses including and stakes in three satellite entities  Eutelsat Intelsat and New Skies and a 16.6% stake in LG Telecom a mobile cellular telephone operator in the Republic of Korea and an 11.9% stake in StarHub a xed and mobile communications operator and payTV operator in
9 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Group strategy Our strategy is to build longterm partnerships with our customers.
With their support we aim to maximise the potential of our traditional business  through a combination of enhanced quality of service creative marketing innovative pricing and cost efciency while pursuing protable growth by migrating our customers to new wave products and services such as ICT broadband mobility and managed services.
Our strategic priorities are to and keep a relentless focus on improving customer satisfaction and put broadband at the heart of BT and create mobility services and solutions and transform our network for the twentyrst century and achieve competitive advantage through cost leadership and lead the world in networkcentric ICT solutions and reinvent our traditional business and motivate our people and live the BT values.
Keep a relentless focus on improving customer satisfaction Reducing customer dissatisfaction by 25% a year over three years on a compound annual basis to the 2005 nancial year is a key target in our drive to deliver the highest levels of customer satisfaction.
In the 2004 nancial year we achieved a 22% reduction in customer dissatisfaction based on qualitative customer research conducted by external agencies.
This follows a 37% reduction in the 2003 nancial year.
The lines of business all reduced customer dissatisfaction levels during the year.
We are working to remove barriers to providing customers with excellent service and to involve all our customerfacing people in improving our service.
For example our retail customerfacing and support teams participated in the my customer programme designed to improve our customers experience and to promote teamworking.
Examples of my customer successes include the introduction of a new contact centre structure that enables our people to handle more calls at the rst point of contact and enabling engineering and contact centre teams directly to update customer records.
Put broadband at the heart of BT In the 2004 nancial year we continued our drive to enhance the awareness availability and attractiveness of broadband.
As at 31 March 2004 in the highly competitive retail market BTs share of consumer and business broadband connections in the UK was 42% representing 928000 lines.
We aim to be a major player in wholesale broadband and data services in the UK.
Broadband for wholesale customers and In February 2004 ahead of our target BTs installed base of broadband lines reached two million.
We achieved the second million lines in just over eight months.
As at 31 March 2004 we had 2.2 million broadband lines which represents growth of 177% on the previous year and our target is to reach ve million by 2006.
In March 2004 we were taking an average of 50000 orders a week.
In total 2465 exchanges had been upgraded by the end of the 2004 nancial year reaching more than 85% of the UKs homes and businesses.
In May 2004 we announced further broadband progress.
The number of broadband lines increased to 2.45 million 2652 exchanges had been upgraded and total UK coverage reached 90%. clear commercial case for doing so.
In July 2002 we introduced a demanddriven registration scheme which enabled people in areas where the exchange had not been upgraded to register an interest.
This hugely successful scheme attracted more than 860000 registrations helping us match our investment to demand.
Because the registration scheme gave us such a clear picture of demand we were able to announce in April 2004 the speeding up of the delivery of broadband services to rural communities.
The scheme is now closed and we intend to roll out broadband to a further 1128 exchanges by no later than the summer of 2005.
This will help bring broadband to exchanges serving 99.6% of UK homes and businesses. communities.
In December 2003 for example we launched a trial of wireless broadband at sites throughout the UK.
Symmetric and BT IPStream Symmetric to 150 exchanges during the year signicantly strengthened our portfolio of businessclass broadband services which service providers can offer their customers.
Based on SDSL symmetric digital subscriber line technology it provides the same rate upstream and downstream and is suitable for the SME remote ofce and teleworking access markets. broadband service for wholesale customers.
BT
IPStream Home 1000 is a selfinstall product for residential customers who want greater bandwidth than the standard 512Kbits available at present.
70% in a phased series of price cuts.
We believe that this move will benet those companies that are willing to innovate and invest in broadband infrastructure.
The new LLU product will be closer to simpler continental European models and we aim to bring it to the market within six months.
Immediate price cuts should ensure that there is sustainable demand prior to launch and help potential customers plan ahead with condence.
See Other market reviews.
10 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 and We also announced that we will be adjusting the price of Datastream products to ensure there are adequate margins between Datastream and IPStream Home 500.
The details will be announced by the end of May 2004.
BT Wholesale DSL volumes thousands Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Qtel391 Broadband for consumers During the year we focused on improving sales processes reduced the cost of our broadband help desk operations and increased the number of orders placed online.
We also launched several additions to our family of products and announced trials and launches of a new set of valueadded products and services.
Yahoo Broadband a broadband internet service combining highquality access and a wide range of content and services for the same price as the existing BT Openworld Broadband offering.
The service combines highquality access with compelling content and services such as intelligent personalisation to help understand our customers needs and tailor content accordingly LAUNCHcast a personalised radio station advanced security services  including antispam email antivirus and a free rewall  news sport and entertainment.
Online Console Gaming.
Broadband Voice package which enables cable broadband customers to make voice calls over the internet.
This was the rst move by a major UK player into the consumer VOIP voice over IP market.
Broadband.
This is twice the speed of ordinary broadband and up to 20 times faster than traditional dialup internet.
The service is available to customers living within approximately 3.5 kilometres of a broadbandenabled exchange around 75% of existing broadband users. service for under 20 a month. the consumer choice. services.
Flexible Bandwidth which began trials in April 2004 enables users to increase bandwidth up to 2Mbits  temporarily or permanently.
BT
Rich Media launched in April 2004 is a platform that enables content providers to make content easily available to users.
BT Communicator enables consumers to use a home PC for VOIP instant messaging text messaging and other related services.
Trials will begin later this year.
Broadband for business customers and In January 2004 we rebranded our business broadband products and business broadband information portal in order to simplify our offerings.
BT Openworld Broadband products became BT Business Broadband products and our revamped business information portal became BT Broadband Ofce.
BT Business Broadband remained the leading ISP for SMEs in the UK.
As at March 2004 we had over 240000 business customers.
Around 40% of these customers use valueadded services such as the Internet Security Pack and the Internet Business Pack. enhance its networking and valueadded services.
These companies include Siebel e.
Worldpay Interland learndirect 2Wire and Lexis
1000 PLUS and 2000 PLUS. broadband every day. and broadband solution.
BT Connected and Complete featuring Microsoft technology gives small businesses access to regularly updated and individually tailored IT software and support previously available only to large companies.
BT Connected and Complete will for the rst time provide small businesses with secure broadband 11 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 access applications service support and maintenance all from a single source and on one bill.
Create mobility services and solutions Mobility for consumers In the consumer mobility market our strategy is to build a foundation for the delivery of addedvalue xedmobile convergent solutions. step towards a converged xedmobile service.
BT
Mobile Home Plan is targeted at families and its features include bundled xedprice packages of call minutes lower line rental and free short calls home to the family xed line.
The launch was supported by a major advertising campaign.
As at 31 March 2004 we had over 41000 contract customers for BT Mobile Home Plan and BT Mobile Sense a previous mobile consumer offering.
The Link and Phones 4U.
Project Bluephone  the rst step towards handset convergence.
Project Bluephone removes the need to own more than one phone as customers will be able to use a single device that can switch seamlessly between xed and mobile networks offering a better service with more guaranteed coverage and lower overall costs.
A soft launch involving more than 1000 users is planned for the summer of 2004 and a full launch for later in the year.
Mobility for business customers We are a service provider in the business mobile market and had over 103000 business connections at 31 March 2004.
BT provides a range of managed mobile services to UK and global customers who either outsource their mobile communications entirely or rely on BT to provide specic managed services such as supplier management or managed billing for mobility. networks via a single smart login application.
WiFi services.
As at 31 March 2004 we had almost 2400 Openzone live sites throughout the
In January 2004 we reached agreement with McDonalds to install Openzone access points in more than 500 McDonalds restaurants.
We also started installing Openzone access points in our public telephone network.
The target is to have 4000 access points throughout the UK by the end of summer 2004.
In January 2004 we sponsored Wireless Broadband Week which offered seven days of free access to BT Openzone and saw trafc in the network increase by 133%.
In February 2004 we announced a global deal with British Airways to install Openzone access points in 80 of its main customer lounges around the world.
BTs position in providing remote monitoring and management information services for business customers in the UK.
Remote monitoring enables the control of electronic devices over long distances helping businesses to manage their assets and risks.
Devices which can be remotely monitored include re and burglar alarms vending machines refrigerators EPOS electronic point of sale terminals parking meters and distribution eets.
Through our BT Redcare operation BT is already a leading player in xed line M2M machine to machine applications in the
This acquisition enhances our M2M service offering by adding wireless capabilities.
Mobility for wholesale customers For wholesale customers we will move towards our strategy in the UK wholesale mobile arena which is to defend our traditional mobility revenues and to grow the new mobility business. switches.
Vodafone will benet from simplication of processes  including a formalised payment structure  as well as access to any new technologies implemented by BT within the ve year term of the contract.
Transform our network for the twentyrst century Our UK network today In the UK we have 873 local and trunk processor units 121.7 million kilometres of copper wire and 7.3 million kilometres of optical bre.
The network services we provide include Frame Relay ATM asynchronous transfer mode and IPVPN and we have the most extensive IP backbone network in the UK.
We interconnect with over 100 other operators as well as carrying transit trafc between telecommunications operators.
Our global reach In Europe we own operations in Belgium France Germany Ireland Netherlands Spain Scandinavia and Central and Eastern Europe.
We deliver service to our customers in Italy through our joint venture Albacom and our applications hosting company I. et.
In the Americas and the Asia Pacic region we deliver service to our customers through a combination of direct sales and services operations and strategic partners.
Our networkbased services Frame Relay ATM and IPVPN extend to and across North and South America and the Asia Pacic region.
This means that products are delivered seamlessly within and from Europe to our own locations in the Americas and delivered locally through interconnect and supply agreements with regional carriers.
12 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 and As at 31 March 2004 our agship MPLS multi protocol label switching product which was launched in 2002 had 1000 points of presence around the globe and could be accessed from more than 70 countries.
MPLSbased IP virtual private networks are the next generation of data networks for corporate customers supporting voice data and video applications offering enhanced exibility and service performance.
MPLS revenues grew by 102% during the 2004 nancial year.
Global customer service is provided via service and network management centres around the world 24 hours a day seven days a week.
Twentyrst century network As one of our strategic priorities we are working to create an intelligent exible and customerfocused network for the 21st century 21CN.
BTs 21CN is designed to support the next generation of services and revenues for BT and for our wholesale customers while enhancing the customer experience and reducing costs through greater network intelligence and automation.
21CN aims to support the endtoend transformation of BTs wholesale business and is designed to deliver tangible benets to our customers businesses.
The multiservice capabilities of 21CN were rened during a period of consultation with many of the leading communications operators in the industry as well as technical and equipment vendors from around the world.
The phased introduction of the new platform will support communication in a range of formats and across multiple devices.
21CN will also introduce new levels of network simplicity intelligence and exibility and will aim to support the delivery of new revenue generating services faster than is currently possible.
This is an innovative longterm transformation programme which is already delivering benets for our customers.
Key developments in the 2004 nancial year included and a programme of industry consultation to help rene the networks technical architecture requirements. and trials.
21CN from the laboratory to the live network over the next 12 months. efciency and reduce network operating costs.
For example our Hands Off Access Network project is helping to improve efciency by minimising manual network intervention and reducing exchange visits.
We expect to launch a range of new commercial broadband services over the next 12 months.
These include and variable bandwidth  giving users the power to boost temporarily broadband speeds online providing access to premium content such as DVDquality streamed videos or online gaming. digital content.
PC enabling phone or video calls over broadband connections.
During the 2004 nancial year we undertook a detailed technical and economic analysis of the options for 21CN deployment.
The 2005 nancial year will see the initial stages of implementation and live technical trials will begin prior to investment and deployment decisions being taken.
Capital expenditure is expected to rise but remain within the groups 3 billion annual target in the 2005 nancial year as the group invests in its 21CN programme.
Achieve competitive advantage through cost leadership Our focus on continued operational efciencies helped reduce overall group operating costs before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items by 348 million in the 2004 nancial year.
Some of the savings in traditional activities have been reinvested in growing new wave activities.
Looking forward we have identied additional efciency savings of over 1 billion which we aim to achieve over the next three years by focusing on reducing the costs of failure complexity and duplication and by working smarter.
For example we will continue to use new technology to develop more costeffective relationships with our customers. and 1.2 million customers receiving ebills.
Next Generation Contact Centre programme having achieved our threeyear target of 150 million annual savings by 31 March 2004.
The reduction in the 2004 nancial year was 63.6 million.
We also invested 1.5 million hours in training contact centre people and continued to rationalise the number of sites  down from 104 to 41 in the last three nancial years.
We invested 45 million in upgrading environmental standards and deploying new systems and technology.
We are driving for cost leadership within the telecoms industry.
Although we currently benchmark well against many other large European telecommunications companies we remain less efcient than the best in class in our industry.
We aim to narrow that gap signicantly over the next three years.
Lead the world in networkcentric ICT solutions Our strategy in the ICT market is to establish BT as a global ICT player capable of competing with the 13 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 worlds best in selected growth markets  outsourcing IP infrastructure broadband mobility managed desktop solutions and CRM.
These are the markets in which communication and networking skills are signicant migration is from our traditional markets our brand has value and in which partnerships protably supplement our capability.
ICT for business customers As applications such as email and ofce productivity software are increasingly being networked networks are increasingly seen as vital to productivity and competitive advantage.
ICT revenues for the 2004 nancial year were 2.6 billion a rise of 19% on the 2003 nancial year itself a rise of 8% on the previous year.
We aim to deliver ICT solutions to large business customers and other organisations particularly in the public and government sectors which give them the communications tools they need for protability andor business improvement.
Our larger or more complex and global customer contracts are delivered through or managed by our BT Global Solutions and BT Syntegra businesses.
BT
Global Solutions portfolio covers a number of key ICTrelated areas including IP infrastructure CRM applications and hosting and outsourcing.
BT
Syntegra offers business transformation and change management services and is a key player in the global trading systems market.
BT Global Solutions and BT Syntegra won business worth more than 7 billion during the 2004 nancial year.
ICT sales orders  billion years ended 31 Marchtel and The highest prole contracts in the year were three NHS contracts which are expected to be worth more than 2.1 billion and form an integral part of the National Programme for Information Technology in the NHS.
These contracts represent some of the largest BT has ever won.
One worth up to 620 million over ten years is to design deliver and manage a national patient record database and transactional messaging service for the NHS Care Records Service.
This will provide all 50 million NHS patients in England with an individual electronic care record and connect more than 30000 GPs and 270 acute community and mental health NHS trusts in a single secure national system.
A second contract expected to be worth up to 996 million over ten years is to design deliver and operate integrated local patient record applications and systems for the whole of the London care community.
The third worth an estimated 533 million over seven years is to procure integrate and manage highspeed broadband networking services for the New National Network for the NHS. delivery to the Inland Revenue.
10.5 million to upgrade its existing network infrastructure to IP.
Assured Infrastructure AAI designed to help organisations understand and master the complex interactions that occur within their communications infrastructure  from desktop to data centre.
With AAI it becomes possible to guarantee that the performance of our customers ICT systems supports their business priorities and enhances their efciency.
This new proposition combines BTs extensive experience in the provision of corporate data networks and hosting with our professional services capability.
UKbased company to introduce Siebel CRM OnDemand to businesses in the UK enabling SMEs and divisions of larger businesses to organise manage and streamline their sales marketing and customer service activity through a hosted environment.
Customers can access the service either as an integrated part of BTs existing Siebelbased Contract Central CRM portfolio which provides a full multimedia contact centre solution or as a standalone CRM application. marketplace.
As a rst step we have signed managed service agreements with a combined value of US1.5 billion over the next seven years.
Under these agreements HP will manage BTs midrange and desktop ICT infrastructure in the UK and BT will manage HPs voice and data network and product support call centres in Europe the Middle East and Africa.
ICT for consumers and Initiatives under the Home of Possibilities programme aim to bring the benets of broadband into the home.
BT Home Networking enables customers to connect a number of PCs to broadband simultaneously without wires.
And in December 2003 we introduced a broadband 14 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 enabled entertainment service in partnership with Phillips which enables customers to stream online radio stations and download music to any part of the house  wirelessly.
Governments Home Computing Initiative legislation which enables companies to provide employees with the use of computers at rates signicantly below high street prices.
ICT for wholesale customers To further our growth strategy we aim to be the network ICT supplier and sales channel of choice serving major corporate and government users and to serve SME and consumer endusers building on our existing intermediate and broadband portfolio.
Fibernet the bespoke network service provider with a fully managed voice network and a managed services contract with Intelliplus Group a subsidiary of Eckoh Technologies.
Reinvent our traditional business We face continued challenges in our traditional markets as a result of regulatory intervention competition and a shift in our customers buying patterns as we provide them with higherspecication highvalue new wave products.
Private circuit volumes fell due to the switch into lowerpriced partial private circuits as a result of regulatory intervention.
Total xedtoxed voice call minutes in the UK market declined by an estimated two percentage points in the 2004 nancial year.
This was driven by customers making use of alternatives such as mobile calls email instant messaging corporate IPVPNs and
However call minutes are less important to BT as customer takeup of pricing packages continues and we actively migrate customers to new wave services such as broadband.
Traditional services for consumers and The BT Together pricing packages which offer a range of competitive call prices and xedfee pricing options are an important part of our traditional revenue defence strategy and had around nine million customers as at 31 March 2004.
During the year we announced we would abolish the standard rate on 1 July 2004 to give more value for money.
Existing standard rate customers will move to join those already on BT Together Option 1 which will become the benchmark for our xedline call prices.
UK high streets shopping centres airports and stations into internet kiosks offering internet access email text messaging and video.
These kiosks give fast access to a range of services from news and sport to shopping games local maps and information about shops and restaurants.
We also continued to offer space in our payphone kiosks for mobile antennas WiFi hotspots and CCTV closedcircuit television. virtual card for dataonly users. the overall size of the market.
Volumes of calls have continued to decline since deregulation.
According to the latest gures from Ofcom calls to all 118 service providers from the BT network in the April 2004 sample were 23% down on September 2003.
However since deregulation calls to BT Directories 118 services have performed far better than the total market.
Calls to 118 500 are 30% up on the level experienced immediately following the 192 switchoff. directories market with The BT Phone Book. penetration of 5% in the rst year.
Our online directory enquiries service site directoryenquiries is the leading online player in the market with almost 1.5 million searches business name residential and classied a week.
The classied service is currently generating more than one million searches a month.
Traditional services for business customers and During the 2004 nancial year we introduced an enhanced version of BT Business Plan offering a ten pence price cap on calls to the US and a 20 pence cap on calls to Europe and certain countries in the Asia Pacic region.
We also reduced the annual spend commitment to 250.
As at 31 March 2004 BT Business Plan had over 175000 customers compared with 20000 as at 31 March 2003. large corporations.
At the end of the 2004 nancial year BT Local Business was active in 73 locations around the country and managing 1.1 billion of annual billed turnover. multimedia payphones.
Traditional services for wholesale customers Our strategy in the UK traditional wholesale market has been to stem the decline in traditional revenues while seeking areas for revenue growth.
Our traditional UK wholesale business has been under pressure from several directions over the year.
As 77% of our 15 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 traditional revenue is regulated the impact of regulatory changes served to reduce UK wholesale revenues.
The impact of the mobile termination rate price cuts reduced our external UK wholesale revenue by 126 million 4% in the year.
The reductions from the regulatory network charge control pricing formulae resulted in weighted average price reductions of around 7% across the basket of relevant products.
New regulatorydriven products such as carrier preselection and wholesale access lines necessitated investment to create and introduce systems and processes  all of which are at a cost.
However we achieved a 1% increase in our UK external revenues excluding the impact of mobile termination rate cuts.
We have further developed our product portfolio launching products such as wholesale calls and ISDN 30 Service Provider.
We have continued with our cost reduction programmes across the business and reduced our UK operating cost base by 4% over the nancial year.
In May 2004 we announced we will be introducing a new wholesale calls product for carrier preselection CPS operators that will allow them to use BT directly for certain calls at a price such that their overall costs can be considerably reduced.
This will be developed in consultation with Ofcom and the industry with interim arrangements to be put in place from July 2004.
Motivate our people and live the BT values Our people As at 31 March 2004 we had a diverse workforce of 99900 people 91600 of whom were employed in the
To support our international operations we employ 8300 people in 37 countries outside the UK.
Workforce exibility The changing nature of the markets in which we operate our focus on cost leadership and our investment in new services have impacted the shape of our permanent workforce.
During the 2004 nancial year 2287 people joined BT natural attrition was running at 2.5% and in the UK 4514 people left BT under our voluntary paid leaver package.
The composition of our workforce is regularly reviewed and at the end of the 2004 nancial year managers and professionals represented 31% of our workforce.
We supplemented our longterm customer contact centre workforce in the UK with an additional workforce of 4.6% outside the UK.
This workforce is under our direction and control.
We also instigated a review of our procurement contracts for the employment of temporary and agency workers.
At 31 March 2004 we were working with ten agencies with costs for contingency workers agency and contractors reducing year on year by 17%.
Shares and pensions Since privatisation we have been committed to providing our employees with a stake in the company.
Under the BT Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP employees can purchase shares in the company from their pretax salaries.
In addition they can buy shares at a discount under our savingsrelated share option plans.
In the 2004 nancial year 20 million was allocated to provide free shares to employees under the ESIP.
Employees outside the UK receive a cash payment equivalent to the value of the shares.
This allocation was linked to corporate performance measures determined by the Board.
98% of eligible employees participate in one or more of these plans.
Most of our employees are members of the BT Pension Scheme or the BT Retirement Plan both of which are controlled by independent trustees.
The BT Pension Scheme was closed to new members on 31 March 2001.
The majority of new employees are eligible to join the BT Retirement Plan.
Listening to our people Our annual employee attitude survey most recently conducted in early 2004 gives employees the chance to express their opinions about the company their managers and the work they do.
It encourages managers and their teams to work together to implement action plans to address specic issues.
80% of people participated in the survey and the results showed for example that 95% of employees are committed to our customers and 90% feel that their actions align with our brand and people values.
Employees are informed about our business through a wide range of communications channels including our online news service monthly newspaper regular email bulletins and senior management web chats and web cast briengs.
This ensures that key messages are available for everyone with additional information sourced on an as needs basis.
In the UK two main trade unions are recognised by the company.
In continental Europe we have strong relationships with the works councils with which we work closely both on an operational basis and as strategic stakeholders.
Health and safety We have zero tolerance of workplace accidents and have set rigorous targets to effect signicant improvements across the company.
During the 2004 nancial year we beat our threeyear targets set in 200001.
Over the three years we have reduced workplace injuries by 40% and the number of cases of occupational illhealth referred to our occupational health service by 36%.
Diversity in our workforce A work environment that actively supports all our employees is central to BTs culture.
We champion equality of opportunity  regardless of gender race sexual orientation disability or age  throughout the company.
Internal networks include the Womens Network gender equality and Kaleidoscope sexual orientation.
During the 2004 nancial year we were awarded the platinum standard by Opportunity Now for our work on gender equality the gold standard by Race for Opportunity for our work on race equality and the Business in the Community Diversity Award recognising our forwardthinking and diverse approach 16 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 to equal opportunities.
We also work closely with the Employers Forum on Disability.
Learning and exibility In addition to culture change programmes such as my customer during the year we spent over 61 million excluding staff and other direct costs on the training and development of our employees.
We have also increased the emphasis on broadband elearning and selfteach opportunities.
This is particularly important as we extend our practices of exible working.
At 31 March 2004 we had around 500 job sharers 5570 people working part time and more than 7900 people working from home.
Research and development and IT support BT Exact is BTs research technology and IT operations business.
It offers expertise and experience in ICT backed by a team of over 6000 technologists and one of the worlds largest communications research and development facilities.
The work undertaken by BT Exact is part of an investment of 334 million in research and development made by BT in the 2004 nancial year.
This compares with 380 million and 362 million invested in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
At BT Exacts core are our worldrenowned laboratories at Adastral Park near Ipswich which have been responsible for some of the worlds most farreaching advances in telecommunications technology including the advancement of singlemode optical bre and of the technology and worldwide standards behind passenger phones on aircraft and videoconferencing.
Brightstar  BTs business incubator with the goal of commercialising our patent portfolio  was created in January 2000.
In March 2003 BT Exact teamed up with Coller Capital and New Venture Partners NVP to create a new independent corporate venturing partnership  NVP Brightstar.
BT remains a limited partner and NVP Brightstar remains closely associated with BT Exact through exclusive rights to continue to spinout companies from its RandD professional and computing services base.
This venturing unit complements our existing patent licensing programme for which we have an exclusive longterm arrangement with Silicon Valley based IPValue Management Inc.
Regulation competition and prices The commercial environment in the UK and in the countries in which BT operates is increasingly competitive and dynamic.
However we remain subject to extensive regulation particularly in the UK which can materially affect the way in which we carry out our business.
We also use inputs such as networks and services from other regulated operators largely outside the UK and the availability and price of these inputs may change from time to time which in turn affects our business.
Regulation in the UK It is our policy to be fully compliant with the regulatory framework in which we operate.
During the 2004 nancial year we reviewed our compliance activities because we want to ensure that we continue to meet the obligations imposed by the UKs Communications Act previously the Telecommunications Act and the Competition Act while competing fairly and vigorously within the rules.
We have published an annual compliance report which can be found in our social and environment report at sitebetterworld.
Ofcom
The UK regulatory environment changed materially in 2003.
On 25 July 2003 the Communications Act 2003 the Communications Act came into force bringing in a new regulator the Ofce of Communications Ofcom and a new regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services.
Ofcom did not however assume its regulatory functions until 29 December 2003 and in the transitional period the existing regulators continued to carry out Ofcoms functions relating to networks and services and spectrum.
Ofcom was set up as a result of the increasing convergence between telecommunications broadcasting and radio to provide a single seamless approach to regulation across the whole converging marketplace.
It amalgamates the roles of ve former regulatory agencies the Director General of Telecommunications Oftel the Independent Television Commission the Broadcasting Standards Commission the Radio Authority and the Radiocommunications Agency.
Ofcom is headed by a board consisting of a chairman and executive and nonexecutive members.
Currently the chairman is Lord Currie and the chief executive is Stephen Carter.
The main regulatory changes for providers of electronic communications networks and services are and the regulators ability to impose conditions without agreement and the possibility of nes being imposed for breach of regulatory obligations and the availability of appeals against regulatory decisions based on their merits and the creation of a new regulatory regime which among other things implements the requirements of the new EU Directives for general authorisations instead of individual licences and bases economic regulation on dominance or signicant market power SMP.
Ofcoms duties and powers Ofcom has a wide range of general and specic duties laid down in the Communications Act.
Below is a summary of those duties and functions of particular relevance to BTs activities and the principal duty to further the interests of citizens in relation to communications matters and secondly to further the interests of consumers where appropriate by promoting competition.
In doing so Ofcom must secure 17 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 among other things the availability in the UK of a wide range of electronic communications services. consistent and appropriately targeted. burdens. conditions see Enforcement.
Ofcoms decisions are subject to appeal on the merits see Appeals.
In carrying out its duties Ofcom must consider promoting competition and the use of effective selfregulation encouraging investment and innovation and encouraging the availability and use of highspeed data services including broadband.
Regulatory conditions Under the new framework based on 2003 EU Directives providers are no longer required to obtain licences before offering telecommunications services.
Individual licences such as that granted to BT in 1984 no longer exist.
Instead there is a general authorisation for anybody who wishes to provide electronic communications networks and services.
Regulation is applied through separate sets of conditions made by Ofcom of which some apply to all relevant communications providers and others are imposed individually on particular providers which following a review of the relevant markets are found to have SMP or which are designated as universal service providers.
Other general obligations are set out in the Communications Act.
The general and specic obligations that form BTs regulatory environment are described below.
Conditions applying to all providers of electronic communications networks or services General conditions The foundation of the new regulatory framework is the set of general obligations referred to in the Communications Act as general conditions.
These apply to all providers of electronic communications networks or services including systemless service providers and internet service providers.
These general conditions are mainly concerned with consumer protection but also address matters such as general access and interconnection obligations standards emergency planning and numbering.
In addition a separate condition has been set regulating the provision of premium rate services.
Electronic Communications Code conditions The Electronic Communications Code deals with powers to carry out streetworks and similar activities for the purposes of providing networks and its application is subject to conditions made by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.
Other general obligations Other obligations corresponding to licence conditions under the old framework now apply directly through provisions of the Communications Act.
These are and payment of administrative charges broadly the equivalent of licence fees under the old framework and provision of information to Ofcom when required to do so.
Conditions applying to BT only USO universal service obligation conditions BT has been designated as the supplier of universal service for the UK excluding the Hull area where Kingston Communications is the designated provider.
The services covered by the USO are dened in an Order issued by the Secretary of State for Trade and
Our basic obligation is to provide a single narrowband connection to the xed telephone network but additional USO conditions relate to issues such as schemes for consumers with special social needs and the provision of call box services.
Ofcom is to carry out a fundamental review of the USO with a consultation expected in summer 2004 and a statement towards the end of the year.
All aspects of the USO will be reviewed including schemes for consumers with special social needs disconnections payphone provision minimum data speeds scope of USO and funding.
Signicant market power SMP conditions and market reviews The EU Directives on which the regulatory framework is based require member state national regulatory authorities in the case of the UK Ofcom to dene and analyse markets market review and to determine whether any communications provider has SMP which is aligned with the competition law concept of dominance.
Economic regulation can only be imposed following a market review and nding of
In markets where Ofcom nds that a provider has SMP it must impose appropriate additional obligations in the form of SMP conditions as specied in the Communications Act.
These may include obligations to meet reasonable requests to supply certain services to other communications providers not to unduly discriminate and to notify price changes.
In some cases additional obligations relating to for example price control and regulatory accounting have also been or will be imposed.
Under provisions in the Communications Act conditions of BTs former licence are kept in force as necessary pending the making of new signicant market power conditions following reviews of the relevant markets.
Where market reviews have not yet been completed in relation to services for which BT was formerly regulated BT is accordingly still regulated under conditions of the former licence.
In the UK the majority of market reviews have been completed although some are still in hand and the local loop unbundling review has only recently commenced see Other market reviews.
The current 18 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 status of the UK market review programme and its implications for and effects on BT are summarised below.
Narrowband market reviews Five reviews of narrowband markets were concluded in November 2003.
In four of these reviews BT was found to have SMP in some or all of the markets concerned and conditions were imposed accordingly including price controls see Pricing regulation non discrimination publication of charges terms and conditions and the publication of a Reference Offer in relation to access services.
While many of these obligations are similar in scope of application and severity to those which applied under the old regulatory regime a number of changes have been introduced.
Some of these are favourable to BT.
For example BT is no longer subject to SMP conditions in retail international calls made by business customers or in wholesale international services on country routes accounting for 95% of call volumes.
In addition BT was found not to have SMP in markets for wholesale unmetered narrowband internet termination.
However these reviews also produced some outcomes less favourable to BT for example Oftels proposal to require us to provide digital wholesale line rental products was conrmed.
Leased lines market review In December 2003 Oftel published its second draft Leased Lines Market Review LLMR.
Among other things this continued the obligation to provide cost oriented partial private circuits PPCs as a wholesale alternative to retail private circuits or leased lines.
The draft LLMR also required a further effective price reduction of RPI7% to take effect from August 2003.
We are working with Ofcom to agree a forwardlooking price control for PPCs.
The LLMR included a new requirement to provide a wholesale variant of BTs retail ethernetinterface leased line services.
We were already in negotiation with wholesale customers for provision of a wholesale product and these commercial negotiations will be guided by our regulatory obligations.
Wholesale broadband access market review The consultation period on this market review closed on 6 February 2004 and the publication of Ofcoms nal decisions is awaited.
In the consultation document Ofcom proposed that BT has SMP in markets for wholesale broadband origination and conveyance and set out plans to impose a full range of SMP obligations.
BT is required to pass margin squeeze tests in advance of any price change on some of the wholesale products in our broadband portfolio.
Margin squeeze tests are designed to address a particular risk where a company with market power upstream is vertically integrated and sells an upstream input both to its own downstream operation and also to its downstream competitors.
The test is to determine whether the company would be protable in the downstream market if it had to pay the same price for the upstream input as its downstream competitors.
This Direction has been continued pending completion of the market review and margin squeeze tests are likely to appear as regulatory remedies in the event that BT is found to have SMP in broadband access.
On 3 April 2003 Oftel began an investigation into BTs proposed price change of the IPStream products on the grounds that there might be a margin squeeze on the Datastream products regarded by Ofcom as the upstream product.
We agreed voluntarily to reduce the corresponding Datastream prices and in May 2004 announced our intention to further adjust the prices to ensure there are adequate margins between Datastream and IPStream Home 500 see Traditional services for wholesale customers.
Other market reviews Ofcom is conducting a market review of local loop unbundling LLU and in May 2004 published the rst consultation.
A second will take place during the summer with completion anticipated for December 2004.
On the mobile front Oftel concluded a market review of mobile access and origination in November 2003 and a nal statement is awaited from Ofcom on the review of mobile voice termination.
Ofcom published a consultation document on nancial reporting in April 2004.
This makes proposals for SMP obligations relating to accounting separation and cost accounting systems across all markets where SMP designations have been made.
SMP apparatus conditions The Government has made provision in the Communications Act for Ofcom to review markets for terminal apparatus eg telephones and impose conditions on accounting methods systems and separation and to impose price controls in relation to hardwired phones on any provider designated with
Ofcom is considering whether to conduct a review of hardwired telephones.
Enforcement
The Communications Act sets out the enforcement process to be followed in relation to breaches of conditions.
Where a breach is not remedied following notication by Ofcom Ofcom may take legally enforceable enforcement action andor impose a penalty of up to 10% of relevant turnover.
In addition a person who suffers loss or damage as a result of the breach may with Ofcoms consent sue for damages and in the case of serious and repeated contraventions Ofcom may restrict or suspend the providers entitlement to provide electronic communications networks or services.
The Communications Act contains similar enforcement procedures though with much smaller penalties for matters such as noncompliance with a request for information or nonpayment of an administrative charge.
19 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Appeals One of the main features of the new regulatory framework is that full appeals on the merits are now available against regulatory decisions.
Consequently appeals can be made against matters such as and SMP SMP apparatus see above and USO designations and the setting modication and revocation of conditions and enforcement actions including the imposition of a penalty.
Any person affected by a decision may appeal to the Competition Appeal Tribunal.
However the Tribunal must refer on to the Competition Commission for determination any matters in any appeal which relates to price controls.
In an appeal by BT the Competition Appeal Tribunal has ruled that it was wrong for Oftel to force us to supply mobile companies with the private circuits that connect their cell sites to their main networks more cheaply on the basis that such circuits were interconnection than we had done historically.
Competition
The competitive environment The UK telecommunications market is fully open and highly competitive.
Although it is some years since the Telecommunications Act abolished the monopoly of the former statutory corporation British Telecommunications obligations placed on BT including pricing regulation network access non discrimination obligations and the requirement to provide universal service are generally more onerous than for other providers of electronic communications networks and services.
Competition and the UK economy The growth of mobile over the last decade has been a major factor in shaping the UKs telecommunications landscape.
Mobile now accounts for approximately 30% of the total UK voice minutes.
BTs market share of the total UK voice market including mobile is estimated to be approximately 40%.
BTs share of the residential xedvoice market as measured by the volume of xedtoxed voice minutes declined to an estimated 70% in the 2004 nancial year compared with an estimated 73% in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years.
CPS has been one of the contributors to the loss of share in the xedvoice market.
We estimate that BT had 42% of the market for business xedvoice calls in the 2004 nancial year compared with an estimated 45% and 49% in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
The estimated market shares are based on our actual minutes market data provided by Ofcom and an extrapolation of the historical market trends.
We also estimate that BT has supplied approximately 80% of exchange lines in the UK during the three years under review.
The growth in cable operators networks in the UK has historically had an adverse effect on BTs share of the residential market as a result of increasing competition from these cable operators.
However in the 2004 nancial year BT grew its residential customer base by 190000.
Current and future wholesale line rental arrangements will allow BTs xedline customers to move PSTN lines to other operators which are expected to be the source of more competition in future.
Since 2000 we have been required to provide other operators with the use of the lines connecting BTs local exchanges to our customers and to other operators to install equipment in our exchanges local loop unbundling see Other market reviews.
Competition Act In addition to telecommunications industry regulation BT is subject to general competition law.
By virtue of provisions in the Competition Act 1998 UK competition law is in line with European Community law in prohibiting anticompetitive agreements concerted practices and the abuse of a dominant market position.
In the case of electronic communications Ofcom has concurrent investigatory and enforcement powers with the Ofce of Fair
Breach of the relevant prohibitions could lead to nes of up to 10% of relevant turnover in the UK for each year of infringement up to a maximum of three years andor result in claims for damages in the civil courts.
A company may also be ordered to cease an infringing activity.
There is an independent mechanism for appeals to the Competition Appeal Tribunal against decisions under the Competition Act.
The Competition Appeal Tribunal is hearing Freeserves appeal against Ofcoms decision in which BT was found not to have infringed the prohibition on abuse of a dominant position in relation to BT Openworlds consumer broadband products.
Enterprise Act The Enterprise Act 2002 aims to give more independence to the competition authorities to reform insolvency and bankruptcy laws and to tackle trading practices that harm consumers.
The key provisions of the Enterprise Act including the new cartel offence and the section on director disqualication entered into force on 20 June 2003.
It is now a criminal offence punishable by imprisonment or a ne or both to engage in cartel activity.
In addition where companies infringe UK or EC competition law company directors can be disqualied from acting as such for a maximum period of 15 years.
Pricing regulation Fixed network We are subject to price controls on our xed network services in the UK at two levels retail and network.
Fixed network competitors are generally not subject to direct price controls although there are some controls on mobile network operators.
Retail price controls We are subject to two sets of UK retail price controls one on certain publicswitched telephony call charges 20 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Price control formula RPIX Years commencing 1 Augustteltel % RPI movement for the relevant period Xin price control formula % required reduction in base prices cd % reduction in base prices overall 0.73 3.24 1.20 2.50 0.22 0.16 Annual increase in RPI to previous June From 1 August 1997 the RPI formula covers the main switched telephone services provided to the lowest 80% of BTs residential customers by bill size After permitted carry forward of any unused allowance or shortfall from previous years From 1 August 2002 the RPI formula covers the change in average prices including residential discount packages Price changes implemented up to March 2004 for all residential customers and exchange line rentals and one on certain private circuits.
Each price control is based on a formula calculated by reference to the UK Retail Prices Index RPI and a factor X.
For services covered by the controls the weighted average of base prices cannot increase in each year beginning 1 August by more than the annual change in RPI minus X.
The current retail price control for public switched telephony applying from August 2002 to July 2006 is RPI minus RPI ie the value of X is RPI and prices cannot increase.
It is measured on services used by the lowest 80% of our residential customers classied by bill size.
From August 2002 the services covered by the control were extended to include BTs share of the revenue for calls to all four mobile networks replacing the previous separate control on BT for calls to Vodafone and O The price control formula and our performance against the formula are set out in the table above.
Under the new controls we have also given an assurance that increases in line rental for business customers will be no more than the annual change in
Under the price controls for private circuits that applied from August 1997 to July 2001 prices for domestic analogue and lowspeed digital private circuits could not increase by more than the change in the RPI in any year.
For all retail analogue private circuits and 8 Mbits digital private circuits we have voluntarily given an assurance to adhere to a RPI0% price cap from 30 June 2003 ie applied retrospectively until 30 June 2006.
As part of the review of price controls in 2002 BT was required to provide a costbased wholesale line rental product to other service providers at a regulated price and in a way that does not discriminate between BTs retail business and service providers.
This product Wholesale Access has been available from BT since 1 September 2002.
Further consultation by Ofcom has resulted in an enhanced wholesale access product being available from 29 March 2004.
Network charge control We operate under interconnection agreements with most other operators.
The current network charge control period began on 1 October 2001 and will last for four years from that date.
It requires us to set reasonable charges based on longrun incremental costs for our standard interconnection services.
Depending on the degree of competition for these services charges are capcontrolled each year by RPI minus X where X ranges from 7.5% to 13% for services Ofcom considers unlikely to become competitive in the near future and safeguard cap controlled ie no increases above RPI during any relevant year of the overall control period for services likely to become competitive.
Those services considered fully competitive are not subject to direct charge controls.
Later in 2004 Ofcom will begin a review of the network charge control to determine what control should apply from 1 October 2005.
The main network price caps are listed below
X Factor in RPI  X formula Duration Call termination 10 30 Sept 2005 Call origination 10 30 Sept 2005 Tandem layer 13 30 Sept 2005 Safeguard cap 0 30 Sept 2005 Interconnect specic 8.25 30 Sept 2005 Local exchange FRIACO 7.5 30 Sept 2005 Number portability 5 31 July 2006 The number portability charge control runs from 1 August 2002 until 31 July 2006.
The charges are controlled by a RPI minus X formula with X set at 5%.
Under the new regime General Condition 18 requires all providers to offer number portability among other things on reasonable terms and for charges to be costorientated.
Ofcom is currently consulting on proposals for Condition 69A presently maintaining the number portability charge control to be replaced by a nonbinding undertaking from BT that we will continue to comply with its terms including the RPI5 charge control as though the provision was still operative until 31 August 2006.
BT must publish a notication to Ofcom and other operators if we intend to amend existing charges or to offer new services.
Notice periods range from 28 to 90 days for regulated services depending on the degree to which they are judged to be competitive.
FRIACO
FRIACO atrate internet access call origination is a service that provides atrate charges for internet dialled access.
On 21 July 2003 Oftel issued a Direction on the intelligent network component of the FRIACO price that required BT to delete this component from the charge retrospectively to 1 June 2002.
BT incurred rebate payments in the 2004 nancial year of around 16 million.
21 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Wholesale access charge control The charges for wholesale access services are also subject to price control.
The charges for the line rental residential and business products line transfer and new line installations have been set by Ofcom and are subject to a price control of RPI minus 2% effective from 1 September 2002 for four years.
The control applies to the aggregate of all charges rental transfer and installation as well as to line transfers separately.
We are also under an obligation to notify Ofcom and service providers if we intend to amend existing charges.
Notice periods range from 28 to 90 days depending on the specic service.
On 28 November 2003 Oftel published its statement on the xed narrowband wholesale exchange line market.
This statement contained new obligations on BT to provide business ISDN2 wholesale line rentals with costoriented prices.
We must also provide residential ISDN2 and ISDN30 wholesale line rentals at retail minus prices.
Furthermore the wholesale ISDN2 business and ISDN30 products have to be provided in accordance with a functional specication dened by Ofcom.
Ofcom is conducting an investigation into the prices of business ISDN2 wholesale line rental.
NonUK regulation BT must comply with the regulatory regimes in the countries in which we operate or wish to operate.
The obligations placed on BT and our suppliers continue to be relevant to our business models and have cost implications for our enduser services.
These rules are generally applied by national regulatory authorities operating under a government mandate.
The impact of the decisions of these bodies can have a material impact on our business models from time to time.
European Union The degree to which the European directives have been implemented varies by country.
While 2004 should see a general move towards the new regime in some countries the directives may not be fully implemented until 2005.
In most but not all member states the primary legislation that will enable the introduction of the new regulatory regime is going through or has been through the legislative process.
The processes of identication of operators with SMP and the subsequent setting of regulatory obligations on those operators are mostly in progress.
The implementation process in Germany is notably behind that in other major member states.
BT will not have universal service obligations outside the UK although in certain member states we may be required to contribute towards an industry fund to pay for the cost of meeting universal service obligations in those countries.
Any ndings that BT has SMP in any nonUK market are not expected to have a material impact.
We are lobbying the European Commission and other EU bodies with responsibility for electronic communications for consistent and timely implementation of the new directives and associated regulation.
The availability of costoriented access products from regulated incumbents remains an important element of our strategy around the world and we continue to press these incumbents their national regulatory authorities and at EU level for such access.
Their availability varies by country.
Rest of the world The vast majority of the markets in which we operate around the world are regulated and in the majority of these we have to obtain licences or other authorisations and to comply with the conditions of these.
The degree to which these markets are liberalised varies widely while many are fully open to competition others place restrictions on market entrants such as the extent to which foreign ownership is permitted or restrictions on the services which may be provided.
The extent to which the national incumbent operator is effectively regulated also varies considerably.
BTs ability to compete fully in some countries is therefore constrained.
Other signicant changes and issues Mobile call termination In early 2003 the Competition Commission ruled that mobile termination rates were against the public interest and recommended oneoff cuts of 15% in real terms before 25 July 2003 and RPI minus X cuts for the following two years X  15% for Vodafone and O and X  14% for TMobile and Orange.
There are two types of mobile termination charge. payable to the mobile operator.
This charge is incorporated in the cost of the call. through BTs xed network.
In this case BT passes the termination charge on behalf of the calling mobile network to the receiving mobile network.
Oftel introduced changes to the mobile operators licences to implement the oneoff 15% cut by 25 July 2003 and Ofcom is currently undertaking a market review of mobile termination rates to evaluate what if any controls should exist going forward.
Ofcoms
Commissions original ndings.
The nancial effect has been to reduce group revenues by over 200 million during the 2004 nancial year.
However payments to mobile operators have reduced by exactly the same amount leaving a neutral effect on prots.
Strategic Review of Telecommunications During 2004 Ofcom will be carrying out a strategic review of the UK telecommunications sector and published its rst consultation in April 2004.
The review will be comprehensive wide ranging and will assess the options for enhancing value and choice in the UK telecommunications sector while having regard to investment and innovation.
Ofcoms proposals will be set out in a report to be published before the end of 2004.
22 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 The review focuses on ve fundamental issues relating respectively to the key attributes of a wellfunctioning telecoms market for citizenconsumers the achievement of sustainable competition the possibility of a signicant reduction in regulation incentivising efcient and timely investment in nextgeneration networks and the relevance of the issue of structural or operational separation of BT.
Funds for liabilities Under conditions relating to the Electronic Communications Code an electronic communications provider which has apparatus on or in the public highway is required to make nancial provision to cover damage suffered by highway or other relevant authorities resulting from works carried out by the communications provider for the removal of its network if necessary in the event of the liquidation or bankruptcy of the company.
The conditions require the company to provide Ofcom annually with a certicate that in the company boards opinion the company has fullled its obligations to ensure the availability of the required funds.
Relationship with HM Government The UK Government collectively is our largest customer but the provision of services to any one department or agency of the UK Government does not comprise a material proportion of our revenues.
Except as described below the commercial relationship between BT as a supplier and the UK Government as customer has been on a normal customer and supplier basis.
We can however be required by law to do certain things and provide certain services for the UK
General conditions made under the Communications Act 2003 require all providers of public telephone networks andor publicly available telephone services including BT on the request of and in consultation with the authorities to make and if necessary implement plans for the provision or restoration of services in connection with disasters.
Furthermore the Civil Contingencies Bill currently before Parliament contains provision enabling obligations to be imposed on providers of public electronic communications networks including BT in connection with civil contingency planning.
In addition the Secretary of State has statutory powers to require us to take certain actions in the interests of national security and international relations.
Legal proceedings The company does not believe that there are any pending legal proceedings which would have a material adverse effect on the nancial position or operations of the group.
Proceedings have been initiated in Italy against 21 defendants including a former BT employee in connection with the Italian UMTS auction.
Blu in which BT held a minority interest participated in that auction process.
The evidential hearings are continuing in Rome.
If the proceedings are successful BT could be held liable with others for any damages.
The company has concluded that it would not be appropriate to make a provision in respect of any such potential claim.
23 Operating and financial review BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Prot and loss account Years ended 31 March Total turnover Continuing activities 18228 21068 21815 20182 18914 Discontinued activities 3675 8598 2827 21903 29666 24642 20182 18914 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 3364 9937 4764 1455 395 Trading between group and principal joint venture 176 698 681 Group turnover Continuing activities 16125 17141 18447 18727 18519 Discontinued activities 2590 3286 2112 18715 20427 20559 18727 18519 Other operating income 21tel177 Operating costs ab 15359 20759 21400 16370 15823 Group operating prot loss Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 3772 3257 2580 2790 2892 Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 200 3230 3059 218 19 3572 27 479 2572 2873 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures Total operating prot loss Continuing activities 3143 2456 1489 2901 2839 Discontinued activities 29 2826 371 3172 370 1860 2901 2839 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 126 619 4389 1691 36 Prot on sale of property xed assets 26 34 1089 11 14 Amounts written off investments   535 7 Net interest payable 382 1314 1622 1439 941 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 3100 2072 1113 1829 2016 Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 158 3103 348 1328 68 2942 1031 1461 3157 1948 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities Prot loss on ordinary activities after taxation 1985 1743 1018 2698 1409 Minority interests 10 127 23 12 8 Prot loss for the nancial year 1995 1870 995 2686 1417 Average number of shares used in basic earnings per share millions 7235 7276 8307 8616 8621 Basic earnings loss per share 27.6p 25.7p 12.0p 31.2p 16.4p Diluted earnings loss per share 26.9p 25.7p 11.9p 31.0p 16.3p Basic earnings loss per share from continuing activities 29.2p 20.7p 34.8p 31.2p 16.4p Diluted earnings loss per share from continuing activities 28.5p 20.4p 34.8p 31.0p 16.3p Dividends per share 19.6p 7.8p 2.0p 6.5p 8.5p Dividends per share cents Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 29.8p 17.5p 6.1p 14.2p 16.9p Diluted earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 29.1p 17.3p 6.0p 14.1p 16.8p Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items on continuing activities 29.5p 19.3p 8.8p 14.2p 16.9p Operating costs include net exceptional costs 111 2857 2707 198 7 Includes redundancy and early leaver costs 5tel202 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures includes exceptional costs release  332 1294 150 26 Net interest payable includes exceptional costs credits  25 162 293 55 Includes exceptional tax charge credit 5 22 143 139 29 Based on actual dividends paid andor year end exchange rate on proposed dividends BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 24 Operating and financial review Fiveyear financial summary Cash ow statement Years ended 31 March Net cash ow from operating activities 5849 5887 5257 6023 5389 Dividends from associates and joint ventures Returns on investments and servicing of nance 163 727 1695 1506 527 Taxation paid 1311 669 562 434 317 Capital expenditure and nancial investment 3752 8442 1354 2381 2477 Acquisitions and disposals 6405 13754 5785 2842 60 Equity dividends paid 1364 1432  367 645 Cash outow inow before management of liquid resources and nancing 7141 19127 7433 4183 1366 Management of liquid resources 1236 480 1864 1729 1123 Financing 5959 19735 5479 2473 2445 Increase decrease in cash in the year 54 128 90 19 44 Increase decrease in net debt in the year 6582 18942 13930 4225 1222 Balance sheet At 31 March Intangible xed assets 5777 1838telTangible xed assets 18163 21625 16078 15888 15487 Fixed asset investments 5878 5204 1221 555 377 Net current assets liabilities 7115 11143 732 1876 2002 Total assets less current liabilities 22703 34066 18283 18537 18070 Loans and other borrowings falling due after one year 5354 18775 16245 13456 12426 Provisions for liabilities and charges 3011 2738 2324 2376 2504 Minority interests 498 499 72 63 46 Total assets less liabilities 13840 12054 358 2642 3094 Called up share capital 7485 757telShare premium account   2 2 2 Capital redemption reserve  2 Other reserves 3345 2848 1025 998 998 Prot and loss account 9700 7329 1819 1208 1660 Total equity shareholders funds deciency 13840 12054 358 2642 3094 Total assets 37588 54799 27673 28217 26618 US GAAP Years ended 31 March Group operating prot loss 2990 633 337 2693 2420 Income loss before taxes 2096 1959 1025 3653 1188 Net income loss Continuing activities 1559 809 1680 4134 883 Discontinued activities 166 3166 948 1393 2357 732 4134 883 Average number of ADSs used in basic earnings per ADS millions 72tel862 Basic earnings loss per ordinary share 19.3p 32.4p 8.8p 48.0p 10.2p Diluted earnings loss per ordinary share 18.8p 32.4p 8.8p 47.7p 10.2p Basic earnings loss per ordinary share from continuing activities 21.5p 11.1p 20.2p 48.0p 10.2p Diluted earnings loss per ordinary share from continuing activities 21.1p 11.0p 20.2p 47.7p 10.2p Basic loss earnings per ordinary share from discontinued activities 2.2p 43.5p 11.4p Diluted loss earnings per ordinary share from discontinued activities 2.3p 43.5p 11.3p Basic earnings loss per ADS 1.93 3.24 0.88 4.80 1.02 Diluted earnings loss per ADS 1.88 3.24 0.88 4.77 1.02 Total assets as at 31 March 38481 55361 30428 31131 28674 Ordinary shareholders equity deciency as at 31 March 13634 10231 4247 2258 1455 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 25 Operating and financial review The review is divided into the following sections 26 Introduction 28 Group results 30 Line of business results 30 BT Retail 32 BT Wholesale 34 BT Global Services 34 Other operating income 34 Operating costs 36 Group operating prot loss 36 Associates and joint ventures 37 Total operating prot loss 37 Prot on sale of group undertakings and xed asset investments 38 Prot on sale of property xed assets 39 Interest charge 39 Prot loss before taxation 39 Taxation 40 Earnings loss per share 40 Dividends 40 Financing 42 Treasury policy 42 Offbalance sheet arrangements 42 Capital resources 42 Foreign currency and interest rate exposure 43 Capital expenditure 43 Acquisitions 43 Demerger and capital reduction 43 Balance sheet 43 Return on capital employed 44 Pensions 44 Geographical information 44 Economic and Monetary Union 45 Regulatory nancial information 45 Regulation competition and prices 45 Competition and the UK economy 45 Environment 45 Critical accounting policies 46 International accounting standards 46 US GAAP Please see cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 141.
Introduction
The 2004 nancial year was marked by the continuing transformation of our business operations and markets where the pace of change is accelerating.
We are driving the change by providing our customers with new technology and services with greater capabilities and lower cost.
The focus on delivering the strategy continued and the groups performance beneted from the growth in new wave activities such as Information and Communications Technology ICT solutions broadband mobility and managed services and continued cost efciency programmes.
The 2003 nancial year was characterised by a focus on implementing and delivering the strategy announced in April 2002 and further corporate transactions in the continued restructuring of the group and reduction of net debt.
The corporate transactions included the unwind of the Concert joint venture on 1 April 2002 and the disposal of our interest in Cegetel for 2.6 billion.
The 2002 nancial year was dominated by a series of corporate transactions designed to focus and transform the group and reduce its net debt position.
Those corporate transactions included raising 5.9 billion through the rights issue in June 2001 selling our Japanese telecom and Spanish mobile investments for 4.8 billion selling the Yell directories business for approximately 2 billion the demerger of mmO and the sale and leaseback of properties for 2.4 billion.
As a result of the major restructuring of the group and the signicant level of corporate transactions completed during the period under review we believe it is difcult for investors to meaningfully compare the nancial performance of the group between the nancial years under review.
In this Financial review the commentary is therefore focused principally on the trading results of the continuing activities of BT Group before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
In comparing the continuing activities of the group the results of our discontinued activities namely our Japanese telecom and Spanish mobile investments Yell and mmO are excluded.
Goodwill amortisation is excluded because the annual charge has varied signicantly during the period under review as a result of the corporate transactions noted above and the exceptional impairment charges.
The exceptional items by virtue of their size or nature are excluded because they predominantly relate to corporate transactions rather than the trading activities of the group.
This is also consistent with the way that nancial performance is measured by management and we believe allows a meaningful comparison to be made of the trading results of the group during the period under review.
The goodwill amortisation and exceptional items are therefore analysed and discussed separately from the line of business results in this Financial review because they are considered to be a reection of the corporate activity rather than the trading activity of the lines of business.
The following table shows the summarised prot and loss account which includes a reconciliation of the key performance measures before and after goodwill amortisation and exceptional items and is discussed further in this Financial review.
The operating results by line of business are discussed in addition to the overall group results as we believe the activities and markets they serve are distinct and this analysis provides a greater degree of insight to investors.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 26 Operating and financial review Financial review Summarised prot and loss accounttel
Continuing activities and total
Total
Total turnover 18914 20182 21815 24642 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 395 1455 4049 4764 Trading between group and principal joint venture   681 681 Group turnover 18519 18727 18447 20559 Other operating income 17telOperating costs 15823 16370 18854 21400 Group operating prot loss Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2892 2790 2771 2580 Goodwill amortisation 12 20 121 352 Exceptional items 7 198 2696 2707 2873 2572 46 479 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates and joint ventures 34 329 1443 1381 Total operating prot loss Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2884 2971 2663 2546 Goodwill amortisation 12 22 162 405 Exceptional items 33 48 3990 4001 2839 2901 1489 1860 Prot on sale of group undertakings and xed asset investments 36 1691 21 4389 Prot on sale of property xed assets 14 11 1089 1089 Amounts written off investments  7 535 535 Net interest payable 941 1439 1579 1622 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2016 1829 1273 1113 Goodwill amortisation 12 22 162 405 Exceptional items 56 1350 3604 753 1948 3157 2493 1461 Prot loss after taxation 1409 2698 2878 1018 Minority interests 8 12 10 23 Prot loss for the nancial year 1417 2686 2888 995 Basic earnings loss per share Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 16.9p 14.2p 8.8p 6.1p Goodwill amortisation 0.1p 0.3p 2.0p 5.0p Exceptional items 0.4p 17.3p 41.6p 10.9p Including discontinued activities BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 27 Operating and financial review Group results All references in this section to the 2002 nancial year results or performance against the 2002 nancial year are in relation to the results from continuing activities.
Whilst driving a signicant transformation in the business the group continued to make further progress with earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items at 16.9 pence which were 19% ahead of the 2003 nancial year and 92% ahead of the 2002 nancial year.
The acceleration of our transformation is demonstrated by the 30% growth of new wave turnover to 3387 million compared to an increase of 20% in the 2003 nancial year.
New wave turnover represented 18% of group turnover in the 2004 nancial year compared to 14% and 12% in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
New wave turnover is mainly generated from ICT solutions broadband mobility and managed services.
Group turnover  million years ended 31 Marchtel New Wave
12% 14% 18% 88% 86% 82% In the 2004 nancial year performance was driven by particularly strong growth in the ICT solutions business and broadband.
However this growth was more than offset by a 6% decline in turnover from the groups traditional businesses.
The decline reects regulatory intervention price reductions and competitive and technological changes that are being used to drive customers from traditional services to better value and more exible new wave services such as broadband and IPVPNs.
Mobile operators were required to reduce their fees for terminating calls and these regulatory reductions were passed on to BT customers resulting in lower revenues but are prot neutral as payments to mobile operators were reduced by the same amount.
Group turnover was maintained after excluding the 219 million impact of these regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates.
In the 2003 nancial year performance in new wave services was also driven by strong growth in ICT solutions and broadband.
This growth was partly offset by the 1% decline in traditional revenues.
The table below analyses the group turnover by customer segment.
Consumer includes the external turnover of BT Retail from consumer customers.
Business includes the external turnover of BT Retail from smaller and medium sized enterprise SME customers.
Major Corporate includes the external turnover of BT Retail Major Corporate customers and the external turnover of BT Global Services excluding global carrier.
Wholesale includes the external turnover of BT Wholesale and BT Global Services global carrier business.
Group turnover by customer segment Consumer 5974 6067 5916 Business 2600 2716 2748 Major Corporate 5909 5794 4962 Wholesale 4002 4110 4433 Other 34 40 388 18519 18727 18447 Consumer turnover in 2004 was 2% lower 1% excluding the impact of regulatory reductions in mobile termination rates at 5974 million when compared to the 2003 nancial year.
In the consumer xed voice market Carrier Pre Selection CPS had some impact with BTs estimated residential market share as measured by the volume of xed to xed voice minutes declining by 3 percentage points to 70% compared to the 2003 nancial year.
The estimated market share as measured by the volume of xed to xed voice minutes is based on our actual minutes market data provided by Ofcom and an extrapolation of the historical market trends.
The proportion of contracted revenues has been increasing now approaching 60% of total revenues with the success of the BT Together packages and broadband.
The underlying 12 months rolling average revenue per customer household net of mobile termination charges of 268 in the 2004 nancial year was 1% lower than the 2003 nancial year.
Consumer turnover in the 2003 nancial year was 3% higher at 6067 million when compared to the 2002 nancial year.
The number of BT Together packages increased by 304000 packages during the 2003 nancial year.
The aggregate Business and Major Corporate turnover in the 2004 nancial year was maintained when compared to the 2003 nancial year after an increase of 10% from the 2002 nancial year.
BTs estimated business market share of xed to xed voice minutes declined to an estimated 42% in the 2004 nancial year compared to an estimated 45% and 49% in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
Turnover from smaller and medium sized enterprise customers in the 2004 nancial year reduced by 4% to 2600 million compared to the 2003 nancial year reecting the continued penetration of CPS and the impact of customers switching from traditional telephony services to new wave services such as broadband.
However BT Business Plan launched in January 2003 had successfully attracted more than 267000 business locations 175000 customers by 31 March 2004 helping to mitigate the rate of market share decline.
Revenues from smaller and medium sized businesses in the 2003 nancial year decreased by 1% compared to the 2002 nancial year.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 28 Operating and financial review Major Corporate turnover increased by 2% to 5909 million in the 2004 nancial year with the growing new wave turnover offsetting the decline in traditional UK services.
This reects the continued migration of traditional voice only services to managed ICT contracts from which turnover grew by 19% to 2564 million in the 2004 nancial year conrming BTs status as a major ICT provider in this market.
Contract wins from ICT solutions amounted to more than 7 billion in the 2004 nancial year.
The highest prole of these were three NHS contracts expected to be worth more than 2.1 billion and forming an integral part of the National Programme for Information Technology in the NHS.
In the 2003 nancial year Major Corporate revenues increased by 17% to 5794 million with part of this increase reecting the reintegration of Concert.
Contract wins from ICT solutions in the 2003 nancial year amounted to more than 4.4 billion compared to more than 3.3 billion in the 2002 nancial year.
Wholesale UK and Global Carrier turnover in the 2004 nancial year fell by 3% maintained excluding the impact of regulatory reductions to mobile termination rates to 4002 million when compared to the 2003 nancial year.
New wave turnover in the UK Wholesale business increased by 54% driven by broadband and managed services after growing by 110% in the 2003 nancial year.
The Global Carrier business turnover declined by 5% in the 2004 nancial year.
In the 2003 nancial year Wholesale UK and Global Carrier turnover decreased by 7% when compared to the 2002 nancial year partly reecting the reintegration of Concert.
Group operating costs before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items reduced by 2% to 15804 million in the 2004 nancial year when compared to the prior year.
The group continued to focus on operational efciency and effectiveness initiatives which were offset by investment in new wave activities and the adverse impact of currency movements of 80 million.
Group operating costs before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items in the 2003 nancial year of 16152 million increased by 1% compared to the 2002 nancial year.
Net staff costs in the 2004 nancial year excluding leaver costs of 202 million increased by 138 million to 3533 million due to the impact of increased pay and national insurance rates and the higher SSAP 24 pension charge offset by improved efciency.
In the 2003 nancial year net staff costs excluding leaver costs of 276 million declined by 2%.
Payments to other telecommunications operators were 3963 million an increase of 1% on the 2003 nancial year as both UK and overseas payments increased.
In the 2003 nancial year payments to other telecommunication operators reduced by 8% to 3940 million.
The payments in the 2002 nancial year include those made to the Concert global venture for the delivery of BTs outgoing international calls which accounts for most of the reduction in the 2003 nancial year.
Other
Other
Group operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items at 2892 million for the 2004 nancial year was 4% higher than the prior year.
This reects cost efciencies achieved during the year the improved performance of BT Global Services and a 74 million decrease in leaver costs offset by the decline in turnover.
In the 2003 nancial year group operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items at 2790 million was 19 million higher than the prior year.
The cost efciencies achieved during the year were offset by a 90 million increase in leaver costs the negative group operating prot effects of unwinding the Concert global venture and the Telereal property sale and leaseback transaction.
In total these effects reduced group operating prots by over 400 million although this was compensated for at the prot before tax level by a corresponding improvement in our share of the operating prots of associates and joint ventures and net interest payable.
BTs share of associates and joint ventures operating losses before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was 8 million in the 2004 nancial year compared to a 181 million prot in the 2003 nancial year and a 108 million loss in the 2002 nancial year.
The 2003 nancial year includes the results of our interest in Cegetel which was sold in January 2003.
The improvement in the 2003 nancial year mainly reected the benet of the unwind of the Concert global venture.
Net interest payable before exceptional items was 886 million for the 2004 nancial year an improvement of 260 million against the 2003 nancial year following an improvement of 271 million in the 2003 nancial year.
This reects the reduction in net debt in both years.
The above factors resulted in the group achieving a prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 2016 million in the 2004 nancial year an increase of 10% compared to the 2003 nancial year reecting the underlying operating performance of the group and lower net interest costs.
In the 2003 nancial year the prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 1829 million was 556 million higher than the 2002 nancial year.
The improvement in the 2003 nancial year was principally due to the exit from loss making businesses improved operating prots and lower interest charges.
The taxation charge for the 2004 nancial year was 568 million on the prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items an effective rate of 28.2% compared to 32.7% and 41.5% in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
The high effective rate in the 2002 nancial year was mainly due to the impact of loss making subsidiaries outside the UK for which tax relief was not available.
Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items were 16.9 pence BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 29 Operating and financial review for the 2004 nancial year an increase of 19% from 14.2 pence in the 2003 nancial year and were 8.8 pence in the 2002 nancial year.
The 2002 nancial year reected the higher operating costs and net interest payable which have continued to improve during the 2004 and 2003 nancial years.
Line of business results In the following commentary we discuss the operating results of the group for the 2004 2003 and 2002 nancial years in terms of the lines of business.
There is extensive trading between the lines of business and their protability is dependent on the transfer price levels.
The intragroup trading arrangements and operating assets are subject to review and have changed in certain circumstances.
Where that is the case the comparative gures have been restated to reect those changes.
The table below analyses the trading relationships between each of the lines of business for the 2004 nancial year.
The majority of the internal trading is performed by BT Wholesale with BT Retail reecting sales of calls and access lines and network charges for other products.
This trading relationship also reects the pass through of termination charges on other telecom operator networks and the sale of wholesale broadband ISP products.
BT Retail also trades with BT Wholesale selling calls and lines products private circuits apparatus and conferencing for onward sale to other telecom operators.
BT Global Services turnover with BT Retail mainly reects the sales of Global Services products in the UK.
BT Global Services trades with BT Wholesale mainly for use of the IPATM network International Direct Dial trafc settlements and certain dial IP revenue share arrangements.
BT
Wholesales turnover with BT Global Services reects the use of the network infrastructure for BT Global Services products.
Internal cost recorded by Internal turnover
Retail
BT
Wholesale
BT Global Services Other Total recorded by m m m m m BT Retail  BT Wholesale 6902  510 2 7414 BT Global Services 2702 646  24 3372 Other   1  1 Total 9604 1415 641 31 11691 The line of business results are presented and discussed before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items for the reasons set out above to provide a meaningful comparison of the trading results between the nancial years under review.
Goodwill amortisation and exceptional items are discussed separately in a group context in this Financial review.
In addition to measuring nancial performance of the lines of business based on the operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items management also measure the operating nancial performance of the lines of business based upon the EBITDA before exceptional items.
EBITDA is dened as the group operating prot loss before depreciation and amortisation.
This may not be directly comparable to the EBITDA of other companies as they may dene it differently.
EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortisation both being non cash items from group operating prot and is a common measure particularly in the telecommunications sector used by investors and analysts in evaluating the operating nancial performance of companies.
EBITDA before exceptional items is considered to be a good measure of the operating performance because it reects the underlying operating cash costs by eliminating depreciation and amortisation and excludes nonrecurring exceptional items that are predominantly related to corporate transactions.
EBITDA is not a direct measure of the groups liquidity which is shown by the groups cash ow statement and needs to be considered in the context of the groups nancial commitments.
A reconciliation of EBITDA before exceptional items to group operating prots losses by line of business and for the group is provided in the table across the page above.
Trends in EBITDA before exceptional items are discussed for each line of business in the following commentary.
BT Retail 2004 Group turnover 13534 13882 13284 Gross margin 3722 3936 3584 Sales general and administration costs 2126 2207 2369 Group operating prot 1434 1528 1006 EBITDA 1596 1729 1215 Capital expenditure 118 109 147 Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 30 Operating and financial review Line of business summary Group turnover Group operating prot loss Goodwill amortisation Exceptional charges credits BT Retail 13534 13882 13284 1433 1  111 BT Wholesale 10859 11247 12325 1682 1758 2070   1 79 BT Global Services 5782 5417 4678 116 394 2625 11 19 120  2211 Intragroup 11691 11860 11935 Total continuing activities 18519 18727 18447 2873 2572 46  2696
Group totals 18519 18727 20559 2873 2572 479  2707 BT Retails results have demonstrated the strategic focus of defending traditional turnover and gross margins cost reductions through a series of cost transformation programmes and focusing on turnover growth through new wave initiatives in the ICT broadband and mobility markets.
In the 2004 and 2003 nancial years the results include those of the reintegrated Concert business relating to UK multinational customer accounts including the associated sales force and account management functions.
BT Retails turnover decreased by 3% in the 2004 nancial year to 13534 million after rising by 5% in the 2003 nancial year.
The growth in new wave turnover of 29% in the 2004 nancial year was more than offset by the decline in traditional turnover driven by the increased impact of regulation and competition.
After adjusting for the regulatory impact of the reduction in mobile termination rates turnover declined by 2% compared to the 2003 nancial year.
The increase in the 2003 nancial year included turnover from the UK multinational customers reintegrated into BT Retail from the Concert global venture.
Turnover for the three years is summarised as follows BT Retail turnover 2004 Voice services 9012 9665 9590 Intermediate products 2356 2534 2285 Traditional 11368 12199 11875 ICT 1734 1502 1378 Broadband 307 131 31 Mobility 84 42 Other 41 8 New wave 2166 1683 1409 Total 13534 13882 13284 Voice services comprise calls made by customers on the BT xed line network in the UK analogue lines equipment sales and rentals and other business voice products.
Overall turnover from voice services was 7% lower in the 2004 nancial year after an increase of 1% in the 2003 nancial year.
The overall market for xed to xed voice call minutes in the 2004 nancial year was estimated to have declined by 2% partly reecting the migration to new wave products and services such as IPVPNs and substitution by email instant messaging and mobile services.
In the 2003 nancial year the estimated overall market for xed to xed voice call minutes declined by 3%.
BT Retails total originating measured call volumes declined by 10% in the 2004 nancial year 2003 5% with geographic local national and international calls declining by 8% 2003  4% reecting the decline in the market and some loss of market share due to CPS.
Fixed to mobile call volumes were at in the 2004 nancial year after a 6% increase in the 2003 nancial year.
BT Retails internet and data related call volumes declined by 16% reecting the move to wholesale at rate internet access products in the 2004 nancial year.
Total BT Group internet and data related call volumes increased by 1% 2003  30% with the decline in the year on year rate of growth driven by the migration to broadband which is not measured in minutes and a slow down in the growth of at rate internet access minutes.
As a result BT Groups total originating measured call volumes declined by 2% in the 2004 nancial year 2003  13% increase.
The directory services market was deregulated following an announcement in September 2001 which resulted in the introduction of the new 118 XXX number range in December 2002 and the termination of the 192 and 153 services in August 2003.
BTs market share of the deregulated directory enquiries market through the 118 500 service has increased during the year as the benets and awareness of the quality of service and pricing supported by a marketing campaign became apparent.
However revenues reduced signicantly year on year due to a contraction in the market.
Turnover from intermediate products in the 2004 nancial year of 2356 million decreased by 7% in the 2004 nancial year after increasing by 11% in the 2003 nancial year.
In the 2004 nancial year the change was mainly driven by a decline in retail private circuits and ISDN as customers migrate to cheaper partial private circuits and new wave products such as broadband and IPVPN.
In the 2003 nancial year growth was achieved which included the benet of the reintegration of Concert despite the migration of customers from retail private circuits to partial private circuits.
As a result of changes required by Ofcom partial private circuits used by UK xed network BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 31 Operating and financial review Group operating prot loss before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items Depreciation Amortisation of intangible assets EBITDA before exceptional items 1434 1528 100tel  1596 1729 1215 BT Retail 1681 1758 2149 1919 1923 1914   3600 3681 4063 BT Wholesale 105 375 294 telBT Global Services
2892 2790 2771 2921 3011 2974 3 43 5816 5805 5748 Total continuing activities
2892 2790 2580 2921 3011 3388 3 414 5816 5805 5982 Group totals operators are no longer provided by BT Retail but are provided as a BT Wholesale product.
Private circuit revenues declined by 228 million in the 2004 nancial year and by 109 million in the 2003 nancial year.
The total number of BT Retail lines which includes voice digital and broadband were at at 29.6 million at 31 March 2004 following an increase of 1% in the 2003 nancial year reecting the continued growth in broadband offset by the declining PSTN lines.
The movement in the 2003 nancial year mainly reected the growth of high speed ISDN lines and broadband.
New wave turnover grew by 29% to 2166 million in the 2004 nancial year compared to growth of 19% in the 2003 nancial year.
ICT turnover increased by 15% in the 2004 nancial year to 1734 million after an increase of 9% in the 2003 nancial year reecting the growth in new IP based services and solutions contracts offset by the decline in business telephony equipment.
Broadband turnover grew by 134% to 307 million in the 2004 nancial year after an increase of 322% in the 2003 nancial year.
This reects the increased take up of broadband with 928000 BT Retail customers at 31 March 2004 and 429000 customers at 31 March 2003 reecting increases of 116% and 298% on the respective prior years.
In November 2003 BT entered the consumer mobile market with the launch of BT Mobile Home Plan through online voice and retail store outlets.
BT now has a consumer and corporate mobile customer base of 144000.
Total turnover from mobile services increased by 100% in the 2004 nancial year to 84 million.
The gross margin percentage decreased by 1 percentage point in the 2004 nancial year after an increase of 1 percentage point in the 2003 nancial year.
The decline in the 2004 nancial year reects lower prices and changes in the revenue mix partly offset by lower charges from BT Wholesale in line with market and regulatory prices.
The improvements in the 2003 nancial year were driven by the success of BT Together packages improved product mix and lower wholesale prices which more than offset the impact of the decline in call volumes.
Gross margin is turnover less costs directly attributable to the provision of the products and services reected in turnover in the period.
Selling general and administration costs are those costs that are ancillary to the business processes of providing products and services and are the general business operating costs.
BT Retail analyses its costs in this manner for management purposes in common with other retail organisations and it has set target savings for selling general and administration costs.
Cost transformation programmes in the 2004 nancial year generated selling general and administration cost savings of 228 million before leaver costs in the traditional business compared to the 2003 nancial year 154 million net of new wave investment.
The savings in the year were driven by a reduction in people related expenses such as travel accommodation and communications lower service costs resulting from improvements in service quality billing initiatives and cost reduction programmes focusing on customer contact centres improving the billing platform and optimising processes across BT Retail.
Excluding leaver costs and investment in new wave activities BT Retail has achieved its target of 800 million savings almost a year early in the traditional business achieving savings of 228 million 275 million and 290 million in the 2004 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
The number of employees in BT Retail at 31 March 2004 and 31 March 2003 was 41500 and 50400 respectively.
BT Retails EBITDA before exceptional items and goodwill amortisation declined by 8% to 1596 million in the 2004 nancial year after showing strong growth in the 2003 nancial year of 42% to 1729 million.
In the 2004 nancial year cost savings were more than offset by the decline in turnover and the impact on margins of the product mix.
In the 2003 nancial year the cost savings and improved gross margins contributed towards BT Retails strong EBITDA growth before exceptional items.
BT Wholesale 2004 Group turnover 10859 11247 12325 Group operating prot 1681 1758 2149 EBITDA 3600 3681 4063 Capital expenditure 1809 1652 1974 Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items BT Wholesale is the line of business within BT that provides network services and solutions within the UK.
Its customers include communications companies xed and mobile network operators and service providers.
The customer base includes BTs lines of business BT Retail and BT Global Services.
The majority of BT Wholesales turnover is internal 2004 68% 2003  69% 2002  68% and mainly represents trading with BT Retail.
External turnover is derived from providing wholesale products and solutions to other operators interconnecting with BTs UK xed network including mmO since the demerger.
Internal turnover and costs with mmO for the 2002 nancial year have been reclassied as external in this section to enable a meaningful year on year comparison.
In the 2004 nancial year turnover totalled 10859 million a decline of 3% following a decrease of 9% to 11247 million in the 2003 nancial year.
The reduction in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years is primarily due to lower sales volumes and prices to BT
The results for the 2002 nancial year included turnover of 770 million relating to the former Concert global venture which was reintegrated from 1 April 2002.
Excluding this Concert turnover in the 2002 nancial year the underlying turnover declined by 3% in the 2003 nancial year.
External turnover declined by 2% in the 2004 nancial year to 3445 million which is fully accounted for by regulatory price reductions on mobile termination rates which have reduced external turnover BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 32 Operating and financial review by 126 million although this has no impact on protability.
In the 2003 nancial year external turnover declined by 11% to 3525 million although excluding sales to Concert in the 2002 nancial year the underlying external turnover increased by 3%.
The decline in external turnover from traditional products in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years is due to the mobile termination rate impact and price reductions Network Charge Control NCC and other Oftel price determinations coupled with unfavourable market conditions.
Turnover from retail private circuits at 207million reduced by 36% in the 2004 nancial year and in the 2003 nancial year at 325 million reduced by 9%.
The decline is due to the migration of customers from retail private circuits to lower priced partial private circuits introduced in August 2001.
Turnover from partial private circuits showed an increase of 43% to 152 million in the 2004 nancial year and an increase of 89% to 106 million in the 2003 nancial year.
FRIACO generated turnover of 78 million in the 2004 nancial year 2003 84 million 2002  68 million and the trend follows the move to at rate packages by internet service providers in 2003 and their subsequent substitution by broadband in 2004.
Conveyance and low margin transit revenues of 2054 million decreased compared to the 2003 nancial year and at 2075 million increased marginally compared to the 2002 nancial year.
New wave turnover including broadband and managed services at 361 million showed strong growth of 54% following growth of 110% in the 2003 nancial year.
This growth in the 2004 nancial year completely offsets the reduction in external traditional turnover after excluding the impact of mobile termination rate cuts.
Wholesale broadband lines had an installed base of 2.2 million at 31 March 2004 representing growth of 177% on the number of lines as at 31 March 2003 which had grown 380% on the previous year.
At 14 May 2004 the installed base was 2.45 million with net additions growing at more than 35000 connections per week since January 2004.
In the 2004 nancial year internal turnover decreased by 4% to 7414 million after a decrease of 8% to 7722 million in the 2003 nancial year.
Lower call and retail private circuit volumes reductions on mobile termination rates and price reductions reected most of the decline in the 2004 nancial year.
The unwind of the Concert global venture resulted in a reduction of internal revenues in the 2003 nancial year.
Excluding the Concert related revenues in the 2002 nancial year the reduction in internal turnover in the 2003 nancial year was 5%.
This reduction was primarily due to a reduction in prices on sales to BT Retail partly offset by the increased sales to BT Global Services.
Despite network volume increases in the 2004 nancial year operating costs excluding depreciation and exceptional items decreased by 4% to 7351 million 10% to 7691 million in 2003.
The movement in the 2003 nancial year was mainly due to 905 million of Concert related costs in the 2002 nancial year offset by an increase in leaver costs of 108 million.
Interconnect payments to other network operators remained broadly at in the 2004 nancial year at 3165 million.
In the 2003 nancial year these payments decreased by 18% to 3143 million and the unwind of the Concert global venture accounted for the majority of this reduction as interconnect payments to Concert were no longer made.
These costs are mainly recharged to BT Retail with no margin or reect external transit revenues with a minimal margin.
Net staff costs in the 2004 nancial year at 805 million decreased by 1% after increasing by 19% to 816 million in the 2003 nancial year.
The increase in the 2003 nancial year reects an increase in leaver costs compared to the prior year of 108 million.
Payments to other BT lines of business declined by 8% in the 2004 nancial year to 2933 million after declining by 12% to 3175 million in the 2003 nancial year.
The reduction in the 2004 nancial year reects the decline in private circuits purchased from BT Retail.
The reduction in the 2003 nancial year was principally due to the unwind of the Concert global venture which reduced the cost of sales of BT Retail products and a reduction in service costs.
EBITDA before exceptional items at 3600 million in the 2004 nancial year was 2% lower than in the 2003 nancial year following a reduction of 9% to 3681 million in the 2003 nancial year.
EBITDA margins before exceptional items were maintained at 33% across all three nancial years.
Depreciation costs were broadly at at 1919 million in the 2004 nancial year and 1923 million in the 2003 nancial year.
Operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items at 1681 million decreased by 4% in the 2004 nancial year.
This was after a reduction of 18% to 1758 million in the 2003 nancial year.
The operating prot margin before exceptional items remained broadly at in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years.
Capital expenditure on plant and equipment at 1809 million in the 2004 nancial year was 10% higher than the 2003 nancial year reecting the focused expenditure on transformational projects.
In the 2003 nancial year capital expenditure declined by 16% to 1652 million which reected cost control tight governance and the alignment of capital spend with the development of the future network strategy.
Managed cash costs are used to measure the controllable operating and capital cash costs of the BT Wholesale business.
Accordingly it is based on operating costs excluding payments to other network operators and depreciation plus capital expenditure.
Targets have been set for achieving managed cash cost savings and accordingly performance against those targets is reported.
In the 2004 nancial year managed cash costs at 5995 million decreased by 3% despite a 10% increase in capital expenditure.
In the 2003 nancial year after adjusting for the unwind of Concert managed cash costs at 6200 million decreased by 1% despite the extra leaver payments of 108 million in the 2003 nancial year.
After allowing BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 33 Operating and financial review for price changes and volume effects the efciency cost savings were 280 million in the 2004 nancial year and 237 million in the 2003 nancial year.
This brings the two year efciency cost savings total to 517 million which is above our two year target of 500 million.
BT Global Services 2004 Group turnover 5782 5417 4678 Group operating loss 105 375 294 EBITDA 508 238 212 Capital expenditure 479 445 615 Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items BT Global Services is at the forefront of two areas of the groups growth being ICT solutions and servicing the needs of global multisite corporations and European multisite organisations.
The product portfolio covers a number of key ICT related areas including IP infrastructure Customer Relationship Management CRM outsourcing and system integration.
These are provided to customers through BT Syntegra and BT Global Solutions.
The 2004 nancial year results demonstrate the success of the reintegration of Concert and delivery of customer orientated ICT based services and solutions.
In the 2003 nancial year the nancial performance of Global Products and Global Carrier reects the reintegration of the returning businesses as a result of the unwind of Concert.
In the 2004 nancial year BT Global Services turnover was 5782 million representing an increase of 7% compared to the prior year following an increase of 16% to 5417 million in the 2003 nancial year reecting the returning Concert businesses.
BT Global Solutions turnover grew by 14% in the 2004 nancial year to 2802 million.
In the 2003 nancial year BT Global Solutions turnover grew by 10% to 2455 million.
BT Syntegra performed strongly with turnover of 721 million in the 2004 nancial year an increase of 16% and turnover of 623 million in the 2003 nancial year an increase of 3%.
In the 2004 nancial year contract wins from ICT solutions amounted to more than 7 billion.
The highest prole of these were three NHS contracts expected to be worth over 2.1 billion and forming an integral part of the National Programme for Information Technology in the NHS.
In the 2003 nancial year contract wins from ICT solutions amounted to more than 4.4 billion.
BT Global Products turnover grew by 9% in the 2004 nancial year to 1831 million reecting the growth of Multi Protocol Label Switching.
In the 2003 nancial year BT Global Products turnover increased by 33% to 1674 million and was mainly due to the reintegration of Concert and the growth in IPVPN products.
The Global Carrier division turnover decreased by 1% in the 2004 nancial year to 962 million 2003  974 million 2002  292 million.
The increase in 2003 was principally due to the reintegration of the international carrier business of the former Concert global venture.
Continued cost reductions in network costs as well as selling general and administration costs helped generate improvements in EBITDA before exceptional items in the 2004 nancial year of 113% to 508 million following an improvement of 12% in the 2003 nancial year.
The reintegration of the former Concert business had an adverse impact on the growth in EBITDA before exceptional items in the 2003 nancial year.
The 2004 2003 and 2002 nancial years include leaver costs of 33 million 65 million and 55 million respectively.
Headcount increased by 23% to 21200 in the 2004 nancial year which includes transfers of operations from other lines of business and an increase in BT Global Solutions headcount due to increased outsourcing contracts.
Headcount increased by 3% to 17200 in the 2003 nancial year.
All major European operations achieved their target of becoming EBITDA positive during the 2003 nancial year.
The group operating loss before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items decreased by 270 million in the 2004 nancial year to a loss of 105 million after increasing by 81 million to a loss of 375 million in the 2003 nancial year.
The loss in the 2003 nancial year includes the adverse impact of the former Concert business.
Capital expenditure for the 2004 nancial year was 479 million an increase of 8% and 445 million in the 2003 nancial year a reduction of 28%.
Other operating income Other operating income for the group decreased by 38 million to 177 million in the 2004 nancial year and by 146 million to 215 million in the 2003 nancial year.
As part of the arrangements for the establishment of Concert BT had been seconding staff and providing administrative and other services from its launch in early January 2000.
The income from these services before the reintegration of Concert was 135 million in the 2002 nancial year.
Operating costs Total operating costs from continuing activities were reduced by 3% in the 2004 nancial year to 15823 million after reducing by 13% in the 2003 nancial year.
As a percentage of group turnover from continuing activities operating costs from continuing activities excluding goodwill amortisation and exceptional items reduced from 87% in the 2002 nancial year to 86% in the 2003 nancial year and 85% in the 2004 nancial year.
Operating costs in the 2003 nancial year include the costs associated with the reintegrated activities of the former Concert global venture.
Because these activities have been fully integrated into the lines of business it is not possible to separately identify those specic costs associated with the activities of the former Concert global venture.
In all three nancial years net exceptional costs from continuing activities were incurred.
These amounted to 7 million 198 million and 2696 million in the 2004 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
These exceptional costs are considered separately in the discussion which follows.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 34 Operating and financial review Operating costs 2004 Continuing activities Staff costs 4412 4254 4260 Own work capitalised 677 583 623 Depreciation 2921 3011 2974 Goodwill and other intangibles amortisation 15 24 124 Payments to telecommunications operators 3963 3940 4289 Other operating costs 5182 5526 5134 Total operating costs from continuing activities before exceptional costs 15816 16172 16158 Net exceptional costs 7 198 2696 Total operating costs from continuing activities 15823 16370 18854 Total operating costs from discontinued activities   2546 Total operating costs 15823 16370 21400 Staff costs from continuing activities increased by 4% to 4412 million in the 2004 nancial year after being broadly at in the 2003 nancial year.
In the 2004 nancial year the number of staff employed in the continuing activities decreased by 4800 to 99900 at 31 March 2004 after decreasing by 3900 in the 2003 nancial year.
Increased pay rates and national insurance and a 141 million increase in the pension charge offset the impact of the lower headcount and leaver costs in the 2004 nancial year.
The increased leaver costs and salary increases offset the impact of lower headcount in the 2003 nancial year.
The allocation for the employee prot share scheme included within staff costs was 20 million in the 2004 nancial year.
The allocation for the 2003 and 2002 nancial years was 36 million and 25 million respectively.
Early leaver costs from continuing activities before exceptional items of 202 million were incurred in the 2004 nancial year compared with 276 million in the 2003 nancial year and 186 million in the 2002 nancial year.
This reects BTs continued focus on reducing headcount and improving operational efciencies.
Leaver costs include the cost of enhanced pension benets provided to leavers which amounted to 1 million 60 million and 21 million in the 2004 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
In the 2002 nancial year this did not reect the full cash cost because there was a pension fund accounting surplus which for accounting purposes includes any provision for pensions on the groups balance sheet and in accordance with BTs accounting policies the accounting surplus was utilised before making a charge to the prot and loss account.
The cost of enhanced pension benets charged against the accounting surplus in the 2002 nancial year amounted to 140 million.
The depreciation charge from continuing activities decreased by 3% in the 2004 nancial year to 2921 million after increasing by 1% in the 2003 nancial year.
The decrease in the 2004 nancial year reects more efcient capital expenditure over recent years.
The increase in the 2003 nancial year is despite the reduction in property depreciation as a result of the property sale and leaseback in December 2001.
The increase in the 2003 nancial year also reects a reduction in the estimated asset lives due to BTs continuing investment in its networks and broadband.
Goodwill amortisation in respect of subsidiaries and businesses acquired since 1 April 1998 when BT adopted Financial Reporting Standard No.
10 and amortisation of other intangibles totalled 15 million in the 2004 nancial year compared with 24 million in the 2003 nancial year and 124 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The low charge in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years reect the impact of the demerger of mmO and the impairment of goodwill in the 2002 nancial year which signicantly reduced the carrying value of goodwill.
Goodwill on acquisitions before 1 April 1998 was written off directly to reserves.
Payments to other telecommunications operators from continuing activities increased by 1% in the 2004 nancial year to 3963 million after reducing by 8% in the 2003 nancial year.
The increase in the payments for the 2004 nancial year reects the increase in both UK and overseas payments.
The payments in the 2002 nancial year include those made to the Concert global venture for the delivery of BTs outgoing international calls which accounts for most of the reduction in the 2003 nancial year following the reintegration of Concert.
Other operating costs before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items which reduced by 6% in the 2004 nancial year to 5182 million after increasing by 8% in the 2003 nancial year include the maintenance and support of the networks accommodation and marketing costs the cost of sales of customer premises equipment and non pay related leaver costs.
The decrease in the 2004 nancial year was largely due to efciency cost savings offset by the adverse impact of currency movements.
The increase in the 2003 nancial year includes the property rental costs of around 190 million following the sale and leaseback transaction in December 2001 and the costs associated with the reintegrated activities of the former Concert global venture.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 35 Operating and financial review The exceptional items within operating costs for the 2004 2003 and 2002 nancial years are shown in the table below.
Exceptional operating costs 2004 Rectication costs 30 Property rationalisation costs  198 Impairment of goodwill and tangible xed assets   2202 Concert unwind costs   172 BT Retail call centre rationalisation  68 BT Wholesale bad debt release expense 23 79 mmO demerger costs  98 Other  77 Total attributable to continuing activities 7 198 2696 Total attributable to discontinued activities  11 Total exceptional operating costs 7 198 2707 In the 2004 nancial year net exceptional operating costs are the estimated rectication costs relating to a major incident offset by the 23 million release of the surplus exceptional bad debt provisions made in the 2002 nancial year.
In the 2003 nancial year a property rationalisation charge of 198 million was recognised in relation to the rationalisation of the groups London ofce portfolio.
The rationalisation involves the exit from a number of ofce properties.
The most signicant item in the 2002 nancial year was the impairment of goodwill and tangible xed assets in the European activities of BT Global Services.
In the light of our announcement that BT Global Services was streamlining its activities to focus on multisite corporate customers with European activities and the assimilation of BTs share of Concerts activities an impairment review of the investment in its European activities was performed.
As a result a goodwill impairment charge of 1939 million and a tangible xed asset impairment charge of 263 million was recognised.
The goodwill in the European activities was fully written down as a result of the charge.
Other exceptional items in the 2002 nancial year included and costs of 172 million associated with the unwind of the Concert global venture discussed further on page 37 and charges of 68 million in relation to BT Retails call centre rationalisation programme reducing the number of call centres from 104 to 30 over two years and bad debt charges of 79 million in BT Wholesale as a result of severe liquidity problems in the TMT sector during the latter part of the year and costs of 98 million associated with the demerger of mmO and other charges of 77 million including impairment of payphone assets.
Group operating prot loss In the 2004 nancial year group operating prot from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and the exceptional items described above of 2892 million was 4% higher than in the 2003 nancial year which in turn was 1% higher than in the 2002 nancial year.
Total group operating prot for the 2004 nancial year was 2873 million compared to a prot of 2572 million in the 2003 nancial year and a loss of 479 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The 2002 nancial year loss reects the losses generated by the discontinued activities and the exceptional charges of 2707 million.
Associates and joint ventures The results of associates and joint ventures split between continuing and discontinued activities are shown below Share of turnover Continuing activities 395 1455 4049 Discontinued activities   715 Total 395 1455 4764 Share of operating loss prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items Continuing activities 8 181 108 Discontinued activities  74 Total 8 181 34 The groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover reduced by 1060 million during the 2004 nancial year mainly reecting the disposal of the groups interest in Cegetel in the 2003 nancial year.
During the 2003 nancial year there was a signicant rationalisation of the groups investments in associates and joint ventures.
On 1 April 2002 the unwind of the Concert global venture was completed and on 22 January 2003 the sale of the groups stake in Cegetel was completed.
As a result BTs share of its ventures turnover fell to 1455 million in the 2003 nancial year from 4764 million in the 2002 nancial year.
In the 2004 nancial year 386 million of the total arose from ventures located outside the UK compared with 1447 million in the 2003 nancial year and 4618 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The principal contributors to turnover in the 2004 nancial year were LG Telecom in Korea 196 million and Albacom in Italy 147 million.
The principal contributors to turnover in the 2003 nancial year were Cegetel in France 956 million up to the date of disposal and LG Telecom 198 million.
The principal contributors to turnover from continuing activities in the 2002 nancial year were Concert 2158 million Cegetel 1068 million and LG Telecom 240 million.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 36 Operating and financial review The principal contributors to turnover from discontinued activities in the 2002 nancial year were Japan Telecom and JPhone 559 million to June 2001 and Airtel 76 million to June 2001.
The groups share of its ventures operating losses from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items totalled 8 million in the 2004 nancial year.
This compares to a prot of 181 million and a loss of 108 million in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
The principal contributor to the groups share of operating prots from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items in the 2003 nancial year was Cegetel 198 million and in the 2002 nancial year the principal contributor to the loss was Concert 225 million offset by prots from Cegetel 168 million.
Exceptional items within the operating losses prots from joint ventures and associates are as follows Goodwill impairment 26  173 Impairment of Concert   806 Concert unwind costs  81 Impairment of investments and release charge of related exit costs  150 234 Total exceptional operating costs credits 26 150 1294 In the 2004 nancial year BT charged its share of an exceptional goodwill impairment made by Albacom amounting to 26 million.
In the 2003 nancial year BT completed the exit from its investment in Blu on more favourable terms than anticipated and accordingly exit cost provisions of 150 million were released.
Concerts performance was a cause of concern in 2001 and in October 2001 BT and ATandT announced the unwind of Concert which was subsequently completed on 1 April 2002.
On completion the businesses customer accounts and networks returned to the two parent companies with BT and ATandT each taking ownership of substantially those parts of Concert originally contributed by them.
As part of the settlement with ATandT for the unwind of the Concert global venture BT received net cash of US72 million 56 million.
This net settlement includes the receipt of US350 million reecting the allocation of the businesses and the payment of US278 million to achieve the equal division of specied working capital and other liability balances.
BT and ATandT also terminated their Canadian joint venture agreement under which BT was committed to participate in ATandTs future obligation to acquire all of the publicly traded shares of ATandT Canada.
ATandT has taken full ownership of BTs interest in the Canadian joint venture and in ATandT Canada and has now assumed full responsibility for all future obligations of the joint venture.
BT has now ceased to have any interest in ATandT Canada and has been released from its future expenditure commitment associated with ATandT Canada.
In the 2002 nancial year BT wrote down the carrying value of its investments in both Concert and ATandT Canada.
The exceptional impairment charge of 1153 million against these investments comprises Concert goodwill impairment of 260 million Concert tangible xed asset writedowns of 546 million and the write off of BTs 347 million interest in ATandT Canada included within amounts written off investments.
BT also recognised exceptional restructuring charges of 81 million for its share of redundancy and other unwind costs in Concert and BTs own unwind costs of 172 million have been charged against group operating costs in the 2002 nancial year.
In the 2002 nancial year exceptional impairment charges and related exit costs totalling 407 million principally relating to goodwill and asset impairments in Blu and SmarTone were recognised in the light of the rapidly changing global telecoms market conditions.
Goodwill amortisation in the 2004 nancial year amounted to nil compared to 2 million in the 2003 nancial year and 53 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The reduction in the 2003 nancial year reects the disposals and the goodwill impairment charges referred to above.
Total operating prot loss Total operating prot from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items for the 2004 nancial year of 2884 million was 3% lower than in the 2003 nancial year which in turn was 12% higher than the previous nancial year.
The movement in the underlying total operating prot was due to the factors explained above.
Total operating prot for the 2004 nancial year was 2839 million including BTs share of the operating results of its associates and joint ventures.
This compared to 2901 million for the 2003 nancial year and a loss of 1860 million for the 2002 nancial year.
The reduction in total operating prot in the 2004 nancial year reects the reduction in group turnover and associates and joint ventures prots offset by cost efciency savings the strong performance of BT Global Services and lower leaver costs.
The improved performance in the 2003 nancial year reects the groups exit from certain loss making activities and the lower level of goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
Prot on sale of group undertakings and xed asset investments During the 2004 nancial year the consideration for disposals totalled 133 million and the prot before tax from disposals totalled 36 million.
This was principally in relation to the disposal of the groups 7.8% interest in Inmarsat which was sold for US118 million 67 million realising a prot on disposal of 32 million.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 37 Operating and financial review In the 2003 nancial year a number of noncore investments were sold.
The consideration for the disposals totalled 3028 million and the prot before taxation from disposals totalled 1691 million.
This was principally in relation to the disposal of our 26% interest in Cegetel a French telecommunications operator on 22 January 2003.
The total proceeds were 2603 million received in cash and the prot was 1509 million before the recognition of an exceptional interest charge of 293 million on closing out xed interest rate swaps following receipt of the sale proceeds.
A major feature of the 2002 nancial year was the successful disposal of many noncore businesses.
The consideration for these disposals totalled 8.0 billion as shown in the table below.
Disposals
Year ended 31 March 2002
Prot loss before tax Japan Telecom and JPhone Communications 3709 2358 Yell 1960 1128 Airtel 1084 844 Maxis Communications Berhard 350 4 Rogers Wireless Communications 267 23 Clear Communications 119 126 epeopleserve 70 61 Other 173 31 Total 7973 4389 BT completed the sale to Vodafone of its 20% economic interest in Japan Telecom and its 20% interest in JPhone Communications on 1 June 2001 and subsequently its interest in JPhone group companies.
The total proceeds of sale were 3709 million received in cash and the prot was 2358 million.
The sale of Yell BTs classied advertising directory businesses in the UK and the USA was completed on 22 June 2001 for a consideration of 1960 million giving a prot of 1128 million.
In
May 2001 the UK Ofce of Fair Trading announced that the price controls over the UK Yellow Pages advertising rates were to be tightened signicantly.
The price we achieved for the sale of Yell which was announced on 26 May 2001 reected the impact of these controls on Yells prospects.
BT completed the sale of its 18% interest in Airtel a major Spanish wireless operator to Vodafone for 1084 million on 29 June 2001.
The prot of 844 million on the sale compares with BTs investment in the company of 223 million built up during the 1990s.
In November 2001 BT completed the sale of its 33% interest in Maxis Communications of Malaysia for 350 million which broadly equated with its carrying value.
We completed the sale of our interest in Rogers Wireless to ATandT for 267 million on 29 June 2001 and recognised a loss of 23 million.
BTs interest in BiB was diluted in July 2000 when BSkyB gained control and in May 2001 we agreed to exchange our residual interest in BiB for tranches of shares in BSkyB.
We received the rst tranche of 19 million BSkyB shares with an initial value of 128 million on 28 June 2001.
We were required to hold 50% of this tranche until May 2002 and recognised a prot on these shares when they were sold in May 2002.
We also received the second tranche of BSkyB shares with a similar value in November 2002 and they were sold at that time.
The prot of 120 million recognised in the 2002 nancial year relates to the BSkyB shares which we were permitted to sell on receipt.
In the 2003 nancial year a prot on disposal of BSkyB shares of 131 million was recognised.
In December 2001 BT completed the sale of its wholly owned subsidiary company Clear Communications Limited which operates a communications network in New Zealand for consideration of 119 million.
A loss of 126 million has been recognised on this sale of which 45 million relates to goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
In February 2002 we completed the sale of our 50% interest in epeopleserve a major human resource outsourcing activity to our jointventure partner Accenture for an initial consideration of 50 million.
BT is entitled to receive additional payments from an earnout arrangement based on epeopleserves revenues from customers other than BT and Accenture over the ve years to 2007.
These additional earnout payments will total between 27 million and approximately 167 million.
A prot of 61 million on this transaction has been recognised in the 2002 nancial year based on the initial consideration and the discounted value of the additional minimum payments of 20 million.
In addition in the 2002 nancial year we recognised an impairment charge of 347 million in relation to the xed asset investment in ATandT Canada as noted above and 157 million in relation to Impsat.
Prot on sale of property xed assets In December 2001 as part of a wider property outsourcing arrangement BT completed the sale and leaseback of the majority of its UK properties to Telereal a 5050 joint venture partnership formed by Land Securities Trillium and The William Pears Group.
Around 6700 properties  ofces telephone exchanges vehicle depots warehouses call centres and computer centres  were transferred totalling some 5.5 million square metres.
Under these arrangements Telereal is responsible for providing accommodation and estate management services to
The consideration received amounted to 2380 million.
BT has leased the properties back at a total annual rental commencing at around 190 million for the 2003 nancial year and subject to a 3% annual increase.
This charge was offset by reduced depreciation and interest charges.
In addition BT has transferred the economic risk on a large portion of its leased properties to Telereal in return for an annual rental commencing at approximately 90 million per annum.
This was broadly equivalent to the existing BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 38 Operating and financial review level of rentals.
In February 2002 BT outsourced its property management unit to Telereal.
The prot on the sale of the properties amounted to 1019 million and was determined after allowing 129 million for BTs actual and future obligations under the terms of the legal agreement with Telereal and for the cost of advisors fees.
The obligations include expenditure of 34 million to be incurred on completing nearly nished new properties and remedial work to be undertaken on several properties.
Part of the proceeds of sale were used in novating xed interest rate obligations to support Telereals nancing.
An exceptional cost of 162 million was incurred in unwinding this position and was included in the interest charge for the year.
In summary the property transaction beneted the results for the 2002 nancial year by 857 million as shown below Prot on sale and leaseback of properties m Sales proceeds 2380 Net book value of assets disposed 1232 Estimated cost of BTs future obligations 129 Prot on properties sold 1019 Interest rate swap novation costs 162 Net prot on sale and leaseback of properties 857 Following this transaction we retained direct ownership of approximately 220 properties  including certain telephone exchanges computer centres and high radio towers  totalling some 800000 square metres.
We also retained BT Centre our headquarters building Adastral Park our major research facility near Ipswich Madley and Goonhilly earth satellite stations and the BT Tower in central London.
In advance of the property transaction being completed with Telereal BT also completed the sale of one of its major properties in London at a prot of 43 million.
Interest charge In the 2004 nancial year the total net interest charge including BTs share of its ventures charges at 941 million was 498 million lower than in the preceding year which in turn was 183 million lower than in the 2002 nancial year.
Of the total net charge 924 million arises in the BT group for the 2004 nancial year compared with 1420 million and 1540 million in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
The reduction in the net interest charge in the 2004 nancial year reects the continued reduction in the level of net debt and lower net exceptional charges in the current year.
The net exceptional charge represents the premium on buying back e1.1 billion of 7.125% bonds due in 2011 and US195 million of the groups US dollar bonds partially offset by a credit from the one off interest recognised on full repayment of loan notes received as part of the original consideration from the disposal of Yell.
The reduction in the net interest charge in the 2003 nancial year reects the reduction in the level of net debt and is partly offset by the 293 million exceptional cost of terminating xed interest rate swaps as a consequence of the receipt of the Cegetel sale proceeds.
The substantially higher charge in the 2002 nancial year is mainly due to the cost of funding the acquisition of mmO s thirdgeneration mobile licences principally in the UK and Germany.
In the 2002 nancial year the groups net interest charge included the 162 million exceptional cost of novating interest swaps as a consequence of the property sale and leaseback transaction.
Interest cover in the 2004 nancial year represented 3.3 times total operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items and compares with interest cover of 2.6 in the 2003 nancial year and 1.9 for continuing activities in the 2002 nancial year.
The improvement in cover in the 2004 nancial year is due to the reduction in the interest charge mainly arising from the reduction in net debt.
The improvement in cover in the 2003 nancial year is due to the reduction in the interest charge and improvement in the operating prot before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
We expect the net interest charge to decrease and interest cover to continue to improve in the 2005 nancial year following the continued reduction in net debt during the 2004 nancial year.
Prot loss before taxation The groups prot before taxation for the 2004 nancial year was 1948 million compared with a prot of 3157 million in the 2003 nancial year and a prot of 1461 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The prot in the 2003 nancial year included the exceptional prots from the sale of investments and businesses totalling 1691 million.
The prot in the 2002 nancial year included net exceptional gains of 753 million.
The groups prot before taxation from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items for the 2004 nancial year was 2016 million compared with 1829 million in the 2003 nancial year and 1273 million in the 2002 nancial year.
The improvement in the 2004 underlying prot was due to cost efciency savings the strong performance of BT Global Services lower leaver costs and lower interest charges explained above.
The improvement in the 2003 nancial year was principally due to the exit from loss making businesses improved operating prots and lower interest charges explained above.
The prot before taxation from discontinued activities in the 2002 nancial year amounted to 3954 million.
The 2002 nancial year included gains on disposals from discontinued activities of 4368 million.
Taxation
The tax charge for the 2004 nancial year was 539 million and comprises 568 million on the prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items offset by tax relief of 29 million on certain exceptional charges.
The tax charge on the prot BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 39 Operating and financial review before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items is at an effective rate of 28.2%.
The tax charge for the 2003 nancial year was 459 million and comprises 598 million on the prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items offset by tax relief of 139 million on certain exceptional charges.
The tax charge on the prot before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items is at an effective rate of 32.7%.
The tax charge for the 2002 nancial year was 443 million.
The effective rate was 41.5% of the prot from continuing activities before taxation goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
This was in excess of the standard UK tax rate of 30% due to the impact of loss making subsidiaries outside the UK for which tax relief is not immediately available and associate company taxation.
Earnings loss per share The basic earnings per share of 16.4 pence per share for the 2004 nancial year compares with 31.2 pence for the 2003 nancial year and 12.0 pence for the 2002 nancial year.
The following table illustrates the impact of the groups discontinued activities up to the date of demerger or sale for the 2002 nancial year as well as signicant exceptional items and goodwill amortisation on the basic earnings per share for the past three nancial years pence pence pence Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items from continuing activities 16.9 14.2 8.8 Exceptional items and goodwill amortisation from continuing activities 0.5 17.0 43.6 Basic earnings loss per share from continuing activities 16.4 31.2 34.8 Basic earnings per share from discontinued activities   46.8 Total basic earnings per share 16.4 31.2 12.0 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items from BTs continuing activities of 16.9 pence for the 2004 nancial year compare with an equivalent of 14.2 pence and 8.8 pence for the 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
Diluted earnings per share were not materially different in all three years.
Dividends
In line with the policy announced in November 2003 the board recommends a nal dividend of 5.3 pence per share to shareholders amounting to 454 million.
This will be paid subject to shareholder approval on 6 September 2004 to shareholders on the register on 6 August 2004.
This takes the dividend for the full year to 8.5 pence per share compared to 6.5 pence in the 2003 nancial year an increase of 31%.
This years dividend pay out ratio is 50% of earnings before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items and we expect this to increase to around 60% for the 2006 nancial year.
The interim and nal dividend in the 2003 nancial year was 2.25 pence per share and 4.25 pence per share respectively.
This gave a full dividend for the year of 6.5 pence per share amounting to 560 million.
The nal and full dividend for the 2002 nancial year was 2.0 pence per share which absorbed 173 million.
As part of BTs debt reduction and restructuring plans the Board decided in May 2001 that there was to be no interim dividend for the 2002 nancial year.
Financing
Net cash inow from operating activities of 5389 million in the 2004 nancial year compares with 6023 million in the 2003 nancial year and 5257 million in the 2002 nancial year.
Net cash inow from continuing operating activities amounted to 5023 million in the 2002 nancial year.
Special and deciency contributions to the main pension fund described below of 742 million in the 2004 nancial year 329 million in the 2003 nancial year and BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 40 Operating and financial review Summarised cash ow statement Net cash inow from operating activities Continuing activities 5389 6023 5023 Discontinued activities   234 Total net cash inow from operating activities 5389 6023 5257 Dividends from associates and joint ventures 3 62 Net cash outow for returns on investments and servicing of nance 527 1506 1695 Taxation paid 317 434 562 Net cash outow for capital expenditure and nancial investment 2477 2381 1354 Net cash outow inow for acquisitions and disposals 60 2842 5785 Equity dividends paid 645 367 Cash inow before management of liquid resources and nancing 1366 4183 7433 Management of liquid resources 1123 1729 1864 Net cash outow from nancing 2445 2473 5479 Increase decrease in cash in the year 44 19 90 Decrease in net debt in the year resulting from cash ows 1222 4225 13930 600 million in the 2002 nancial year were paid consequently reducing the net cash inow by these amounts.
The pension payments in the 2004 nancial year include early payment of 380 million deciency contributions to the BT Pension Scheme which represents most of the deciency contributions for the 2005 and 2006 nancial years.
The net cash outow for returns on investments and servicing of nance amounted to 527 million 1506 million and 1695 million in the 2004 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
The reduction in the 2004 nancial year outow of 979 million reects the receipt of 420 million of funds on restructuring some of the groups swap portfolio.
There will be offsetting higher interest payments in future years as a result of restructuring the swaps.
The
2003 nancial year included the payment of a 293 million premium on closing out 2.6 billion of xed interest rate swaps following receipt of the Cegetel sale proceeds.
Tax paid in the 2004 nancial year totalled 317 million compared with 434 million in the 2003 nancial year and 562 million paid in the 2002 nancial year.
The lower tax paid in the 2004 and 2003 nancial years reects the lower current tax charge and the level of payments made on account.
The net cash outow of 2477 million for capital expenditure and nancial investment in the 2004 nancial year included 2684 million of capital expenditure on property plant and equipment offset by 208 million received on the sale of xed assets.
In the 2003 nancial year the net cash outow of 2381 million for capital expenditure and nancial investment included 2580 million of capital expenditure on plant and equipment offset by 200 million received on the sale of xed assets.
In the 2002 nancial year the net cash outow of 1354 million for capital expenditure and nancial investment included 4069 million of capital expenditure on plant and equipment offset by 2752 million received on the sale of xed assets.
These proceeds included 2380 million from the property sale and leaseback transaction completed in December 2001 described above.
The net cash outow from acquisitions less disposals in the 2004 nancial year totalled 60 million.
The principal cash outow for acquisitions was due to the purchase of a controlling interest in BT Expedite Limited formerly NSB Retail plc and Transcomm plc.
In the 2003 nancial year the net cash inow from disposals less acquisitions totalled 2842 million.
Cash proceeds from disposals amounted to 2919 million and principally comprised 2603 million from the sale of the investment in
In the 2002 nancial year the net cash inow from disposals less acquisitions totalled 5785 million.
Cash proceeds from disposals amounted to 6916 million and principally comprised 3075 million from the sale of the investment in Japan Telecom and JPhone 1838 million from the sale of the Yell directories business and 1084 million from the sale of our investment in Airtel.
The principal cash outow for acquisitions was the completion of the purchase of a minority interest in Esat Digifone in April 2001 for 869 million.
Equity dividends paid in the 2004 nancial year totalled 645 million whilst those paid in the 2003 nancial year totalled 367 million.
There were no equity dividends paid in the 2002 nancial year as explained above.
The resulting cash inow for the 2004 nancial year before management of liquid resources and nancing of 1366 million was mainly applied in repaying longterm borrowings and shortterm investments with total borrowings of 3627 million being repaid.
In addition the group issued new loans of 1326 million.
The new loans included a US172 million 0.75% exchangeable bond due in 2008 exchangeable into ordinary shares of LG Telecom BTs Korean based associate and a sale and leaseback of circuit switches which had no effect on net debt but increased gross debt and cash by around 1 billion.
The cash inow for the 2003 nancial year of 4183 million was applied in repaying shortterm borrowings and investing in shortterm investments with total borrowings of 2535 million being repaid.
The cash inow for the 2002 nancial year of 7433 million was also applied in repaying shortterm borrowings and investing in shortterm investments.
This was in part due to the success of the companys rights issue which closed in June 2001.
1976 million new shares were issued for a total consideration of 5876 million net of expenses.
As part of the demerger arrangements 440 million was received from mmO additionally mmO assumed 60 million of the groups external net debt.
The cash inow for the 2004 nancial year resulted in net debt reducing by a further 1148 million to 8425 million having reduced by 4128 million to 9573 million in the 2003 nancial year.
In the 2002 nancial year the cash inow resulted in net debt reducing to 13701 million at 31 March 2002.
During the 2004 nancial year as noted earlier the group restructured some of its swaps portfolio to mitigate credit risk to certain counterparties.
As a result the group terminated 7 billion of cross currency interest rate swaps and replaced these with new swaps which had the same economic hedging effect.
This resulted in the group paying 445 million in reducing gross debt and receiving 420 million of interest receipts.
The interest receipts have been included within deferred income on the balance sheet and will be amortised to the prot and loss account over the term of the underlying hedged debt.
During the 2004 nancial year the group commenced a share buyback programme repurchasing 81 million shares during the year for consideration of 144 million.
The buyback programme will be funded from cash generated over and above that required to meet our net debt target of around 7 billion in the 2007 nancial year after paying dividends and taking into account acquisitions or disposals.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 41 Operating and financial review Treasury policy The group has a centralised treasury operation whose primary role is to manage liquidity funding investment and the groups nancial risk including risk from volatility in currency and interest rates and counterparty credit risk.
The treasury operation is not a prot centre and the objective is to manage risk at optimum cost.
The Board sets the treasury departments policy and its activities are subject to a set of controls commensurate with the magnitude of the borrowings and investments under its management.
Counterparty credit risk is closely monitored and managed within controls set by the Board.
Derivative instruments including forward foreign exchange contracts are entered into for hedging purposes only.
We have set out further details on this topic and on our capital resources and foreign currency exposure in note 36 to the nancial statements in compliance with FRS 13.
Offbalance sheet arrangements As disclosed in the nancial statements there are no offbalance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on the groups nancial condition changes in nancial condition revenues or expenses results of operations liquidity capital expenditure or capital resources with the exception of the following and Operating leases note 30 and Capital commitments and guarantees note 30 and Derivative contracts note 36 Capital resources During the 2004 and 2003 nancial years the group has reduced its level of borrowings so that its net debt was 8.4 billion at 31 March 2004 compared with 9.6 billion at 31 March 2003 and 13.7 billion at 31 March 2002.
The debt reduction in the 2003 nancial year was principally achieved by the disposal of our stake in Cegetel.
The directors have a reasonable expectation that the group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and therefore they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the nancial statements.
There has been no signicant change in the nancial or trading position of the group since 31 March 2004.
The following table sets out the groups contractual obligations and commitments as they fall due for payment as at 31 March 2004.
Payments due by period Contractual obligations
Less than 1 year years years
Loans and other borrowings 12598 989 4582 693 6334 Finance lease obligations 109tel Operating lease obligations 1091tel9088 Capital commitments Total 25490 2278 5974 1740 15498 At 31 March 2004 the group had cash and shortterm investments of 5272 million.
At that date 1271 million of debt fell due for repayment in the 2005 nancial year.
The group had unused shortterm bank facilities amounting to approximately 145 million at 31 March 2004.
These resources will allow the group to settle its obligations as they fall due.
At 31 March 2003 the group had cash and shortterm investments of 6431 million.
The group had unused shortterm bank facilities amounting to approximately 575 million at 31 March 2003.
Foreign currency and interest rate exposure Most of the groups current turnover is invoiced in pounds sterling and most of its operations and costs arise within the UK.
The groups foreign currency borrowings which totalled 9.4 billion at 31 March 2004 are used to nance its operations.
These borrowings have been predominantly swapped into sterling.
Cross currency swaps and forward foreign exchange contracts have been entered into to reduce the foreign currency exposure on the groups operations and the groups net assets.
The group also enters into forward foreign exchange contracts to hedge investment interest expense and purchase and sale commitments.
The commitments hedged are principally US dollar and euro denominated.
As a result of these policies the groups exposure to foreign currency arises mainly on the residual currency exposure on its nonUK investments in its subsidiaries and ventures and on any imbalances between the value of outgoing and incoming international calls.
The groups exposure to changes in currency movements decreased signicantly following the demerger of the mmO business and its European operations in November 2001.
A 10% strengthening in sterling against major currencies would cause the groups net assets at 31 March 2004 to fall by less than 120 million with insignicant effect on the groups prot.
This compares with a fall of less than 100 million and 150 million in the years ended 31 March 2003 and 2002 respectively.
Foreign exchange contracts are entered into as a hedge of sales and purchases accordingly a change in the fair value of the hedge is offset by a corresponding change in the value of the underlying sale or purchase.
The majority of the groups longterm borrowings have been and are subject to xed interest rates.
The group has entered into interest rate swap agreements with commercial banks and other institutions to vary the amounts and period for which interest rates are xed.
At 31 March 2004 the group had outstanding interest rate swap agreements with notional principal amounts totalling 5210 million compared to 5170 million at 31 March 2003.
The longterm debt instruments which BT issued in December 2000 and February 2001 both contained covenants that if the BT group credit rating were downgraded below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of Standard and Poors SandP additional interest would accrue from the next interest coupon period at the rate of 0.25 percentage points BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 42 Operating and financial review for each ratings category adjustment by each ratings agency.
In May 2001 Moodys downgraded BTs credit rating to Baa1 which increased BTs annual interest charge by approximately 32 million.
BTs credit rating from SandP is A minus.
Based upon the total amount of debt of 9 billion outstanding on these instruments at 31 March 2004 BTs annual interest charge would increase by approximately 45 million if BTs credit rating were to be downgraded by one credit rating category by both agencies below a longterm debt rating of Baa1 A minus.
If BTs credit rating with Moodys was to be upgraded by one credit rating category the annual interest charge would be reduced by approximately 23 million.
Based upon the composition of net debt at 31 March 2004 a one percentage point increase in interest rates would increase the groups annual net interest expense by less than 15 million.
This compares with an increase of less than 10 million and less than 20 million in the years ended 31 March 2003 and 2002 respectively.
Capital expenditure Capital expenditure on plant equipment and property excluding the movement on capital accruals totalled 2673 million in the 2004 nancial year compared with 2445 million and 3908 million in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
Of the total capital expenditure in the 2002 nancial year 3100 million was in relation to the groups continuing activities.
Work continues on enhancing the intelligence of the network to enable customers to benet from advanced services and improving the networks capacity to carry highspeed data.
Capital expenditure is expected to rise but remain within its 3 billion annual target in the 2005 nancial year as the group invests in its 21st century network 21CN programme.
Capital expenditure in relation to the groups discontinued activities amounted to 808 million in the 2002 nancial year.
Prior to the demerger mmO continued improving the quality and capacity of its digital GSM network.
Of the capital expenditure 86 million was in Europe outside the UK in the 2004 nancial year and 138 million was spent there in the 2003 nancial year.
Contracts placed for ongoing capital expenditure totalled 879 million at 31 March 2004.
We plan to develop the 21CN using stringent capital return criteria and a rigorous approach to any investment in the narrowband network.
21CN aims to deliver long term structural cost reduction as we progressively migrate onto a simpler lower cost network architecture.
BT expects that future capital expenditure will be funded from net cash inows from operating activities and if required by external nancing.
Acquisitions
The total amount invested in the 2004 nancial year including further funding of existing ventures was 61 million.
The total amount invested in the 2003 nancial year including further funding of existing ventures was 77 million signicantly lower than the 1131 million invested in the 2002 nancial year.
In the 2002 nancial year the signicant acquisition made in April 2001 was of the 49.5% interest in Esat Digifone that we did not already own from Telenor for 869 million under an agreement made in early 2000.
Demerger and capital reduction The demerger of mmO the groups former mobile phone business was completed in November 2001.
The demerger scheme of arrangement and associated reduction in capital were approved by shareholders in October 2001 and the High Court in November 2001.
The demerger of mmO created two new listed companies and dealings in BT Group and mmO shares commenced on 19 November 2001.
BT shareholders on record on 16 November 2001 received one BT Group plc share and one mmO plc share for each existing British Telecommunications plc share held.
Based on the rst days dealings on the London Stock Exchange BT Group represented approximately 78% of the equity value of the former BT group and mmO represented approximately 22%.
On the demerger net assets of 19490 million attributable to mmO were distributed to shareholders in the form of a demerger distribution. continuing BT Group.
The reduction of capital had the effect of increasing distributable reserves in BT Group plc by 9537 million.
Balance sheet Net assets at 31 March 2004 amounted to 3094 million compared to 2642 million at 31 March 2003 with the increase due to the retained prots of 685 million offset by the 144 million buyback of shares and currency movements.
BT Group plc the parent company has reserves of 9585 million at 31 March 2004 and 9537 million at 31 March 2003.
BTs xed assets totalled 16068 million at 31 March 2004 of which 15487 million were tangible assets principally forming the UK xed network.
At
31 March 2003 xed assets were 16661 million and tangible assets were 15888 million.
Return on capital employed The return before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items on the average capital employed total assets excluding goodwill less current liabilities excluding corporate taxes and dividends payable and provisions other than those for deferred taxation was 15.3% for the 2004 nancial year.
In the 2003 nancial year the group made a return from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 15.7%.
In the 2002 nancial year the group made a return from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items of 15.7% on the average capital employed in its business excluding mmO and goodwill.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 43 Operating and financial review Pensions The most recently completed triennial actuarial valuation of the BT Pension Scheme BTPS BTs main pension fund performed by the BTPS independent actuary for the trustees of the scheme was carried out as at 31 December 2002.
This valuation showed the fund to be in decit to an amount of 2.1 billion.
Assets of the fund of 22.8 billion at that date covered 92% of the funds liabilities.
The previous valuation was carried out as at 31 December 1999.
The result of this valuation was that the fund was in decit by 1.0 billion.
Assets of the fund of 29.7 billion at that date covered 97% of the funds liabilities.
The deterioration in the funding position was principally the result of lower equity returns over the three years and improved life expectancy of BTPS members and was in spite of the additional deciency funding payments totalling 600 million that were paid over the previous three years.
The valuation under the prescribed Minimum Funding Requirement approach showed the assets to cover 101% of the liabilities at 31 December 2002.
The groups ordinary contribution rate increased to 12.2% of employees pensionable pay with effect from April 2003.
The contribution rate was 11.6% for the 2003 and 2002 nancial years.
In addition the company agreed to make annual deciency contributions to the BTPS of 232 million with effect from the 2004 nancial year.
In the 2004 nancial year total deciency contributions of 612 million were made including early payment of 380 million scheduled for payment in subsequent years.
This compares to the 200 million annual deciency payments made in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years.
The group is also required to pay special contributions to cover costs arising from enhanced pension benets provided to leavers.
The special contributions paid in the 2004 2003 and 2002 nancial years amounted to 130 million 129 million and 400 million respectively in respect of early leavers.
The payment expected to be made in the 2005 nancial year is 5 million in relation to leavers in the calendar year ended 31 December 2003.
The group continues to account for pension costs in accordance with UK Statement of Standard Accounting Practice No.
24 SSAP 24.
The groups total annual pension charges including discontinued activities for the 2004 2003 and 2002 nancial years were 404 million 322 million and 382 million respectively.
This includes 376 million 306 million and 373 million respectively in relation to the BTPS.
The increase in the pension charge in the 2004 nancial year reects the 154 million amortisation charge for the pension decit partly offset by a reduction in the number of active members and the interest credit related to the balance sheet prepayment.
The reduction in the pension charge in the 2003 nancial year reects the lower membership of the BTPS and the interest credit on the balance sheet prepayment.
The costs of providing incremental pension benets for leavers amounted to 1 million 60 million and 46 million in the 2004 2003 and 2002 nancial years respectively.
The pension charge for the 2004 nancial year is based upon the SSAP 24 valuation as at 31 March 2003.
This valuation is based on the December 2002 funding valuation rolled forward to 31 March 2003 and uses a slightly higher investment return assumption than was used for the trustees funding valuation a lower ination rate and lower salary increase assumptions.
The resulting SSAP 24 decit amounts to 1.4 billion.
The regular pension cost is charged at 11.3% of pensionable salaries compared to the 11.6% rate applied in the 2003 and 2002 nancial years.
The full FRS 17 disclosures are provided in the notes to the nancial statements.
At 31 March 2004 the FRS 17 decit was 3.6 billion net of tax being a reduction of 43% from 6.3 billion at 31 March 2003.
The number of retired members and other current beneciaries in the pension fund has been increasing in recent years and at 31 December 2003 was approximately 104% higher than the number of active members.
Consequently BTs future pension costs and contributions will depend on the investment returns of the pension fund and could uctuate in the medium term.
The BTPS was closed to new entrants on 31 March 2001 and we launched a new dened contribution pension scheme for people joining BT after that date which is to provide benets based on the employees and the employing companys contributions.
This change is in line with the practice increasingly adopted by major UK groups and is designed to be more exible for employees and enable the group to determine its pension costs more precisely than is the case for dened benet schemes.
The nancial impact of this change was not signicant in the nancial years under review and is not expected to be signicant in the next few years but it should reduce pension costs in the longer term.
Geographical information In the 2004 nancial year approximately 93% of the groups turnover was generated by operations in the UK compared with 94% in the 2003 and 89% in the 2002 nancial years.
Of its continuing activities approximately 92% of the groups turnover was generated by operations in the UK in the 2002 nancial year.
BTs operating prots have been derived from its UK operations with losses being incurred outside the UK in each of the last three nancial years.
Economic and Monetary Union The euro is established as the single currency spanning the 12 EU member countries participating in Economic and Monetary Union EMU.
Most of the groups business in Europe is conducted in the UK which is not one of the 12 participants.
Following the June 2003 announcement by the UK Government detailed planning and preparation for euro conversion has been put on hold until a Government decision to recommend UK entry.
After any such decision the issue will be put to a vote in BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 44 Operating and financial review Parliament and then to a referendum.
BT has completed outline planning participated in by representatives from across each of the BT lines of business and supporting group functions for adoption of the euro.
BT policy will ensure consistency of approach across the group and will be in line with Government plans for a phased transition.
Regulatory nancial information BT is required under the continuation notice issued by Oftel on 25 July 2003 which extends the applicability of certain conditions previously included in its main licence to publish disaggregated nancial information for various activities of the group which have been used as the basis of charges paid by other telecommunication operators in the UK for the use of BTs network.
The activities presented separately in the regulatory nancial statements do not necessarily correspond with any businesses separately managed funded or operated within the group.
The results set out in regulatory nancial statements for the 2003 and 2002 nancial years showed that the groups operating prot is derived predominantly from xed network calls.
Regulation competition and prices See pages 17 to 23 in the Business review section.
Competition and the UK economy See page 20 in the Business review section.
Environment
See pages 47 to 48 in the Our commitment to society section.
Critical accounting policies The groups principal accounting policies are set out on pages 75 to 77 of the Consolidated nancial statements and conform with UK Generally Accepted Accounting Principles UK GAAP.
In accordance with the requirements of Financial Reporting Standard
18 these policies and applicable estimation techniques have been reviewed by the directors who have conrmed them to be the most appropriate for the preparation of the 2004 nancial statements.
We in common with virtually all other companies need to use estimates in the preparation of our nancial statements.
The most sensitive estimates affecting our nancial statements are in the areas of assessing the level of interconnect income with and payments to other telecommunications operators providing for doubtful debts establishing xed asset lives for depreciation purposes assessing the stage of completion and likely outcome under long term contracts making appropriate longterm assumptions in calculating pension liabilities and costs making appropriate mediumterm assumptions on asset impairment reviews and calculating current tax liabilities on our prots.
We are required to interconnect our networks with other telecommunications operators.
In certain instances we rely on other operators to measure the trafc ows interconnecting with our networks.
We use estimates in these cases to determine the amount of income receivable from or payments we need to make to these other operators.
The prices at which these services are charged are often regulated and are subject to retrospective adjustment.
We use estimates in assessing the likely effect of these adjustments.
We provide services to over 20 million individuals and businesses mainly on credit terms.
We know that certain debts due to us will not be paid through the default of a small number of our customers.
We use estimates based on our historical experience in determining the level of debts that we believe will not be collected.
These estimates include such factors as the current state of the UK economy and particular industry issues.
The plant and equipment used in our networks is longlived with cables and switching equipment operating for over ten years and underground ducts being used for decades.
The annual depreciation charge is sensitive to the estimated service lives we allocate to each type of asset.
We regularly review these asset lives and change them when necessary to reect current thinking on their remaining lives in light of technological change prospective economic utilisation and physical condition of the assets concerned.
As part of the property rationalisation programme we have identied a number of properties that are surplus to requirements.
Although efforts are being made to sublet this space it is recognised by management that this may not be possible immediately in the current economic environment.
Estimates have been made of the cost of vacant possession and any shortfall arising from the sub lease rental income being lower than the lease costs being borne by BT.
We enter into long term customer contracts which can extend over a number of nancial years.
During the contractual period turnover cost and prots may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate protability of each contract.
If at any time these estimates indicate the contract will be unprotable the entire estimated loss for the contract is recognised immediately.
The company performs ongoing protability analyses of its contracts in order to determine whether the latest estimates require updating.
Key factors reviewed include future staff and third party costs and potential productivity efciencies.
We have a commitment mainly through the BT Pension Scheme to pay pension benets to approximately 362000 people over more than 60 years.
The cost of these benets and the present value of our pension liabilities depend on such factors as the life expectancy of the members the salary progression of our current employees the return that the pension fund assets will generate in the time before they are used to fund the pension payments and the discount rate at which the future pension payments are discounted.
We use estimates for all these factors in determining the pension costs and liabilities incorporated in our nancial statements.
In the 2002 nancial year we made charges for the impairment of the carrying value of goodwill BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 45 Operating and financial review investments and tangible xed assets in our balance sheet.
The amount of the charges are in most cases based on the discounted present value of the future cash ows that we expected to be derived from these assets.
We use estimates in determining these future cash ows and the discount rate.
The actual tax we pay on our prots is determined according to complex tax laws and regulations.
Where the effect of these laws and regulations is unclear we use estimates in determining the liability for the tax to be paid on our past prots which we recognise in our nancial statements.
International accounting standards The Council of the European Union EU announced in June 2002 that all European listed companies will be required to adopt EU endorsed International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs and International Accounting Standards IASs in the preparation of nancial statements from 2005 onwards.
This means the group will prepare its rst nancial statements in accordance with endorsed IFRSs and IASs for the year ending 31 March 2006.
The international standard setter the International Accounting Standards Board IASB has undertaken an extensive exercise to develop new standards and improve existing ones.
The work on those standards that are applicable is now substantially complete.
In addition the IASB may issue nonmandatory standards up to the date of transition.
Our project to manage the transition of nancial reporting from UK GAAP to international accounting is progressing well.
The group has completed initial high level assessments of the impact on our results and net assets and rolled out the initial phase of detailed quantications of comparative information.
The IFRSs which will be mandatory in the 2006 nancial year are now substantially complete and in addition certain IFRSs may be issued before the 2006 nancial year which we may decide to adopt early.
The effects of such early adoptions if any cannot be quantied at present.
However we believe that the major areas of impact on our net prot and shareholders funds will be due to the standards regarding nancial instruments pensions leases and share based payments.
Details of the required adjustments for the restated periods will be provided at the appropriate time.
US GAAP The groups net income loss and earnings loss per share for the three nancial years ended 31 March 2004 and shareholders equity at 31 March 2004 and 2003 under US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles US GAAP are shown further in the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles Section see Consolidated nancial statements.
Differences between UK GAAP and US GAAP include results of the differing accounting treatment of leasing transactions pension costs redundancy costs intangible assets goodwill deferred taxation capitalisation of interest nancial instruments contributing assets to joint ventures stock compensation and dividends.
Cash ow information under the US GAAP presentation is also shown further in this document.
In January 2003 the Financial Accounting Standards Board FASB issued Financial Interpretation
46 FIN 46 Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities and in December 2003 issued a revised interpretation FIN 46R.
The interpretation requires the primary beneciary to consolidate a variable interest entity if it has a variable interest that will absorb a majority of the entitys losses if they occur or receive a majority of the entitys expected returns or both.
BT had adopted FIN 46 in June 2003 and the further adoption of FIN 46R did not have a material effect on the results or statement of nancial position of the group.
In May 2003 the FASB issued SFAS No.
Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Characteristics of both Liabilities and Equity.
SFAS
No.
150 establishes standards for how to classify and measure certain nancial instruments with characteristics of both liabilities and equity.
It requires that an issuer classify a nancial instrument that is within its scope as a liability or an asset in some circumstances.
On adoption SFAS No.
150 did not have a material effect on the results or statement of nancial position of the group.
In November 2002 the Emerging Issues Task Force reached a consensus on EITF 0021 Revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables.
BT adopted this consensus for contracts entered into after 15 June 2003.
Adoption of the consensus did not have a material impact on the results of the group.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 46 Operating and financial review Corporate social responsibility CSR Our challenge is to manage social ethical and environmental issues in ways that grow shareholder value and help make sustainable development happen.
The Dow Jones Sustainability Indexes rank companies for their success in meeting this challenge.
During the 2004 nancial year BT was ranked as the top telecommunications company in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index for the third year running.
We also hold the Queens Award for Enterprise in recognition of our contribution to sustainable development.
This section of the report together with the broad statement on social environmental and ethical matters included in the section on Corporate governance provides information in response to the Association of British Insurers disclosure guidelines on social responsibility.
More detailed disclosures on BTs implementation of social ethical and environmental policies and procedures are available online in our independently veried social and environmental report which has been prepared in accordance with the 2002 Global Reporting Initiative GRI sustainability reporting guidelines.
CSR governance The Board is kept informed of BTs main CSR risks and opportunities and any new developments which may impact on its duties and reviews annually our CSR strategy.
In addition social ethical and environmental matters have been incorporated into the directors induction programme.
A Board committee  the Community Support Committee  oversees community charitable and arts expenditure and establishes the strategy for maximising our contribution to society.
The committee chaired by Sir Christopher Bland consists of representatives from BT businesses two non executive directors and two external independent members who have a reputation for excellence in this eld.
An executive committee the Corporate Social Responsibility Steering Group CSRSG oversees the implementation of our CSR programme.
This includes risk assessment target and objective setting ISO14001 certication  the international standard for environmental management systems  and public accountability.
The CSRSG consists of CSR champions nominated by the lines of business and six support functions human resources corporate governance health and safety nance communications and procurement.
The CSRSG is chaired by BTs overall CSR champion Alison Ritchie Chief Broadband Ofcer and a member of the Operating Committee.
It is supported by advice from an independent panel of CSR experts.
To ensure that CSR is embedded into BTs commercial operations we undertake CSR health checks of our main commercial initiatives.
These health checks identify specic social economic and environmental impacts both positive and negative and particular CSR risks and opportunities.
A report is then compiled including recommended actions.
We have important relationships with a wide range of stakeholders including employees customers and suppliers.
We engage with these stakeholders in a number of ways including consumer liaison panels an annual employee survey and a supplier relationship management programme.
We also employ a number of CSR experts who investigate longterm societal trends identify potential issues that might affect the business and support BTs commercial activities.
We have identied 11 nonnancial KPIs key performance indicators in this context to provide a quick overview of BTs social and environmental performance.
These KPIs have also been used to establish ten strategic social and environmental targets and are published in our social and environmental report.
Social environmental and ethical risks During the 2004 nancial year we developed a separate CSR risk register that sets out our important social ethical and environmental risks.
It identies the following risks as the most signicant in the context of and breach of the code of business ethics.
Each of these CSR risks has a risk owner and mitigation strategy in place more detail can be found in our social and environmental report.
CSR business opportunities Following a detailed statistical analysis of customer opinion data going back up to 80 months and based on tens of thousands of interviews we have been able to show that a 1% improvement in the publics perception of our CSR activities results in a 0.1% increase in our retail customer satisfaction gures.
This is a critical correlation and shows how important it is not only to protect our reputation through appropriate risk management activities but also to enhance it through our community activities.
Longterm sustainability trends are creating market opportunities for us such as the use of teleconferencing and exible working to reduce the need to travel and provide more exible lifestyles.
Increasingly BT has to address social and environmental matters when bidding for business.
In the 2004 nancial year bids to the value of almost 900 million required us to demonstrate expertise in managing these issues.
Environment
BT is one of the largest consumers of industrial and commercial electricity in the UK and the growth of broadband is likely to increase our electricity use.
However during the 2004 nancial year a 675000 investment in our energy conservation programme BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 47 Operating and financial review Our commitment to society enabled us to reduce our electricity consumption by 1.5%.
The use of renewable energy and combined heat and power  together with energy and transport efciency measures  has enabled us to reduce our globalwarming CO emissions by 42% since 1996.
We have set a target to cap our 2010 CO emissions at 25% below those of 1996.
CO emissions Financial yeartel Total UK only million tonnes 0.92 0.96 1.03 % below 1996 42% 40% 36% Tonnes per 1m turnover 50 51 56 During the 2004 nancial year we received an income of 4 million from our recycling activities offset against the 10 million we spent managing our waste contracts recycling our waste and sending waste to landll.
Waste
Financial yeartel Total waste tonnes 107303 117688 114999 Total waste recycled tonnes 27626 27809 24099 % Recycled 26% 24% 21% Also during the 2004 nancial year we reduced both our commercial eet  still one of the largest in the UK and our fuel consumption by 4%.
Transport
Financial yeartel Number of vehicles UK only 32663 33979 37509 Fuel consumption million litres 53.85 56.12 62.76 Digital inclusion Digital inclusion is a key public policy issue and we are working with the UK Government and the voluntary sector to nd effective ways to use communications technology to tackle social exclusion.
In particular we launched a digital inclusion campaign to support the Governments aim to give all citizens online access within the next few years and demonstrate how communications can help improve society.
A key element of the campaign is the Everybodyonline programme established in partnership with charity campaign group Citizens
The campaign is currently focused on eight deprived communities and aims to increase skills and access to communications technology in underprivileged areas and to deepen the understanding of the causes and effects of the digital divide and how they may be addressed nationally.
Disability services Our Age and Disability Action team promotes equal access to a wide range of products and services.
We work directly with older and disabled people and their representatives to raise awareness of BTs inclusive approach.
For people with hearing or speech impairments for example our textphone offers easy access to BT TextDirect  the service that enables users to dial direct to other text or voice users.
Customers with visual or mobility impairments benet from products with large clear keypads and cordless or handsfree options.
A variety of new products and network services with mixedability appeal will be launched during the 2005 nancial year.
We continue to offer services to protect the telephone lines of people who need support.
This includes free directory enquiries for those unable to use the printed directory and billing service and product information in a variety of formats such as Braille and large print.
We are committed to increasing the accessibility of our internet pages.
In the 2004 nancial year our Age and Disability Action website site agedisability was awarded the RNIB See it Right logo.
Community
We commit a minimum of 0.5% of our UK pretax prots to direct activities in support of society.
This has ranged from 10 million in 1987 peaking at 16 million in 2001 and was 5.6 million including 1.2 million to charities in the 2004 nancial year.
BT operations also provided a further 12.4 million in funding and support in kind over the past nancial year.
The focus of our community programmes is on big issues where better communication can make a real difference to society.
For example more than 9500 schools and over two million young people have taken part in the BT Education Programme  a dramabased campaign helping children to improve their communication skills.
This activity is supported by our volunteering programme which at 31 March 2004 had 3000 registered volunteers working with schools.
We are working with ChildLine on a major new campaign to raise funds to ensure that every one of the 4000 children who call ChildLine every day has hisher call answered.
In addition BT people gave 2 million directly to charities during the 2004 nancial year through Give as you Earn to which BT added a direct contribution of 1 million.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 48 Operating and financial review Board of directors Sir Christopher Bland Chairman def Sir Christopher Bland was appointed to the Board as Chairman on 1 May 2001.
He chairs the Nominating and Community Support committees.
He was chairman of the BBC Board of Governors from 1 April 1996 until 30 September 2001.
From
1972 to 1979 Sir Christopher was deputy chairman of the Independent Broadcasting Authority and chairman of its Complaints Review Board.
In 1982 he became a nonexecutive director of LWT Holdings and was chairman from 1983 to 1994 when LWT was acquired by Granada Group.
From December 1994 to May 2000 he was chairman of NFC.
From 1977 to 1985 he was chairman of Sir Joseph Causton and Sons.
Sir Christopher who was chairman of the Hammersmith and Queen Charlottes Hospitals Special Health Authority from 1982 to 1994 and of Hammersmith Hospitals NHS Trust from 1994 to February 1997 was knighted for his work in the NHS in 1993.
He was chairman of the Private Finance Panel from 1995 to 1996 and a member of the Prime Ministers Advisory Panel on the Citizens Charter.
He is senior adviser at Warburg Pincus and chairman of the Royal Shakespeare Company.
Aged 65.
Executive directors Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002 and became Chief Executive on 1 February 2002.
He chairs the Operating Committee.
Ben Verwaayen was formerly vice chairman of the management board of Lucent Technologies in the USA from October 1999.
He joined Lucent in September 1997 as executive vice president international and became chief operating ofcer the following month.
Prior to joining Lucent Ben Verwaayen worked for KPN in the Netherlands for nine years as president and managing director of its telecoms subsidiary PTT Telecom.
From 1975 to 1988 he worked for ITT in Europe.
A Dutch national he is aged 52.
Ian Livingston Group Finance Director af Ian Livingston was appointed Group Finance Director in April 2002.
He was formerly group nance director of Dixons Group from 1997.
He joined Dixons in 1991 after working for 3i Group and Bank of America
His experience at Dixons spanned a number of operational and nancial roles both in the UK and overseas.
He was also a director of Freeserve from its inception.
He is a Chartered
He is a nonexecutive director of Hilton
Aged 39.
Pierre Danon Chief Executive BT Retail Pierre Danon was appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
He joined BT as Chief Executive of BT Retail in October 2000 and was a member of the former Executive Committee.
From 1981 to 2000 he worked for Rank Xerox which became Xerox in 1997 latterly as president of Xerox Europe.
He was a senior vice president of Xerox Corporation since 1997.
He is a nonexecutive director of Emap.
A French national he is aged 48.
Andy Green Chief Executive BT Global Services Andy Green was appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
He was appointed as Chief Executive of BT Global Services in October 2001.
Since joining BT in 1986 he has held a number of positions including Chief Executive of BT Openworld and Group Director of Strategy and Development.
Andy Green was a member of the former Executive Committee from February 1995.
Aged 48.
Dr Paul Reynolds Chief Executive BT Wholesale Paul Reynolds was appointed to the Board on 19 November 2001.
In April 2000 he was appointed to the former Executive Committee as Chief Executive of BT Wholesale.
He joined BT from the companys predecessor corporation which he joined in 1983 and has held a number of roles including Director of the Ofce of the Chairman Director of Multimedia and from 1999 Managing Director of Networks and Information Services.
He will become a nonexecutive director of EAccess a Japanese corporation in June 2004.
Aged 47.
NonExecutive directors Clayton Brendish be Clayton Brendish was appointed to the Board on 1 September 2002.
He is nonexecutive chairman of Beacon Investment Fund and a nonexecutive director of Elexon and Herald Investment Trust.
He is also a trustee of Economist Newspapers and the Foundation for Liver Research and a council member of City University of London.
Prior to his retirement in May 2001 Clayton Brendish was executive deputy chairman of CMG having joined the board when it acquired Admiral.
Clayton Brendish was cofounder and executive chairman of Admiral incorporated in 1979.
He also acted as an advisor to the Government on the efciency of the Civil Service working as an advisor to the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and the Ofce of Public Services on their respective Next Steps Agencies.
Aged 57.
Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman bcd Sir Anthony Greener was appointed to the Board on 1 October 2000.
He was appointed Joint Deputy Chairman and chairman of the Audit Committee on 1 January 2001.
He is the senior independent director.
He became Deputy Chairman and chairman of the Remuneration Committee on 18 July 2001.
Sir Anthony is chairman of University for Industry learndirect and the Qualications and Curriculum Authority and a nonexecutive director of Robert Mondavi Corporation.
He was formerly chairman of
Prior to the merger of Guinness and Grand Metropolitan he was chairman and chief executive of Guinness having been chief executive of Guinness since 1992.
Aged 63.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 49 Board of directors and Operating Committee Louis R Hughes bc Louis Hughes joined the Board on 1 January 2000.
He is nonexecutive chairman of Maxager Technology Inc.
USA.
He was formerly president and chief operating ofcer of Lockheed Martin Corporation and previously executive vice president of General Motors.
Louis Hughes is a nonexecutive director of AB Electrolux Sweden and Sulzer AG and ABB Limited both Switzerland.
From 1993 to 2000 he was a member of the supervisory board of Deutsche
A US national he is aged 55.
The Rt Hon Baroness Jay of Paddington PC ce Baroness Margaret Jay was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
She was formerly Lord Privy Seal Leader of the House of Lords and Minister for Women.
Previously she was Minister of State at the Department of Health.
Baroness Jay is a nonexecutive director of Independent News and Media and has held non executive positions with Scottish Power Carlton Television and LBC.
Currently chairman of the Overseas Development Institute she has been a member of the Central Research and Development Committee for the NHS was a founding director of the National AIDS trust a governor of South Bank University and a member of the Meteorological Ofce
Aged 64.
John Nelson bdf John Nelson was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
A Chartered Accountant he retired as chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston Europe CSFB on 31 January 2002.
He was a member of the executive board and chairman of the European executive committee of CSFB.
Prior to joining CSFB in January 1999 John Nelson spent 13 years with Lazard Brothers.
He was appointed vice chairman of Lazard Brothers in 1990.
He was also a chairman of Lazard S. director of Lazard Freres New York.
He was a nonexecutive director of Woolwich until it was taken over by Barclays Bank in 2000.
He is deputy chairman of Kingsher and a nonexecutive director of Hammerson.
Aged 56.
Carl G Symon bc Carl Symon was appointed to the Board on 14 January 2002.
He retired from IBM in May 2001 after a 32year career during which he held senior executive positions in the USA Canada Latin America Asia and Europe including chairman and chief executive ofcer of IBM UK.
Carl Symon is chairman of a number of private companies and a nonexecutive director of RollsRoyce and Rexam.
A US national he is aged 58.
Maarten van den Bergh bcdf Maarten van den Bergh was appointed to the Board on 1 September 2000.
He chairs the Pension Scheme Performance Review Group.
TSB Group and a nonexecutive director of Royal Dutch Petroleum Company and British Airways.
Prior to his retirement in July 2000 Maarten van den Bergh was president of the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company and vice chairman of its committee of managing directors from July 1998 having been appointed a managing director of the Royal Dutch Shell Group of companies in July 1992.
A Dutch national he is aged 62.
Operating Committee Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ian Livingston Group Finance Director Pierre Danon Chief Executive BT Retail Andy Green Chief Executive BT Global Services Dr Paul Reynolds Chief Executive BT Wholesale See page 49 for biographical details.
Alison Ritchie ae Alison Ritchie joined BT from the companys predecessor corporation which she joined in 1981.
She was appointed a member of the former Executive Committee in December 2000.
Alison Ritchie was appointed Chief Broadband Ofcer in November 2002 and she directs BTs policy on broadband developments across the whole of BT ensuring a coordinated approach to the delivery of high quality broadband services to residential and business customers.
Alison Ritchie was formerly Chief Executive BT Openworld.
Before joining BT Openworld she was BTs Restructuring Project Director coordinating the project teams working on the nancial organisational and managerial restructuring of BT.
She is a member of the board of the British Quality Foundation and a nonexecutive director of Roffey Park Institute.
Aged 43.
Company Secretary Larry Stone Larry Stone formerly Corporate Governance Director from 1 June 2000 was appointed Company Secretary on 27 March 2002.
He previously held external relations and regulatory roles with BT in Tokyo and Brussels and with BT Cellnet now O
He is a trustee of the BT Pension Scheme a member of the executive committee of the British Quality Foundation and a director of ProShare.
Aged 46.
Key to membership of principal Board committees
Audit
Remuneration
Nominating
Community Support Pension Scheme Performance Review Group All the nonexecutive directors are considered independent of the management of the company.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 50 Board of directors and Operating Committee The directors submit their report and the audited nancial statements of the company BT Group plc and the group which includes its subsidiary undertakings for the 2004 nancial year.
Introduction
BT Group plc is the listed holding company for the BT group of companies and was formed when the mmO business comprising what had been British Telecommunications plcs mobile activities in the UK the Netherlands Germany and the Republic of Ireland was demerged on 19 November 2001.
The Operating and nancial review on pages 6 to 46 the discussion on Corporate governance on pages 52 to 57 the Report on directors remuneration on pages 58 to 71 and Risk Factors on pages 138 and 139 form part of this report.
The audited nancial statements are presented on pages 74 to 134.
Principal activity The groups principal activity is the supply of communications services and equipment.
In the 2004 nancial year approximately 93% of group turnover arose from operations in the UK.
Directors
The names and biographical details of the directors of the company are given on pages 49 and 50.
All served throughout the nancial year.
In accordance with the articles of association Sir Christopher Bland retires by rotation at the forthcoming annual general meeting and will be proposed for reelection.
Andy Green Ian Livingston and John Nelson also retire by rotation and will be proposed for reelection.
Details of these directors contracts of appointment are included in theReportondirectors remuneration on pages 58 to 71 and the discussion on Corporategovernance on pages 52 to 57.
Substantial shareholdings At 19 May 2004 the company had received notications from Legal and General Investment Management Limited Barclays PLC and Brandes Investment Partners LLC under Part VI of the Companies Act 1985 in respect of holdings of 289727496 shares 347436030 shares and 347201310 shares respectively representing holdings of 3.37% 4.04% and 4.04% of the companys issued ordinary share capital.
Interest of management in certain transactions During and at the end of the 2004 nancial year none of the companys directors was materially interested in any material transaction in relation to the groups business and none is materially interested in any presently proposed material transactions.
Policy on the payment of suppliers BTs policy is to use its purchasing power fairly and to pay promptly and as agreed.
BT has a variety of payment terms with its suppliers.
The terms for payments for purchases under major contracts are settled when agreeing the other terms negotiated with the individual suppliers.
It is BTs policy to make payments for other purchases within 30 working days of the invoice date provided that the relevant invoice is presented to the company in a timely fashion and is complete.
BTs payment terms are printed on the companys standard purchase order forms or where appropriate specied in individual contracts agreed with the supplier.
The ratio expressed in days between the amounts invoiced to the company by its suppliers in the 2004 nancial year and the amounts owed to its trade creditors at the end of the year was 35 calendar days.
Political donations The companys continuing policy is not to make political donations in the everyday sense of those words.
This is explained in the Corporate governance section on pages 52 to 57.
However during the 2004 nancial year British Telecommunications plc made the following payments to cover the cost of hosting brieng meetings about the companys activities with MPs and MEPs Labour Party 8882 Conservative Party 8366 Liberal Democrat Party 5942 Scottish National Party 2500.
Auditors
A resolution to reappoint PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as auditors of the company and authorise the directors to settle their remuneration will be proposed at the
Authority to purchase shares The authority given at last years AGM of the company held on 16 July 2003 for the company to purchase in the market 867 million of its shares representing 10% of the issued share capital expires on 15 October 2004.
Shareholders will be asked to give a similar authority at the AGM.
During the 2004 nancial year 81 million shares of 5 pence each were purchased under this authority 1% of the share capital for a total consideration of 144 million at an average price of 1.77 per share.
The shares were purchased in an onmarket programme of buying back the companys shares initiated in November 2003 as part of the companys shareholder distribution strategy.
36 million shares were cancelled and 44 million shares have been retained as treasury shares.
At 14 May 2004 0.2 million treasury shares had been transferred to meet the companys obligations under its employee share plans.
AGM resolutions The resolutions to be proposed at the AGM to be held on 14 July 2004 together with explanatory notes appear in the separate Notice of Annual General Meeting sent to all shareholders.
By order of the Board Larry Stone Secretary 19 May 2004 Registered ofce 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ Registered in England and Wales No.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 51 Report of the directors BTs policy is to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity in all our operations.
This includes a commitment to maintaining the highest standards of corporate governance and ethics throughout the group.
The company took part in the consultations leading up to the publication in July 2003 of the UKs new Combined Code on Corporate Governance.
BT is obliged this year to report on how it has applied the previous version of the Combined Code.
The directors consider that BT has throughout the year complied with the provisions of that version of the Code.
This section also reports on BTs position in respect of the provisions introduced by the new Combined Code.
The company will report fully on its compliance with the new Code next year.
The Board Composition and role The Board which operates as a single team is currently made up of the parttime Chairman the Chief Executive four other executive directors and seven nonexecutive directors.
All of the nonexecutive directors meet the criteria for independence set out in the new Combined Code and are therefore considered by the Board to be independent.
It is BTs policy that the Board will comprise a majority of independent non executive directors.
The directors biographies are set out on pages 49 and 50.
The Boards principal focus is the overall strategic direction development and control of the group.
In support of this the Board approves the groups values business practice policies strategic plans annual budget capital expenditure and investments budgets larger capital expenditure proposals and the groups overall system of internal controls governance and compliance authorities.
It also has oversight and control of the groups operating and nancial performance.
These responsibilities are set out in a formal statement of the Boards role which is available on the companys website.
The Board has agreed the groups corporate governance framework as part of which it has empowered the companys key management committee the Operating Committeeto make decisions on operational and other matters.
The roles and powers of these committees are set out later in this report under Principal Board committees.
Their powers and the authorities delegated to individual members of the Operating Committee are available to everyone in the group on the groups intranet site.
The Board meets every month except in August.
Additionally it meets on an ad hoc basis to consider matters which are time critical.
The Board met 11 times during the 2004 nancial year.
The roles of the Chairman and the Chief Executive are set out in written job descriptions.
In addition to chairing the Board the Chairman is responsible for consulting the nonexecutive directors particularly the Deputy Chairman on corporate governance issues matters considered by the Nominating Committee which the Chairman chairs and the individual performances of the nonexecutive directors.
With the Chief Executive and the Secretary he ensures the Board is kept properly informed is consulted on all issues reserved to it and that its decisions are made in a timely and considered way that enables the directors to full their duciary duties.
The Chairman ensures that the views of the shareholders are known to the Board and considered appropriately.
He represents the company in specied strategic and Government relationships as agreed with the Chief Executive and generally acts as the bridge between the Board and the Companys executive team particularly on the Groups broad strategic direction.
The Chief Executive has nal executive responsibility to the Board for the success of the group.
The Secretary manages the provision of timely accurate and considered information to the Board for its meetings and in consultation with the Chairman and Chief Executive at other appropriate times.
He recommends to the Chairman and the Chief Executive for Board consideration where appropriate the companys corporate governance policies and practices and is responsible for their communication and implementation.
BTs nonexecutive directors The desired combination of experience skills and other attributes that the nonexecutive directors as a whole are to bring to the Board is agreed and reviewed by the Nominating Committee.
This prole is used by the Committee to assess the suitability as nonexecutive directors of candidates put forward by the directors and outside consultants before the Committee meets shortlisted candidates and goes on to recommend to the Board a candidate for appointment.
The nonexecutive directors provide a strong independent element on the Board.
Between them they bring experience and independent judgement gained at the most senior levels of international business operations and strategy marketing technology communications and political and international affairs.
The Chairman and the non executive directors hold regular dinners at which they discuss matters without the executive directors being present.
At least annually these provide an occasion for the nonexecutive directors led by the Deputy Chairman Sir Anthony Greener to meet without the Chairman present to review the Chairmans performance.
Sir Anthony Greener the Deputy Chairman is the senior independent director.
He chairs the Audit and Remuneration committees.
In his capacity as the chairman of the Remuneration Committeehe meets with BTs major institutional shareholders.
The Deputy Chairman also continues to be available to discuss matters with institutional shareholders where it would be inappropriate for those discussions to take place with either the Chairman or the Chief Executive.
He will also attend at his discretion and in consultation with the Chairman and the Chief Executive other meetings with shareholders during the year.
The other nonexecutive directors may attend at their request meetings with the companys major shareholders and others.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 52 Corporate governance Nonexecutive directors are appointed initially for three years subject to three months termination notice from either BT or the director.
At the end of the rst three years the appointment may be continued by mutual agreement.
Each nonexecutive director is provided upon appointment with a letter setting out the terms of his or her appointment including membership of Board committees the fees to be paid the time commitment expected from the director and covering such matters as the condentiality of information and the companys share dealing code.
The appointment letter was reviewed by the Nominating Committee following the publication of the new Combined Code and new letters sent to all nonexecutive directors which align the companys letter as appropriate to the sample letter annexed to the new Code.
Election and reelection All directors are required by the companys articles of association to be elected by shareholders at the rst AGM after their appointment if appointed by the
A director must subsequently retire by rotation at an AGM at intervals of not more than three years.
The director may seek reelection.
Service agreements The Chairman and executive directors have service agreements which are approved by the Remuneration
Information about the periods of these contracts is in the Report on directors remuneration.
Independent advice The Board has a procedure for directors in furtherance of their duties to take independent professional advice if necessary at the companys expense.
In addition all directors have access to the advice and services of the Secretary the appointment and removal of whom is a matter for the whole Board.
He advises the Board on appropriate procedures for the management of its meetings and duties and the meetings of the companys principal committees as well as the implementation of corporate governance and compliance within the group.
Training and information On appointment the directors take part in an induction programme when they receive information about BT the role of the Board and the matters reserved for its decision the terms of reference and membership of the principal Board and management committees and the powers delegated to those committees the companys corporate governance practices and procedures including the powers reserved to the groups most senior executives and the latest nancial information about the group.
This is supplemented by visits to key BT locations and meetings with members of the Operating Committee and other key senior executives.
Throughout their period in ofce the directors are continually updated on BTs business the competitive and regulatory environments in which it operates technology and corporate social responsibility matters and other changes affecting BT and the communications industry as a whole by written briengs and meetings with senior BT executives.
Directors are also advised on appointment of their legal and other duties and obligations as a director of a listed company both in writing and in facetoface meetings with the
They are reminded of these duties each year and they are also updated on changes to the legal and governance requirements upon the company and themselves as directors.
During the 2004 nancial year for example they have been advised on the changes to UK corporate governance brought about by the new Combined Code continued to receive briengs on the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 which affects BT because its securities are registered with the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC and various corporate proposals from the European
They also received an updated brieng on UK US and international nancial reporting developments.
Guidelines are in place concerning the content presentation and delivery of papers for each Board meeting so that the directors have enough information to be properly briefed sufciently far ahead of each Board meeting and at other appropriate times.
Board evaluation During summer 2003 the Board carried out through a questionnaire and discussion with directors an evaluation of its performance and the quality of board processes.
The results of that exercise were considered by the Board in July 2003 and a number of actions agreed.
A further evaluation including on the performance of directors and the Boards committees will be carried out during 2004.
Directors and ofcers liability insurance and indemnity For some years the company has purchased insurance to cover its directors and ofcers against their costs in defending themselves in civil legal proceedings taken against them in that capacity and in respect of damages resulting from the unsuccessful defence of any proceedings.
To the extent permitted by UK law the company also indemnies its directors and ofcers.
Neither the insurance nor the indemnity provide cover where the director has acted fraudulently or dishonestly.
Principal Board committees To meet best corporate governance practice Audit Remuneration and Nominating Committees have long been an established part of BTs system of governance.
Each committee has written terms of reference which are available on the companys website.
The minutes of Audit and Nominating Committee meetings are sent at their request to directors who are not a member of a committee.
In the case of the Remuneration Committee minutes are circulated on request to other nonexecutive directors as well as to members of the committee.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 53 Corporate governance Audit Committee The Audit Committee is chaired by Sir Anthony Greener the Deputy Chairman and senior independent director.
The other members are Maarten van den Bergh Clay Brendish Lou Hughes John Nelson and Carl Symon.
They are all independent nonexecutive directors.
They were members of the committee throughout the 2004 nancial year.
The Board considers that the Committees members have broad commercial experience and extensive business leadership having held various roles in accountancy nancial management and supervision treasury and corporate nance and that there is a broad and suitable mix of business nancial and IT experience on the
The Board has reviewed membership of the Committee and is satised for the purposes of the new Combined Code that collectively the Committee has recent and relevant nancial experience.
The Committee recommends the appointment and reappointment of the companys external auditors and considers their resignation or dismissal recommending to the Board appropriate action to appoint new auditors.
It ensures that key partners are rotated at appropriate intervals.
It discusses with the auditors the scope of their audits before they commence reviews the results and considers the formal reports of the auditors and reports the results of those reviews to the
It reviews the auditors performance including the scope of the audit and recommends to the Board appropriate remuneration.
As a result of regulatory or similar requirements it may be necessary to employ the companys external auditors for certain nonaudit work.
In order to safeguard the independence and objectivity of the external auditors the Board has determined policies as to what nonaudit services can be provided by the companys external auditors and the approval processes related to them.
Under those policies work of a consultancy nature will not be offered to the external auditors unless there are clear efciencies and value added benets to the company.
The overall policies and the processes to implement them were reviewed and appropriately modied in the light of the provisions of the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 relating to nonaudit services that external auditors may not perform.
The Audit Committee monitors the extent of nonaudit work being performed by the companys auditors and approves such work before it is undertaken.
It also monitors the level of nonaudit fees paid to the external auditors.
The Audit Committee reviews the companys published nancial results the Annual Report and Form 20F and other published information for statutory and regulatory compliance.
It also reviews the disclosure made by the Chief Executive and Group Finance Director during the certication process for the annual report about the design or operation of internal controls or material weaknesses in the controls including any fraud involving management or other employees who have a signicant role in the companys nancial controls.
The Board as required by UK law takes responsibility for all disclosures in the annual report.
The Audit Committee monitors and reviews the standards of risk management and internal control the effectiveness of internal control nancial reporting accounting policies and procedures and the companys statements on internal controls before they are agreed by the Board for each years annual report.
It also reviews the companys internal audit function and its relationship with the external auditors including internal audits plans and performance.
It reviews the arrangements for dealing in condence with complaints from employees about accounting or nancial management impropriety fraud poor business practices and other matters.
At each of its meetings the Committee sets aside time to seek the views of the companys internal and external auditors in the absence of executives.
The Group Finance Director the Secretary the groups chief internal auditor and the companys external auditors attend the Committees meetings.
The Committee met four times during the 2004 nancial year.
At its meetings the Committee has reviewed the companys full year and quarterly results and its Annual Report and Form 20F and considered the adequacy of the nancial systems that have produced those results.
It has reported its views to the Board so it has been able to approve the results announcements and the annual report for publication.
It has also during the 2004 nancial year considered the groups risk register as submitted to it by the Management Council and reviewed the companys internal control accounting systems IT security and related matters.
It also approved the arrangements for employees to make condential complaints about accounting and other issues and adopted for the purposes of the SarbanesOxley Act a code of ethics for the Chief Executive Group Finance Director and Director Group Financial Control and Treasury which is consistent with BTs overall statement of business ethics.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee comprises solely independent nonexecutive directors and is chaired by Sir Anthony Greener.
It met four times during the 2004 nancial year.
Further details about the Committee are included in the Report on directors remuneration.
Nominating Committee The Nominating Committee consists of the Chairman the Deputy Chairman John Nelson and Maarten van den Bergh.
Its members have not changed during the 2004 nancial year.
It ensures an appropriate balance of experience and abilities on the Board using this evaluation to review the size and composition of the Board and to recommend any proposed changes to the
It keeps under review the need for appointments to the Board prepares a description of the specic experience and skills needed for an appointment considers candidates who are put forward by the directors and external consultants and recommends to the Board the appointments of all directors after having met shortlisted candidates.
It
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 54 Corporate governance also reviews the time required from the Deputy Chairman and other nonexecutive directors to carry out their duties and advises the Board on succession planning for the positions of the Chairman Deputy Chairman Chief Executive and all other Board appointments.
The Committee met once during the 2004 nancial year at which time it reviewed the current structure prole and balance of the Board reviewed and recommended to the Board the continued appointments as nonexecutive directors of Sir Anthony Greener and Maarten van den Bergh neither of whom took part in the review of his own position and agreed changes to the nonexecutive directors letter of appointment to align it to recommended best practice.
Meetings attendance The following table shows the attendance of directors at meetings of the Board and Audit Remuneration and Nominating committees during the 2004 nancial year.
Board
Audit
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nominating
Committee attendance is shown only for a committee member Number of meetings Director Sir Christopher Bland 11 1 Maarten van den Bergh 9431 Clay Brendish 11 3 Pierre Danon 11 Andy Green 11 Sir Anthony Greener Lou Hughes 11 4 4 Margaret Jay 11 3 Ian Livingston 11 John Nelson 11 4 1 Paul Reynolds 11 Carl Symon 11 4 4 Ben Verwaayen 11 Operating Committee and Management Council The Chief Executive Ben Verwaayen chairs the Operating Committee which meets weekly.
The other members are the Group Finance Director the Chief Executives of BT Retail BT Wholesale and BT Global Services and the Chief Broadband Ofcer.
The
Secretary attends all meetings.
The Committee has collective responsibility for running the groups business endtoend.
To do that it develops the groups strategy and budget for Board approval recommends to the Board the groups capital expenditure and investments budgets monitors the nancial operational and customer quality of service performance of the whole group allocates resources across the group within plans agreed by the Board plans and delivers major crossbusiness programmes and reviews the senior talent base and succession plans of the group.
Within the groups corporate governance framework approved by the Board the Operating Committee is empowered to approve up to limits after which Board approval is required capital expenditure disposals of xed assets the making of investments by the group and divestments.
It is authorised to delegate these approvals up to its own limits to senior executives.
A subcommittee of the Operating Committee the Management Council meets monthly.
It consists of the Operating Committee members plus a number of other senior executives.
It is an advisory forum supporting the Chief Executive and the Operating Committee in policy formulation in areas such as cultural change public policy reputation and business practices policies human resources pensions matters and employment policies.
Internal control and risk management The Board is responsible for the groups systems of internal control and risk management and for reviewing the effectiveness of those systems.
Such systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives any system can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Board also takes account of signicant social environmental and ethical matters that relate to BTs businesses and reviews annually BTs corporate social responsibility.
The companys workplace practices specic environmental social and ethical risks and opportunities and details of underlying governance processes are dealt with in the Our people and Our commitment to society sections of this report.
BT has processes for identifying evaluating and managing the signicant risks faced by the group.
These processes have been in place for the whole of the 2004 nancial year and have continued up to the date on which this document was approved.
The processes are in accordance with the guidance for directors published in the UK in September 1999.
Risk assessment and evaluation takes place as an integral part of the groups annual strategic planning cycle.
The group has a detailed risk management process culminating in a Board review which identies the key risks facing the group and each business unit.
This information is reviewed by senior management as part of the strategic review.
The groups current key risks are summarised in Risk factors of this document.
The key features of the risk management process comprise the following procedures and senior executives led by the Secretary review the groups key risks and have created a group risk register describing the risks owners and mitigation strategies.
This is reviewed by the Management Council before being reviewed and approved by the Board. addressed.
Finance Director on the operation of internal controls in their area of responsibility.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 55 Corporate governance group operations with their opinion on the effectiveness of the operation of internal controls during the nancial year. and control.
Internal Audit reports to the management and the Audit Committee on the status of specic areas identied for improvement.
They also promote effective risk management in the lines of business operations. nancial year.
This follows consideration of the matter by the Management Council.
The Audit Committee reviews reports from the internal auditors and from the external auditors and reports its conclusions to the Board.
The Audit Committee has carried out these actions for the 2004 nancial year.
Material joint ventures and associates which BT does not control outside the UK have not been dealt with as part of the group for the purposes of this internal control assessment.
The Board has approved the formal statement of matters which are reserved to it for consideration approval or oversight.
It has also approved the groups corporate governance framework which sets out the high level principles by which the group is managed and the responsibilities and powers of the Operating Committee Management Council and the groups senior executives.
As part of this framework the development and implementation of certain powers relating to groupwide policies and practices are reserved to identied senior executives.
Relations with shareholders Senior executives led by the Chief Executive and the Group Finance Director and including as appropriate the other executive directors hold meetings with the companys principal institutional shareholders to discuss the companys strategy nancial performance and specic major investment activities.
The Deputy Chairman also attends at his discretion and in consultation with the Chairman and the Chief Executive meetings with shareholders during the year.
As explained in the Report on directors remunerationwe also maintain contact when appropriate through the chairman of the Remuneration Committee and other senior executives to discuss overall remuneration policies and plans.
Contact with institutional shareholders and with nancial analysts brokers and the media is controlled by written guidelines to ensure the protection of share price sensitive information that has not already been made generally available to the companys shareholders.
The directors are provided with reports and other written briengs from the companys major shareholders and analysts either in full or through summaries from the companys brokers and are regularly informed by the Secretary about the holdings of its principal shareholders.
The Secretary also surveys the companys retail shareholders about the quality of the companys shareholder communications and share registration services.
We are continuing our policy that shareholders vote on the annual report at the AGM.
Shareholders will also again be asked to vote on the Report on directors remuneration.
It is part of our policy to involve shareholders fully in the affairs of the company and to give them the opportunity at the AGM to ask questions about the companys activities and prospects.
We also give the shareholders the opportunity to vote on every substantially different issue by proposing a separate resolution for each issue.
The Boards opinion is that the reelection and the fees of the auditors are inter related matters and should therefore be dealt with in one resolution.
The proxy votes for and against each resolution as well as abstentions will be counted before the AGM and the results will be made available at the meeting after the shareholders have voted on each resolution on a show of hands and at the end of the meeting.
It is our policy for all directors to attend the AGM if at all possible.
Whilst because of ill health or other pressing reasons this may not always be possible in normal circumstances this means that the chairman of the Audit Nominating and Remuneration committees is at the AGM and is available to answer relevant questions.
The Annual Review and if requested the Annual Report and Form 20F together with the Notice of the AGM are sent to shareholders in the most cost effective fashion given the large number of shareholders.
We aim to give as much notice as possible and at least 21 clear days as required by the companys articles of association.
In practice these documents are being sent to shareholders more than 20 working days before the AGM.
Established procedures ensure the timely release of share price sensitive information and the publication of the companys nancial results and regulatory nancial statements.
Statement of business practice To reinforce our commitment to achieve best practice in our standards of business integrity and ethics BT has a written statement of business practice The Way We Work.
The statement covers all our operations and reects the expectations in the area of corporate governance and business practice standards.
A copy of the statement has been sent to every employee and is also available on the companys intranet site.
These highlevel principles are supported by a continuing and comprehensive communications programme and online training.
A condential helpline and email facility are also available to employees who have questions about the application of these principles.
We also continue to require our agents and contractors to apply these principles when representing
Political donations It has always been BTs policy that no company in the group shall make cash contributions to any political BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 56 Corporate governance party.
This policy continues and appropriate arrangements are in place to implement it throughout the group.
However the Companies Act 1985 requires companies to obtain shareholder authority before they can make donations to EU political organisations which includes UK political parties.
The denition of political donations used in the Act is very much broader than the sense in which these words are ordinarily used.
As a result it covers activities which form part of normal relationships between BT individual politicians and the principal political parties.
These activities are not designed to provide support to or to inuence public support for any political party.
They would not be thought of as political donations in the everyday sense of these words.
They are entirely nonpolitical in nature and are designed so that BT can make MPs and others aware of key industry issues and matters affecting the company.
The authority we are requesting from shareholders at the AGM is not designed to change the companys stated policy of not making cash contributions.
It will however ensure that BT acts within the provisions of the current UK law when carrying out the above activities.
They are carried out on an evenhanded basis related broadly to the major UK political parties electoral strength and the company believes that they make an important contribution to the success of BT.
The level of political donations split as between the major UK political parties is shown in the Report of the directors.
Pension funds BTs two main pension funds  the BT Pension Scheme and the BT Retirement Plan  are not controlled by the Board but by separate trustees who are company and union nominees under independent chairmen.
The trustees look after the assets of the funds which are held separately from those of the company.
The pension funds assets can only be used in accordance with their respective rules and for no other purpose.
Financial
A statement by the directors of their responsibilities for preparing the nancial statements is included in the Statement of directors responsibility.
The directors report on page 72 that the company is a going concern.
US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 BT has securities registered with the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC.
As a result BT is obliged to comply with those provisions of the SarbanesOxley Act the Act applicable to foreign issuers.
BT will comply with the legal and regulatory requirements introduced pursuant to this legislation in so far as they are applicable to the group.
Given the narrow and prescriptive denition under the relevant SEC rules it is the opinion of the Board that the Audit Committee does not include a member who is an audit committee nancial expert.
However the Board considers that the Committees members have broad commercial experience and extensive business leadership having held various roles in accountancy nancial management and supervision treasury and corporate nance and that there is a broad and suitable mix of business nancial and IT experience on the Committee.
The Board and its committees will keep under active review the nancial expert matter during the 2005 nancial year as part of their nomination and succession planning activities.
The Chief Executive and Group Finance Director after evaluating the effectiveness of BTs disclosure controls and procedures as of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report and Form 20F have concluded that as of such date BTs disclosure controls and procedures were effective to ensure that material information relating to BT was made known to them by others within the group.
The Chief Executive and Group Finance Director have also provided the certications required by the Act.
There were no changes in BTs internal control over nancial reporting that occurred during the year ended 31 March 2004 that have materially affected or are reasonably likely to materially affect BTs internal control over nancial reporting.
The code of ethics for the Chief Executive Group Finance Director and Director Group Financial Control and Treasury adopted for the purposes of the Act is posted on the companys website at httpsiteThegroupCompanyprole
The New York Stock Exchange In November 2003 the SEC approved the new corporate governance listing standards of the New York Stock Exchange NYSE.
The company as a foreign issuer with American Depositary Shares listed on the NYSE is obliged to disclose any signicant ways in which its corporate governance practices differ from these standards.
The company has reviewed the NYSEs new listing standards and believes that its corporate governance practices are consistent with them with one exception where the company does not meet the strict requirements set out in the standards.
The standards state that companies must have a nominating corporate governance committee composed entirely of independent directors and with written terms of reference which in addition to identifying individuals qualied to become board members develops and recommends to the Board a set of corporate governance principles applicable to the company.
BT has a Nominating Committee.
Information about it is set out on pages 54 and 55.
It does not develop corporate governance principles for the Boards approval.
The
Board approves the groups overall system of governance internal controls governance and compliance authorities.
The Board and the Nominating Committee are made up of a majority of independent nonexecutive directors.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 57 Corporate governance The review is divided into the following sections 59 Remuneration policy Not audited i Packages ii Annual package  2005 nancial year iii Other Matters Executive share ownership
Other benets Service agreements Termination payments Outside appointments Nonexecutive directors letters of appointment Nonexecutive directors remuneration Directors service agreements and contracts of appointment Directors interests Performance graph 65 Remuneration review Audited Directors remuneration Former directors
Pensions
Share options Share awards under longterm incentive schemes Deferred Bonus Plan Share awards under allemployee share ownership plans Operating Committee The Remuneration Committee is made up wholly of independent nonexecutive directors.
Throughout the year the company has applied the principles in Section 1 of the 1998 version of the Combined Code on Corporate Governance the Code and complied with the Code.
The Committee also adopted the main principles set out in the Higgs Report reviewing the role and effectiveness of nonexecutive directors and this report explains how the company has complied with the principles and provisions of the new Combined Code on Corporate Governance which will begin to apply for the company in the 2005 nancial year.
Shareholders will be invited to approve this report at the companys 2004 AGM.
The Board is ultimately responsible for both the structure and amount of executive remuneration but it has delegated prime responsibility for executive remuneration to the Committee.
The terms of reference of the Committee are available on the companys website at site The Committees role is to set the remuneration policy and individual remuneration packages for the Chairman and the senior management team comprising the executive directors members of the Operating Committee OC and other senior executives reporting to the Chief
This includes approving changes to the companys longterm incentive plans recommending to the Board those plans which require shareholder approval and overseeing their operation.
In this role the Committee also monitors the structure of reward for executives reporting to the senior management team and determines the basis on which awards are granted under the companys executive share plans.
The Committee met four times during the 2004 nancial year.
Sir Anthony Greener has chaired the Committee since 18 July 2001.
Other members of the Committee who served during the nancial year were and Maarten van den Bergh and Louis Hughes and Margaret Jay and Carl Symon The Chairman and Chief Executive are invited to attend meetings.
They are not present when matters affecting their own remuneration arrangements are considered.
No director is involved in any decision relating to his or her remuneration.
Nonexecutive directors who are not members of the Committee are entitled to receive papers and minutes of the Committee.
The Committee has access to professional advisers both from within the company and externally.
Towers Perrin HR consultants Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ian Livingston Group Finance Director Alex Wilson Group HR Director and Larry Stone Company Secretary provided advice that materially assisted the Committee in relation to the 2004 nancial year.
The
Committee has agreed that Towers Perrin may advise both the Committee and BT and should be invited to attend meetings when major remuneration policy issues are being discussed.
Towers Perrin provides BT with a range of data and advisory services covering all aspects of executive pay bonus arrangements shares and benets.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 58 Report on directors remuneration Remuneration policy This part of the Report on directors remuneration is not subject to audit.
BTs executive remuneration policy is to reward employees competitively taking into account individual performance company performance market comparisons and the competitive pressures in the information and communications technology industry.
Base salaries are positioned around the midmarket with total direct compensation basic salary annual bonus and the value of any longterm incentives to be at the upper quartile only for sustained and excellent performance.
There are no plans to change this policy.
A signicant proportion of the total executive remuneration package is linked to line of business and corporate performance.
Remuneration arrangements and performance targets are kept under regular review to achieve this.
The Committee has decided to review during the 2005 nancial year the companys current arrangements for executive remuneration including the structure of the remuneration packages their constituent parts and their mix.
Where any signicant changes are proposed to executive remuneration these will be discussed with BTs principal shareholders and the main representative groups of the institutional shareholders.
The remuneration package is made up of some or all of the following Basic salary Salaries are reviewed annually.
Salary increases are made only where the Committee believes that adjustments are appropriate to reect contribution increased responsibilities andor market pressures.
Performancerelated remuneration Annual bonus and deferred bonus The annual bonus plan is designed to reward the achievement of results against set objectives.
For the 2004 nancial year ontarget and maximum requiring truly exceptional performance bonus levels for executive directors and OC members as a percentage of salary were 50% and 100% increased from 75% at the beginning of the 2003 nancial year to reward the achievement of increasingly stretching targets.
The ontarget and maximum bonus levels for the Chief Executive were 85% and 130% respectively under his service agreement.
Under his contract the Chairman is not entitled to a bonus.
Targets set at the beginning of the 2004 nancial year for each objective to which specic weights were attached were based on earnings per share and free cash ow each representing 40% of the potential bonus and customer satisfaction representing 20% of the potential bonus.
For the three line of business CEOs 75% of the potential bonus was linked to BTs corporate performance and 25% to the performance of their respective line of business.
For all other relevant executives bonuses are based solely on corporate performance.
The Committee retains the exibility to enhance or reduce bonus awards in exceptional circumstances.
Awards in the form of BT shares granted under the Deferred Bonus Plan DBP are directly linked to the value of annual bonuses and hence to performance.
The shares are held in trust and transferred to the executive if still employed by the company in three years time.
There are no additional performance measures for the vesting of DBP awards.
The DBP rewards performance and acts as a retention measure.
Awards for the senior management team are equivalent in value to 50% of gross annual bonus.
The awards under the DBP held by Ben Verwaayen Pierre Danon Andy Green Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds at the end of the 2004 nancial year are contained in the table on page 69.
The amounts are in note e on page 65.
Longterm incentives The BT Equity Incentive Portfolio the Portfolio is designed to ensure that equity participation is a signicant part of overall remuneration.
It comprises three elements share options incentive shares and retention shares.
Share options were the main element of equity participation in the 2004 nancial year.
Retention shares are used as a recruitment and retention tool.
Under his service agreement the Chairman is not entitled to participate in the annual operation of the
Generally awards vest and options become exercisable only if a predetermined performance target has been achieved.
Normally the performance measure for outstanding awards and options is TSR total shareholder return compared with the FTSE 100 companies.
TSR links the reward given to directors with the performance of BT against the shares of other major UK companies.
For 1999 2000 2001 and 2003 awards the base price at the beginning of the performance period has been calculated by averaging the BT share price over the six months to 31 March in the year of award.
For the 2002 awards the period was from 19 November 2001 the date of the mmO demerger to 31 March 2002.
The end price is the average of the share price over the six months to the end of the performance period.
The end price is adjusted for all capital actions and dividend payments that occur during the performance periods.
Share options The price at which shares may be acquired under the Global Share Option Plan GSOP is the market price at the date of grant.
Other than for new recruits the size of option grant is based on corporate and individual performance and market relativity.
Options granted will be exercisable in three years subject to the performance target being met.
The
Committee would not normally expect the initial value of annual grants of options based on the market price of a BT share to exceed three times salary.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 59 Report on directors remuneration For options granted subject to a TSR measure BTs TSR at the end of the threeyear period must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to be exercisable.
At median 30% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
If the performance measure is not met at the rst measurement it may be retested against a xed base in years four and ve for options granted in 2002.
If TSR has not reached the median at the end of the fth year previously unexercisable options will lapse.
This was reduced to one retesting in year ve for options granted in 2003.
The oneoff grant of options in 2002 to the seven senior executives most responsible for delivering BTs strategic plan is subject to an earnings per share test.
The Committee believes that earnings per share was the most appropriate measure for this grant as BT embarked on a radical business transformation that will require exceptional performance in exceeding business goals.
For these options to become exercisable there must be a 35% compound annual growth in BTs earnings per share over three years equivalent to 22 pence per share at the end of the 2005 nancial year.
There will be no opportunity to retest.
Earnings per share is calculated as basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items.
The option granted to Sir Christopher Bland on 22 June 2001 as part of his recruitment package is not subject to a performance measure as it matched a personal investment in BT shares of 1 million.
The details of the options held by Sir Christopher Bland Ben Verwaayen Pierre Danon Andy Green Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds at the end of the 2004 nancial year are contained in the table on page 67.
Incentive shares There were no awards under the Incentive Share Plan ISP in the 2004 nancial year.
A number of awards made in previous years were however still outstanding at the beginning of the 2004 nancial year and are contained in the table on page 68.
Participants are entitled to shares at the end of a threeyear performance period if the company has met the relevant predetermined performance target and participants are still employed by the group.
At the end of the threeyear period BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all the shares to vest.
At median 25% of the shares under award vest.
Below that point none of the shares vest.
None of the awards of incentive shares granted in 2001 vested as BTs TSR was at 83rd position on 31 March 2004 the end of the performance period.
Retention shares Retention shares are granted under the Retention Share Plan RSP to individuals with critical skills as a recruitment or retention tool.
As a result shares currently under award are not linked to a corporate performance target.
The length of the retention period before awards vest is exible.
The shares are transferred at the end of the specied period if the individual is still employed by BT.
Retention shares are used only in exceptional circumstances and in the 2004 nancial year ve awards were made for recruitment purposes and a further two were made for retention purposes one of which was to Sir Christopher Bland under his new contract securing his services for the company until 2007.
The awards under the RSP held by Sir Christopher Bland Ben Verwaayen and Ian Livingston at the end of the 2004 nancial year are contained in the table on page 68.
Executive Share Plan ESP The last awards under the ESP were granted in 1999.
Participants are generally only entitled to the shares at the end of a veyear performance period if the company has met the relevant predetermined performance target and participants are still employed by the group.
At the end of the veyear period if BTs TSR reaches 30th position all the shares vest.
If BT is at 70th position starting from the top of the list none of the shares vest.
Between those points the shares vest on a straight line pro rata basis.
None of the awards of shares granted under the ESP in 1999 vested as BTs TSR was at 90th position on 31 March 2004 the end of the performance period.
Other share plans The executive directors and the Chairman may participate in BTs Inland Revenue approved all employee share plans the Employee Sharesave Scheme and Employee Share Investment Plan which replaced the Employee Share Ownership Scheme on the same basis as other employees.
There are further details of these plans in note 34 to the accounts.
The Remuneration Committee has decided that there should be no increase in base pay for executive directors in the 2005 nancial year which reects the restraint being exercised across the company.
Salaries have now been held at for three years.
There is no change either to ontarget and maximum bonus levels see page 59.
The annual bonus plan will continue to focus on annual objectives and to reward the achievement of results against those objectives.
Performance will again be against earnings per share free cash ow and customer satisfaction measures.
Performance targets for the 2005 nancial year are more challenging than the outturn of the 2004 nancial year as BT continues its transformation.
For the achievement of target performance related remuneration is approximately 63% of total remuneration excluding pension for the Chief Executive and 55% for the other executive directors.
Total remuneration comprises base salary annual bonus and awards under the DBP and the expected value of share options and awards under BTs longterm incentive plans.
The Committee has decided that a combination of performancelinked share options and incentive shares will be granted in the 2005 nancial year.
For the last two years only share options have been granted.
The
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 60 Report on directors remuneration combination of share options and share awards creates in the Committees view a better balance of remuneration in the light of BTs business strategy including the development of new wave business and the achievement of operating efciencies.
In the 2005 nancial year the maximum grant of options will reduce from three times base salary to 1.5 times base salary and the maximum share award will be equivalent to twothirds of salary.
The overall value of longterm incentive awards will not change as a result of these proposals which were determined by the Committee with advice from Towers Perrin.
The performance measure will be relative TSR for both elements but the FTSE 100 is being replaced by the FTSE E300 Telecommunication Services index as the comparator group.
Performance against an appropriate industry sector is considered a more appropriate test of executive capability in driving absolute performance.
At 1 April 2004 the index contained the following companies excluding BT Cable and Wireless Cosmote Mobile
Deutsche Telekom France Telecom
Telecommunications mmO Portugal Telecom
Swisscom
TDC
Tele2
Telecom Italia Telecom Italia Mobile
Telekom Austria
TeliaSonera
Vodafone Group For awards made last year subject to TSR there was provision for retesting in year ve against a xed base.
The Committee has decided that there will be no retesting in respect of the share awards or options to be granted in the 2005 nancial year.
Executive share ownership A shareholding programme encourages executive directors and OC members to build up a shareholding in the company by retaining shares received as a result of participating in a BT employee share plan other than the shares sold to pay a National Insurance or income tax liability.
The programme which is not mandatory is designed to encourage executive directors and members of the OC to build up a shareholding with a value of 100% of their annual salary.
Given that a large part of an executives remuneration is already variable the proposal specically excludes the need to make a personal investment should awards not vest.
Pensions
Those executive directors and most other senior executives who joined the company prior to 1 April 2001 have their pension benets based on service and salary known as dened benet arrangements.
Those with longer BT service are entitled to pensions at normal retirement age of twothirds of nal salary including any cash lump sum entitlement.
Those with shorter BT service are entitled to a pension of one thirtieth of salary for each year of service.
In both cases a spouses pension of twothirds of the executives pension is provided in the event of death after retirement.
Should the executive die in service a lump sum equal to four times annual salary is payable together with a spouses pension of twothirds of the executives anticipated pension at normal retirement age.
BT closed its dened benet arrangements to new employees with effect from 1 April 2001.
From this date retirement provision is made on a dened contribution basis.
The company agrees to pay a xed percentage of the executives salary each year towards the provision of retirement benets typically this is 2030% of salary.
Additionally a lump sum equal to four times annual salary is payable on death in service.
Pension provision for all executives is based on salary alone  bonuses other elements of pay and longterm incentives are excluded.
Other benets Other benets for the Chairman and the senior management team include some or all of the following company car fuel and driver personal telecommunications facilities and home security medical and dental cover for the director and immediate family professional subscriptions and personal tax and nancial counselling.
The company has a permanent health insurance policy to provide cover for the Chairman and executive directors and members of the OC who may become permanently incapacitated.
Service agreements It is the policy for the Chairman and executive directors to have service agreements providing for one years notice.
It may be necessary on recruitment to offer longer initial periods to new directors from outside BT or circumstances may make it appropriate to offer a longer xed term.
All the service agreements contain provisions dealing with the removal of a director through poor performance including in the event of early termination of the contract by BT.
Termination payments Sir Christopher Blands contract expires at the conclusion of the AGM in 2007.
On termination of his contract by BT before that date he is entitled to payment of salary and the value of benets for the period of 12 months from date of termination or until the conclusion of the companys AGM in 2007 if that period is shorter.
Ben Verwaayens contract entitles him on termination of his contract by BT to payment of 700000.
The contracts of Pierre Danon Andy Green Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds entitle them on termination of their contract by BT to payment of salary and the value of benets until the earlier of 12 months from notice of termination or the director obtaining fulltime employment.
If the contract of a director but not the Chairman is terminated by BT within one year of BT entering into a scheme of arrangement or becoming a subsidiary of another company he will be entitled to receive the higher of that current years ontarget bonus or the previous years bonus the market value of shares BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 61 Report on directors remuneration awarded under an employee share ownership plan or deferred bonus plan that have not vested together with a years salary and the value of any benets.
The Committee has reviewed contracts taking into account the joint statement of best practice on executive contracts and severance published in December 2002 by the Association of British Insurers and the National Association of Pension Funds and other relevant guidelines and believes contract terms are generally in line with best practice.
The clause dealing with termination following BT entering into a scheme of arrangement or becoming a subsidiary of another company will be reviewed for future appointments and in any contract renegotiations.
Outside appointments The Committee believes that there are signicant benets to both the company and the individual from executive directors accepting nonexecutive directorships of companies outside BT.
The Committee will consider up to two external appointments of which only one may be to the Board of a major company for which a director may retain the fees.
Pierre Danon receives fees of 35000 per year as a nonexecutive director of Emap plc and Ian Livingston fees of 35000 per year as a nonexecutive director of Hilton Group plc.
Pierre Danon has resigned from the Board of Hays plc where he received fees of 45000 per year.
Nonexecutive directors letters of appointment Nonexecutive directors have letters of appointment.
They are appointed for an initial period of three years.
During that period either party can give the other at least three months notice.
At the end of the period the appointment may be continued by mutual agreement.
Further details of appointment arrangements for nonexecutive directors are set out on page 53 in the section dealing with corporate governance issues.
The letters of appointment of nonexecutive directors are terminable on notice by the company without compensation.
Nonexecutive directors remuneration Seven of the directors on the Board are nonexecutive directors who in accordance with BTs articles of association cannot individually vote on their own remuneration.
Nonexecutive remuneration is reviewed by the Chairman and the Chief Executive and discussed and agreed by the Board.
Nonexecutive directors may attend the Board discussion but may not participate in it.
The fees paid to nonexecutive directors were increased with effect from 1 January 2004 to reect their increasing responsibilities and time commitments.
Nonexecutive directors fees were last changed ve years ago on 1 January 1999.
The basic fee for nonexecutive directors is 40000 per year.
An additional fee for membership of Board committees is 5000 per year other than for the Pensions Performance Review Group for which no fee is paid.
Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman and senior nonexecutive director who also chairs both the Remuneration Committee and the Audit Committee receives total fees of 115000 per year.
To align further the interests of the nonexecutive directors with those of shareholders the companys policy is to encourage these directors to purchase on a voluntary basis 5000 of BT shares each year.
The directors are asked to hold these shares until they retire from the Board.
This policy is not mandatory.
No element of nonexecutive remuneration is performancerelated.
Nonexecutive directors do not participate in BTs bonus or employee share plans and are not members of any of the company pension schemes.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 62 Report on directors remuneration Directors service agreements and contracts of appointment The dates on which directors initial service agreementsletters of appointment commenced and the current expiry dates are as follows Chairman and executive directors Commencement date Expiry date of current service agreement or letter of appointment Sir Christopher Bland 1 May 2001 Sir Christopher Bland entered into a new service agreement on 29 August 2003 which terminates at the conclusion of the 2007 AGM terminable on 12 months notice by either the company or the director before that date.
B Verwaayen 14 January 2002 The agreement was terminable during the rst year by the company giving two years notice and thereafter by notice of not less than one year terminable by the director on six months notice ending after the rst two years.
P Danon The contract is terminable by the company on 12 months notice and by the director on six months notice.
A Green 19 November 2001 Dr P Reynolds I Livingston 8 April 2002 The initial period was for two years.
The contract is terminable on 12 months notice by the company and six months notice by the director ending at any time after the initial period.
Nonexecutive directors Sir Anthony Greener 1 October 2000 Letters of appointment were for an initial period of three years.
Appointments were extended for a further three years and are terminable by the company or the director on three months notice.
The appointments are renewable by mutual agreement.
M van den Bergh 1 September 2000 LR Hughes 1 January 2000 C Brendish 1 September 2002 Letters of appointment are for an initial period of three years and are terminable by the company or the director on three months notice.
The appointments are renewable by mutual agreement.
Baroness Jay 14 January 2002 J Nelson 14 January 2002 CG Symon 14 January 2002 There are no other service agreements or material contracts existing or proposed between the company and the directors.
There are no arrangements or understandings between any director or executive ofcer and any other person pursuant to which any director or executive ofcer was selected to serve.
There are no family relationships between the directors.
Directors interests The interests of directors and their families in the companys shares at 31 March 2004 and 1 April 2003 or date of appointment if later are shown below
Benecial holdings 2004 2003 Sir Christopher Bland B Verwaayen 387876 387876 P Danon A Green I Livingston Dr P Reynolds ab Sir Anthony Greener 34607 11167 M van den Bergh 4800 4800 C Brendish 23920 10920 LR Hughes 6800 6800 Baroness Jay 5572 5572 J Nelson 50000 50000 CG Symon 10069 10069 Total 1640025 1461704 During the period from 1 April 2004 to 17 May 2004 Paul Reynolds purchased 144 shares under the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan.
Includes free shares awarded under the Employee Share Investment Plan and Employee Share Ownership Scheme  details are set out on page 70.
At 31 March 2004 Sir Christopher Bland and each of the executive directors as potential beneciaries had a nonbenecial interest in 30463435 shares 2003  31719402 held in trust by Ilford Trustees Jersey Limited for allocation to employees under the employee share schemes.
They each also had a nonbenecial interest in 141864 shares 2003  19822 held in trust by Halifax Corporate Trustees Limited for participants in the Employee Share Investment Plan.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 63 Report on directors remuneration Performance graph This graph illustrates as required by the Directors Remuneration Report Regulations 2002 the performance of BT Group plc measured by TSR adjusted for the rights issue and the demerger of BTs mobile business in the 2002 nancial year relative to a broad equity market index over the past ve years.
The FTSE 100 is considered to be the most appropriate index against which to measure performance for these purposes as BT has been a constituent of the FTSE 100 throughout the veyear period and the index is widely used.
TSR is the measure of the returns that a company has provided for its shareholders reecting share price movements and assuming reinvestment of dividends.
0304 0203 0102 0001 9900 BTs total shareholder return TSR performance over five financial years to 31 March 2004 1 April 1999  100.
Source Datastream
FTSE 100 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 64 Report on directors remuneration Remuneration Review  this part of the Report on directors remuneration is subject to audit Directors remuneration Directors remuneration for the 2004 nancial year was as follows
Pension allowance net of pension contributions Total salary and fees
Expenses allowance
Total
Total
Sir Christopher Bland 500  500   32 532 512 B Verwaayen ce 70tel250 49 1968 2174 P Danon be 450  A Green I Livingston bef 45tel19 4 913 1116 Dr P Reynolds be 400  Sir Anthony Greener 96  96 96 90 M van den Bergh 44  44 44 40 C Brendish LR Hughes 40  40 40 37 Baroness Jay 39  39 39 35 J Nelson 39  39 39 35 CG Symon 40  40 40 37 3262 225 3487 2074 307 160 6028 6418 Balance or part of the pension allowance for the 2004 nancial year  see Pensions on pages 65 to 66.
Pierre Danon Ian Livingston and Paul Reynolds each received a monthly cash allowance in lieu of a company car totalling 18500 per annum.
Ben Verwaayen is entitled to a housing allowance of 250000 per annum until 13 January 2005.
In the 2004 nancial year 250000 was paid in respect of that year 2003  250000.
These amounts are included in the table above under Expenses allowance.
Includes some or all of the following company car fuel and driver personal telecommunications facilities and home security medical and dental cover for the director and immediate family professional subscriptions and personal tax and nancial counselling.
Deferred bonuses payable in shares in three years time were awarded to Ben Verwaayen 429500 2003  849000 Pierre Danon 129500 2003 169000 Andy Green 168000 2003  153000 Ian Livingston 162500 2003  169000 and Paul Reynolds 147500 2003  144000.
When added to the amounts paid or payable for the 2004 nancial year in the table above the total remuneration of Ben Verwaayen was 2397500 2003  3023000 Pierre Danon 879500 2003  998000 Andy Green 959000 2003  914000 Ian Livingston 1075500 2003 1285000 and Paul Reynolds 884500 2003  876000.
Ian Livingston joined the Board on 8 April 2002.
Clayton Brendish joined the Board on 1 September 2002.
Retirement benets are accruing to three directors 2003  three under dened contribution arrangements and to three directors 2003  three under a dened benet scheme.
The salaries of the Chairman and executive directors remained unchanged during the 2003 and 2004 nancial years and following this years salary review the Committee decided there should be no increase from 1 June 2004 in basic salaries.
Sir Christopher Bland was appointed as parttime Chairman on 1 May 2001.
His annual salary on appointment was 500000.
Ben Verwaayen joined the company on 14 January 2002 on an annual salary of 700000.
He became Chief Executive on 1 February 2002.
Pierre Danon Andy Green and Paul Reynolds joined the Board on 19 November 2001 on salaries of 450000 425000 and 400000 respectively.
Ian Livingston joined the Board on 8 April 2002 on a salary of 450000.
Annual bonus awards to executive directors ranged from 58% to 123% of salary in the 2004 nancial year 2003 72% to 121%.
These payments are not pensionable.
Former directors Yve Newbold remains a member of the Community Support Committee for which she received fees of 5000 in the 2004 nancial year.
She also received fees of 4000 as a member of BTs Social Policy Leadership Panel.
Dr Iain Anderson received fees of 12000 in the 2004 nancial year as chairman of the BT Scotland Board.
He will retire in June 2004.
Sir Peter Boneld received under preexisting arrangements a pension of 331000 payable by the company in the 2004 nancial year 2003  322000.
Loans
Prior to the date of their appointment to the Board on 19 November 2001 Pierre Danon and Paul Reynolds each had interestfree loans from the company to assist with relocation of 375000 and 300000 respectively.
At 31 March 2004 Pierre Danon owed 243750 2003  281250 and Paul Reynolds owed 260000 2003  290000.
During the 2004 nancial year the maximum amount outstanding was 571250.
There are no outstanding loans granted by any member of the BT group to any other of the directors or guarantees provided by any member of the BT group for their benet.
Pensions
Sir Christopher Bland is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company matches his contributions up to 10% of the earnings cap to a personal pension plan.
Company contributions of 9900 were payable in respect of the 2004 nancial year.
The earnings cap is a restriction on the amount BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 65 Report on directors remuneration of pay which can be used to calculate contributions and benets due to a tax approved pension scheme.
Ben Verwaayen is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company has agreed to pay an annual amount equal to 20% of his salary towards pension provision.
The company paid 29700 into his personal pension plan plus a cash payment of 110300 representing the balance of the pension allowance for the 2004 nancial year.
BT also provides him with a lump sum death in service benet of four times his salary.
Ian Livingston is not a member of any of the company pension schemes but the company has agreed to pay an annual amount equal to 30% of his salary towards pension provision.
The company paid 19800 into his personal pension plan plus a cash payment of 115200 representing the balance of the pension allowance for the 2004 nancial year.
BT also provides him with a lump sum death in service benet of four times his salary.
Pierre Danons pension accrues at the rate of onethirtieth of his nal salary for each year of service.
In addition a twothirds widows pension would be payable on his death.
He is a member of the BT Pension Scheme but as he is subject to the earnings cap the company has agreed to increase his benets to the target level by means of a nonapproved unfunded arrangement.
Andy Green is a member of the BT Pension
From 31 December 1997 the company has been purchasing an additional 203 days of pensionable service each year to bring his pensionable service at age 60 up to 40 years.
A twothirds widows pension would be payable on his death.
Paul Reynolds is a member of the BT Pension
From 1 July 1996 the company has been purchasing an additional 109 days of pensionable service each year to bring his pensionable service at age 60 up to 40 years.
A twothirds widows pension would be payable on his death.
The table below shows the increase in the accrued benets including those referred to above to which each director has become entitled during the year and the transfer value of the increase in accrued benet Accrued pension Transfer value of accrued benets Change in transfer value cd less directors contributions
Transfer value of increase in accrued benets less directors contributions P Danon 52 3tel14 125 A Green 117 109 1553 1P Reynolds 116 110 1405 1ad As required by the Companies Act 1985 Schedule 7A.
These amounts represent the deferred pension to which the directors would have been entitled had they left the company on 31 March 2003 and 2004 respectively.
Transfer value of the deferred pension in column a as at 31 March 2004 calculated on the basis of actuarial advice in accordance with Actuarial Guidance Note GN11 and excludes directors contributions.
The transfer value represents a liability of the company rather than any remuneration due to the individual and cannot be meaningfully aggregated with annual remuneration as it is not money the individual is entitled to receive.
The equivalent transfer value but calculated as at 31 March 2003 on the assumption that the director left service at that date.
The increase in pension built up during the year net of ination.
The transfer value of the pension in column e less directors contributions.
Directors contributions in the 2004 nancial year were as follows Pierre Danon 14850 2003  14580 Andy Green 25500 2003  25500 and Paul Reynolds 24000 2003  24000.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 66 Report on directors remuneration Share options held at 31 March 2004 Number of shares under option Option exercise price per share Usual date from which exercisable Usual expiry date 1 April 2003 Granted Lapsed 31 March 2004 Sir Christopher Bland 314244 314244 318p 010504 010511 B Verwaayen 1121121 1121121 250p 110205 110212 935830 187p 290705 290712 561500 187p 290705 290712 1052632 199.5p 240606 240613 2618451 1052632 3671083 P Danon 601610 601610 187p 290705 290712 360970 187p 290705 290712 676692 199.5p 240606 240613 962580 676692 1639272 A Green 2905 2905 255p 140805 130206 568190 187p 290705 290712 340910 187p 290705 290712 639098 199.5p 240606 240613 912005 639098 1551103 I Livingston 7290 7290 227p 140807 130208 601610 187p 290705 290712 360970 187p 290705 290712 676692 199.5p 240606 240613 969870 676692  1646562 Dr P Reynolds 4555 4555 218p 140207 130807 534760 187p 290705 290712 320860 187p 290705 290712 601504 199.5p 240606 240613 860175 601504  1461679 Total 6637325 3646618  10283943 All of the above options were granted for nil consideration.
No options were exercised during the year.
Options granted under the GSOP on 22 June 2001.
The option is not subject to a performance measure.
It was a term of Sir Christopher Blands initial service contract that i he purchased BT shares to the value of at least 1 million and ii as soon as practicable after the purchase of the shares invested shares the company would grant a share option over shares to the value of at least 1 million.
Sir Christopher Bland was the legal and benecial owner of the invested shares on 1 May 2004 so the option became exercisable on that date.
Options granted under the GSOP on 11 February 2002.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100.
BTs TSR must be in the upper quartile for all of the options to become exercisable.
At median 40% of the options will be exercisable.
Below that point none of the options may be exercised.
Options granted under the GSOP on 29 July 2002.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100.
Details are set out on page 60.
Options granted under the GSOP on 29 July 2002.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is earnings per share.
Details are set out on page 60.
Options granted under the GSOP on 24 June 2003.
The exercise of options is subject to a performance measure being met.
The performance measure is relative TSR compared with the FTSE 100.
Details are set out on page 60.
Options granted on 24 June 2002 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Options granted on 21 December 2001 under the Employee Sharesave Scheme in which all employees of the company are eligible to participate.
Details of the GSOP and performance conditions are set out on pages 59 and 60.
The market price of the shares at 31 March 2004 was 177p 2003  157p and the range during the 2004 nancial year was 162p  206.75p.
There were no unrealised gains on the above share options at 31 March 2004 2003  nil based on the share price of the shares at that date.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 67 Report on directors remuneration Share awards under longterm incentive schemes held at 31 March 2004 Details of the companys ordinary shares provisionally awarded to directors as participants under the ESP ISP and RSP are as follows Total number of award shares
1 April 2003 Awarded Vested Lapsed
31 March
Market Price at grant Market Price at vesting award Sir Christopher Bland ISP 2001 318308   331488 13180   267.912p RSP 2003  274725 11375 286100 B Verwaayen RSP 2001 799754    33115 832869 100105 257.814p P Danon RSP 2000 53253  54474 ISP 2000 99850   99850 ISP 2001 179047   186460 7413   267.912p A Green ESP 1998 38095   38095 ESP 1999 38710   40032 1322   267.912p ISP 2000 85292   85292 ISP 2001 179047   186460 7413   267.912p I Livingston RSP 2002 505081  168360 13943 350664 050405 273.5p 185p 311 RSP 2002 113012    4679 117691 200505 202.0p Dr P Reynolds ESP 1998 11626   11626 ESP 1999 11605   11999 ISP 2000 48111   48111 ISP 2001 148012   154140 6128   267.912p Former directors Sir Peter Boneld ESP 1998 112579   112579 ESP 1999 100239   103666 3427   267.912p ISP 2000 272947   272947 ISP 2001 522025   543641 21616   267.912p R Brace ESP 1998 57149   57149 B Cockburn ESP 1998 77935   77935 ESP 1999 68432   70771 2339   267.912p An award under the RSP was made to Sir Christopher Bland on 1 September 2003 with an initial value of 500000.
The award will vest subject to continued employment at the conclusion of the 2007 AGM.
The nal tranche of the RSP award granted on 4 October 2000 vested on 6 October 2003.
The ISP 2000 performance measurement period ended on 31 March 2003.
At that time BTs position was at 85th position.
As a consequence all awards lapsed.
The ISP 2001 performance measurement period ended on 31 March 2004.
At that time BTs position was at 83rd position.
As a consequence all awards lapsed.
The ESP 1998 performance measurement period ended on 31 March 2003.
At that time BTs position was at 83rd position.
As a consequence all awards have lapsed.
The ESP 1999 performance measurement period ended on 31 March 2004.
At that time BTs position was at 90th position.
As a consequence all awards have lapsed.
The rst tranche of the RSP award granted on 30 May 2002 vested on 27 May 2003.
The second and third tranches will vest on the second and third anniversaries of Ian Livingston joining BT.
Adjusted for the demerger of BTs wireless business in November 2001.
Under the terms of his agreement the awards granted to Sir Peter Boneld were preserved on his leaving the company until the normal vesting date.
The awards granted to Bill Cockburn and Robert Brace were preserved at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee on their leaving until their normal vesting date.
Details of the ISP ESP and RSP and any relevant performance conditions are set out on page 60.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 68 Report on directors remuneration Vesting of outstanding share awards and options Details of options granted under the GSOP and awards of shares under the ESP and ISP which would have vested based on BT Groups TSR compared with the other companies in the FTSE 100 for the relevant performance period up to 31 March 2004 are as follows 31 March 2004 31 March 2003
Percentage of shares vesting TSR position Percentage of shares vesting ESP 1999 310304 90  87 ISP 2001 310304 83  73 GSOP 2002 290705 77  61 GSOP 2003 240606 93 The ESP 1999 performance measurement period ended on 31 March 2004.
At that time BTs position was at 90th position.
As a consequence all awards have lapsed.
The ISP 2001 performance measurement period ended on 31 March 2004.
At that time BTs position was at 83rd position.
As a consequence all awards lapsed.
Options granted to executive directors under the GSOP during the 2003 nancial year as an additional incentive whose exercise is subject to a 35% compound annual growth in earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items being achieved over three years equivalent to 22p per share at the end of the 2005 nancial year are not included in the above table but are included in the table on page 67.
Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items for the 2004 nancial year are 16.9p per share 2003 The compound annual growth in earnings per share over the 2003 and 2004 nancial years was 38.6%.
Deferred Bonus Plan awards at 31 March 2004 The following deferred bonuses have been awarded to the directors under the DBP.
These shares will normally be transferred to participants at the end of the threeyear deferred period if those participants are still employed by BT Group.
1 April 2003 Awarded Vested
Total number of award shares 31 March
Market Price at grant Market Price at vesting Monetary value of vested award B Verwaayen 76996   3187 80183 010805 202.0p 17624 443238 010806 199.5p P Danon 22292   762 23054 010804 267.912p 75983   3146 79129 010805 202.0p 3502 88088 010806 199.5p A Green 10924  10924 ad 45179   1544 46723 010804 267.912p 50654   2097 52751 010805 202.0p 3180 79983 010806 199.5p I Livingston  84586 3502 88088 010806 199.5p Dr P Reynolds 4419  4419 ad 32813   1121 33934 010804 267.912p 45590   1886 47476 010805 202.0p 2992 75277 010806 199.5p Former director Sir Peter Boneld 86725  86725 ad 152502   5216 157718 010804 267.912p Andy Green Paul Reynolds and Sir Peter Boneld received 70p per share on their awards vesting as compensation for the difference between the price of a BT share at the date of vesting and the demerger when the awards should have vested.
The Remuneration Committee determined that the awards should continue until their normal vesting date and that participants should be compensated if there was a subsequent fall in the share price.
Under the terms of his service agreement the awards granted to Sir Peter Boneld were preserved on his leaving until the normal vesting date.
Awards granted on 24 June 2003.
Awards granted on 2 August 2000 vested on 4 August 2003.
Details of the DBP are set out on page 59.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 69 Report on directors remuneration Share awards under allemployee share ownership plans at 31 March 2004 1 April 2003 Awarded Vested Total number of award shares 31 March 2004
Sir Christopher Bland ESIP 2003  186 186 050808 P Danon ESIP 2002 130   130 140807 ESIP 2003  186 186 050808 A Green ESOS 2000 85  85 ESOS 2001 66   66 300704 ESIP 2002 130   130 140807 ESIP 2003  186 186 0508 P Reynolds ESOS 2000 85  85 ESOS 2001 66   66 300704 ESIP 2002 130   130 140807 ESIP 2003  186 186 0508 Awards granted under the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan on 14 August 2003.
On that date the market price of a BT Group share was 194p.
Awards granted under the BT Employee Share Ownership Scheme on 17 August 2000 vested on 17 August 2003.
On 18 August 2003 the rst dealing day after that date the market price of a BT Group share was 191p.
The market price on the date of award was 812p.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 70 Report on directors remuneration Operating Committee The aggregate remuneration of members of the Operating Committee OC other than directors for services in all capacities during the 2004 nancial year was as follows Salaries and benets 296 275 Annual bonuses 198 201 Provision for longterm incentive awards 268 327 Company pension contributions 34 32 Total 796 835 Of the six members of the OC ve are members of the
No options were granted under the BT Group Employee Sharesave Scheme to OC members other than directors during the 2004 nancial year 2003  Nil.
The members of the OC benecially own less than 1% of the companys outstanding ordinary shares.
By order of the Board Sir Anthony Greener Deputy Chairman and Chairman of Remuneration Committee 19 May 2004 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 71 Report on directors remuneration The directors are required by law to prepare nancial statements for each nancial year which give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and the group as at the end of the nancial year and of the prot or loss and cash ows of the group for that period.
The directors consider that in preparing the nancial statements for the year ended 31 March 2004 on pages 74 to 134 the company has used appropriate accounting policies consistently applied and supported by reasonable and prudent judgements and estimates.
The directors also consider that all applicable accounting standards have been followed and conrm that the nancial statements have been prepared on the going concern basis.
The directors are responsible for ensuring that the company keeps accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the company and which enable them to ensure that the nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 1985.
The directors are also responsible for taking such steps that are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
The auditors responsibilities are stated in their report to the shareholders.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 72 Statement of directors responsibility for preparing the financial statements United Kingdom Opinion Independent auditors report to the shareholders of BT Group plc We have audited the nancial statements which comprise the group prot and loss account group and company balance sheets group cash ow statement group statement of total recognised gains and losses and the related notes which have been prepared under the historical cost convention and the accounting policies set out in the Accounting Policies section.
We have also audited the disclosures required by Part 3 of Schedule 7A to the Companies Act 1985 contained in the directors remuneration report the audited part.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditors The directors responsibilities for preparing the annual report and the nancial statements in accordance with applicable United Kingdom law and accounting standards are set out in the statement of directors responsibilities.
The directors are also responsible for preparing the directors remuneration report.
Our responsibility is to audit the nancial statements and the audited part of the directors remuneration report in accordance with relevant legal and regulatory requirements and United Kingdom Auditing Standards issued by the Auditing Practices Board.
This report including the opinion has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Section 235 of the Companies Act 1985 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving this opinion accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
We report to you our opinion as to whether the nancial statements give a true and fair view and whether the nancial statements and the audited part of the directors remuneration report have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
We also report to you if in our opinion the directors report is not consistent with the nancial statements if the company has not kept proper accounting records if we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or if information specied by law regarding directors remuneration and transactions is not disclosed.
We read the other information contained in the Annual Report and Form 20F and consider the implications for our report if we become aware of any apparent misstatements or material inconsistencies with the nancial statements.
The other information comprises only those sections set out in the table of contents including Financial headlines Chairmans message Chief Executives statement Operating and nancial review Report of the directors Corporate governance and Risk factors.
We review whether the corporate governance statement reects the companys compliance with the seven provisions of the Combined Code issued in June 1998 specied for our review by the Listing Rules of the Financial Services Authority and we report if it does not.
We are not required to consider whether the boards statements on internal control cover all risks and controls or to form an opinion on the effectiveness of the companys or groups corporate governance procedures or its risk and control procedures.
Basis of audit opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards issued by the Auditing Practices Board.
An audit includes examination on a test basis of evidence relevant to the amounts and disclosures in the nancial statements and the audited part of the directors remuneration report.
It also includes an assessment of the signicant estimates and judgements made by the directors in the preparation of the nancial statements and of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the companys circumstances consistently applied and adequately disclosed.
We planned and performed our audit so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered necessary in order to provide us with sufcient evidence to give reasonable assurance that the nancial statements and the audited part of the directors remuneration report are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or other irregularity or error.
In forming our opinion we also evaluated the overall adequacy of the presentation of information in the nancial statements.
Opinion
In our opinion the nancial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and the group at 31 March 2004 and of the prot and cash ows of the group for the year then ended the nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and those parts of the directors remuneration report required by Part 3 of Schedule 7A to the Companies Act 1985 have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors
19 May 2004 United States Opinion To the board of directors and shareholders of BT Group plc In our opinion the accompanying group prot and loss account group balance sheet group cash ow statement group statement of total recognised gains and losses and the related notes present fairly in all material respects the nancial position of BT Group plc and its subsidiaries at 31 March 2004 and 2003 and the results of their operations and their cash ows for each of the three years in the period ended 31 March 2004 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United Kingdom.
These nancial statements are the responsibility of the groups management our responsibility is to express an opinion on these nancial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits of these statements in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of America which require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the nancial statements are free of material misstatement.
An audit includes examining on a test basis evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the nancial statements assessing the accounting principles used and signicant estimates made by management and evaluating the overall nancial statement presentation.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Accounting principles generally accepted in the United Kingdom vary in certain important respects from accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Information relating to the nature and effect of such differences is presented in the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles section.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors
19 May 2004 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 73 Report of the independent auditors The consolidated nancial statements are divided into the following sections 75 Accounting policies 78 Group prot and loss account 81 Group statement of total recognised gains and losses 82 Group cash ow statement 83 Group balance sheet 84 Notes to the nancial statements 84 Changes in accounting policy and presentation and discontinued activities 84 Segmental analysis 88 Turnover 88 Other operating income 89 Operating costs 91 Groups share of operating loss prot of associates and joint ventures 91 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 92 Prot on sale of property xed assets 92 Amounts written off investments 92 Interest receivable 92 Interest payable 92 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 93 Minority interests 93 Dividends 94 Earnings loss per share 96 Reconciliation of operating prot loss to operating cash ows 96 Management of liquid resources 96 Acquisitions and disposals 99 Net debt 99 Intangible assets 100 Tangible xed assets 101 Fixed asset investments 102 Debtors 102 Current asset investments 103 Loans and other borrowings 104 Other creditors 104 Provisions for liabilities and charges 105 Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds 106 Related party transactions 107 Financial commitments contingent liabilities and subsequent events 108 Pension costs 112 Directors emoluments 113 People employed 113 Employee share schemes 117 Auditors 117 Financial instruments and risk management 122 Company balance sheet BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 74 Consolidated financial statements i Basis of preparation of the nancial statements The nancial statements are prepared under the historical cost convention and in accordance with applicable accounting standards and the provisions of the Companies Act 1985.
The group nancial statements consolidate those of the company and all of its subsidiary undertakings.
Where the nancial statements of subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures do not conform with the groups accounting policies appropriate adjustments are made on consolidation in order to present the group nancial statements on a consistent basis.
The principal subsidiary undertakings nancial years are all coterminous with those of the company.
The preparation of nancial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the nancial statements and the reported amounts of income and expenditure during the reporting period.
Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Estimates are used principally when accounting for interconnect income provision for doubtful debts payments to telecommunication operators longterm contracts depreciation goodwill amortisation and impairment employee pension schemes provisions for liabilities and charges and taxes.
Group turnover net of discounts which excludes value added tax and other sales taxes comprises the value of services provided and equipment sales by group undertakings excluding those between them.
Total turnover is group turnover together with the groups share of its associates and joint ventures turnover excluding the groups share of transactions between the group and its principal joint venture Concert BV in the 2002 nancial year.
Turnover from calls is recognised in the group prot and loss account at the time the call is made over the groups networks.
Turnover from rentals is recognised evenly over the period to which the charges relate.
Turnover from equipment sales is recognised at the point of sale.
Prepaid call card sales are deferred until the customer uses the stored value in the card to pay for the relevant calls.
Turnover arising from the provision of other services including maintenance contracts is recognised evenly over the periods in which the service is provided to the customer.
Turnover from installation and connection activities is recognised in the period in which its is earned.
Turnover from long term contracts is recognised throughout the duration of the contract to the extent that the outcome of the contract can be assessed with reasonable certainty and in accordance with the stage of completion of contractual obligations.
Turnover from classied directories mainly comprising advertising revenue is recognised in the group prot and loss account upon completion of delivery.
Expenditure on research and development is written off as incurred.
Assets held under nance leases are capitalised and depreciated over their useful lives.
The capital element of future obligations under nance leases are recognised as liabilities.
The interest element of rental obligations are charged over the period of the nance lease and represent a constant proportion of the balance of capital repayments outstanding.
Operating lease rentals are charged against the prot and loss account on a straightline basis over the lease period except where the contractual payment terms are considered to be a more systematic and appropriate basis.
Interest payable including that related to nancing the construction of tangible xed assets is written off as incurred.
Discounts or premiums and expenses on the issue of debt securities are amortised over the term of the related security and included within interest payable.
Premiums payable on early redemptions of debt securities in lieu of future interest costs are written off when paid.
On consolidation assets and liabilities of foreign undertakings are translated into sterling at year end exchange rates.
The results of foreign undertakings are translated into sterling at average rates of exchange for the year.
Exchange differences arising from the retranslation at year end exchange rates of the net investment in foreign undertakings less exchange differences on borrowings which nance or provide a hedge against those undertakings are taken to reserves and are reported in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
All other exchange gains or losses are dealt with through the prot and loss account.
Goodwill arising from the purchase of subsidiary undertakings and interests in associates and joint ventures represents the excess of the fair value of the purchase consideration over the fair value of the net assets acquired.
For acquisitions completed on or after 1 April 1998 the goodwill arising is capitalised as an intangible asset or if arising in respect of an associate or joint venture recorded as part of the related investment.
Goodwill is amortised on a straight line basis from the time of acquisition over its useful economic life.
The economic life is normally presumed to be a maximum of 20 years.
For acquisitions on or before 31 March 1998 the goodwill is written off on acquisition against group reserves.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 75 Accounting policies If an undertaking is subsequently divested the appropriate unamortised goodwill or goodwill written off to reserves is dealt with through the prot and loss account in the period of disposal as part of the gain or loss on divestment.
Licence fees paid to governments which permit telecommunication activities to be operated for dened periods are amortised from the latter of the start of the licence period or launch of service to the end of the licence period on a straightline basis.
Tangible xed assets are stated at historical cost less depreciation.
Cost in the case of network services includes contractors charges and payments on account materials direct labour and directly attributable overheads.
Depreciation is provided on tangible xed assets on a straight line basis from the time they are available for use so as to write off their costs over their estimated useful lives taking into account any expected residual values.
No depreciation is provided on freehold land.
The lives assigned to other signicant tangible xed assets are Freehold buildings  40 years Leasehold land and buildings  Unexpired portion of lease or 40 years whichever is the shorter Transmission equipment duct  25 years cable  3 to 25 years radio and repeater equipment  2 to 25 years Exchange equipment  2 to 13 years Computers and ofce equipment  2 to 6 years Payphones other network equipment motor vehicles and cableships  2 to 20 years Software  2 to 5 years ix Fixed asset investments Investments in subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures are stated in the balance sheet of the company at cost less amounts written off.
Amounts denominated in foreign currency are translated into sterling at year end exchange rates.
Investments in associates and joint ventures are stated in the group balance sheet at the groups share of their net assets together with any attributable unamortised goodwill on acquisitions arising on or after 1 April 1998.
The groups share of prots less losses of associates and joint ventures is included in the group prot and loss account.
Investments in other participating interests and other investments are stated at cost less amounts written off.
Intangible and tangible xed assets are tested for impairment when an event that might affect asset values has occurred.
Goodwill is also reviewed for impairment at the end of the rst nancial year after acquisition.
An impairment loss is recognised to the extent that the carrying amount cannot be recovered either by selling the asset or by the discounted future cash ows from operating the assets.
Stocks mainly comprise items of equipment held for sale or rental consumable items and work in progress on longterm contracts.
Equipment held and consumable items are stated at the lower of cost and estimated net realisable value after provisions for obsolescence.
Work in progress on longterm contracts is stated at cost after deducting payments on account less provisions for any foreseeable losses.
Debtors are stated in the balance sheet at estimated net realisable value.
Net realisable value is the invoiced amount less provisions for bad and doubtful debtors.
Provisions are made specically against debtors where there is evidence of a dispute or an inability to pay.
An additional provision is made based on an analysis of balances by age previous losses experienced and general economic conditions.
Redundancy or leaver costs arising from periodic reviews of staff levels are charged against prot in the year in which the group is demonstrably committed to the employees leaving the group.
If the estimated cost of providing incremental pension benets in respect of employees leaving the group exceeds any total accounting surplus based on the latest actuarial valuation of the groups pension scheme and the amount of the provision for pension liabilities on the balance sheet then the excess estimated cost is charged against prot in the year in which the employees agree to leave the group within redundancy or leaver costs.
The group operates a funded dened benet pension scheme which is independent of the groups nances for the substantial majority of its employees.
Actuarial valuations of the main scheme are carried out by an independent actuary as determined by the trustees at intervals of not more than three years to determine the rates of contribution payable.
The pension cost is determined on the advice of the companys actuary having regard to the results of these valuations.
In any intervening years the actuaries review the continuing appropriateness of the contribution rates.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 76 Accounting policies The cost of providing pensions is charged against prots over employees working lives with the group using the projected unit method.
Variations from this regular cost are allocated on a straightline basis over the average remaining service lives of current employees to the extent that these variations do not relate to the estimated cost of providing incremental pension benets in the circumstances described in xiii above.
Interest is accounted for on the provision or prepayment in the balance sheet which results from differences between amounts recognised as pension costs and amounts funded.
The regular pension cost variations from the regular pension cost described above and interest are all charged within staff costs.
The group also operates dened contribution pension schemes and the prot and loss account is charged with the contributions payable.
Full provision is made for deferred taxation on all timing differences which have arisen but have not reversed at the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is regarded as more likely than not that there will be taxable prots from which the underlying timing differences can be deducted.
No deferred tax is provided in respect of any future remittance of earnings of foreign subsidiaries or associates where no commitment has been made to remit such earnings.
The deferred tax balances are not discounted.
Debt instruments are stated at the amount of net proceeds adjusted to amortise any discount evenly over the term of the debt and further adjusted for the effect of currency swaps acting as hedges.
The group uses derivative nancial instruments to reduce exposure to foreign exchange risks and interest rate movements.
The group does not hold or issue derivative nancial instruments for nancial trading purposes.
Criteria to qualify for hedge accounting The group considers its derivative nancial instruments to be hedges when certain criteria are met.
For foreign currency derivatives the instrument must be related to actual foreign currency assets or liabilities or a probable commitment and whose characteristics have been identied.
It must involve the same currency or similar currencies as the hedged item and must also reduce the risk of foreign currency exchange movements on the groups operations.
For interest rate derivatives the instrument must be related to assets or liabilities or a probable commitment such as a future bond issue and must also change the interest rate or the nature of the interest rate by converting a xed rate to a variable rate or vice versa.
Accounting for derivative nancial instruments Principal amounts underlying currency swaps are revalued at exchange rates ruling at the date of the group balance sheet and to the extent that they are not related to debt instruments are included in debtors or creditors.
Interest differentials under interest rate swap agreements used to vary the amounts and periods for which interest rates on borrowings are xed are recognised by adjustment of interest payable.
The forward exchange contracts used to change the currency mix of net debt are revalued to balance sheet rates with net unrealised gains and losses being shown as part of debtors creditors or as part of net debt.
The difference between spot and forward rate for these contracts is recognised as part of net interest payable over the term of the contract.
The forward exchange contracts hedging transaction exposures are revalued at the prevailing forward rate on the balance sheet date with net unrealised gains and losses being shown as debtors and creditors.
Instruments that form hedges against future xedrate bond issues are marked to market.
Gains or losses are deferred until the bond is issued when they are recognised evenly over the term of the bond.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 77 Accounting policies Continuing activities
Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items
Total
Total turnover 2 18914  18914 Groups share of joint ventures turnover 3 352  352 Groups share of associates turnover 3 43  43 Group turnover 2 18519  18519 Other operating income 4 177  177 Operating costs 5 15804 19 15823 Group operating prot loss 2892 19 2873 Groups share of operating loss of joint ventures 6 12 26 38 Groups share of operating prot of associates 6 4 4 Total operating prot loss 2884 45 2839 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 7 434 38 Loss on sale of group undertakings 7  2 2 Prot on sale of property xed assets 14  14 Interest receivable Interest payable 11 1150 89 1239 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation 2016 68 1948 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 12 568 29 539 Prot loss on ordinary activities after taxation 1448 39 1409 Minority interests 13 8 8 Prot loss for the nancial year 1456 39 1417 Dividends 14 732 Retained prot for the nancial year 28 685 Basic earnings per share 15 16.9p 16.4p Diluted earnings per share 15 16.8p 16.3p BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 78 Group profit and loss account for the year ended 31 March 2004 Continuing activities
Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items
Total
Total turnover 2 20182  20182 Groups share of joint ventures turnover 3 425  425 Groups share of associates turnover 3 1030  1030 Group turnover 2 18727  18727 Other operating income 4 215  215 Operating costs 5 16152 218 16370 Group operating prot loss 2790 218 2572 Groups share of operating prot loss of joint ventures 6 31 150 119 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates 6 212 2 210 Total operating prot loss 2971 70 2901 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 7  1700 1700 Loss on sale of group undertakings 7  9 9 Prot on sale of property xed assets 11  11 Interest receivable 10 195  195 Amounts written off investments 9 7  7 Interest payable 11 1341 293 1634 Prot on ordinary activities before taxation 1829 1328 3157 Tax on prot on ordinary activities 12 598 139 459 Prot on ordinary activities after taxation 1231 1467 2698 Minority interests 13 5 7 12 Prot for the nancial year 1226 1460 2686 Dividends 14 560 Retained prot for the nancial year 28 2126 Basic earnings per share 15 14.2p 31.2p Diluted earnings per share 15 14.1p 31.0p BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 79 Group profit and loss account for the year ended 31 March 2003 Continuing activities
Before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items
Total continuing activities
Total
Total turnover 2 21815  21815 2827 24642 Groups share of joint ventures turnover 3 2752  2752 76 2828 Groups share of associates turnover 3 1297  1297 639 1936 Trading between group and principal joint venture 3 681  681  681 Group turnover 2 18447  18447 2112 20559 Other operating income 4 361  361 1 362 Operating costs 5 16037 2817 18854 2546 21400 Group operating prot loss 2771 2817 46 433 479 Groups share of operating prot loss of joint ventures 6 323 1160 1483 19 1464 Groups share of operating prot loss of associates 6 215 175 40 43 83 Total operating prot loss 2663 4152 1489 371 1860 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 7  169 169 3208 3377 Prot loss on sale of group undertakings 7  148 148 1160 1012 Prot on sale of property xed assets 8 27 1062 1089  1089 Interest receivable 10 360  360  360 Amounts written off investments 9  535 535  535 Interest payable 11 1777 162 1939 43 1982 Prot loss on ordinary activities before taxation 1273 3766 2493 3954 1461 Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 12 528 143 385 58 443 Prot loss on ordinary activities after taxation 745 3623 2878 3896 1018 Minority interests 13 10  10 13 23 Prot loss for the nancial year 735 3623 2888 3883 995 Dividends see note below 14 173 Retained prot for the nancial year 28 822 Basic earnings loss per share 15 8.8p 34.8p 12.0p Diluted earnings loss per share 15 8.8p 34.8p 11.9p In addition to the nal dividend for the year of 173 million there was a demerger distribution of 19490 million representing the net assets of mmO including purchased goodwill as at the date of demerger.
Of the demerger distribution 9 million represents a cash dividend paid by British Telecommunications plc to mmO plc as part of the demerger process.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 80 Group profit and loss account for the year ended 31 March 2002 2004 Prot loss for the nancial year Group 1468 2483 2580 Joint ventures 54 103 1524 Associates 3 100 61 Total prot for the nancial year 1417 2686 995 Currency movements arising on consolidation of nonUK Subsidiaries 87 2 14 Joint ventures 1 5 46 Associates 1 245 Unrealised gain on transfer of assets and group undertakings to a joint venture  5 Total recognised gains and losses for the nancial year 1328 2691 985 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 81 Group statement of total recognised gains and losses for the year ended 31 March 2004 Notes Net cash inow from operating activities 16 5389 6023 5257 Dividends from associates and joint ventures 3 62 Returns on investments and servicing of nance Interest received 673 231 309 Interest paid including nance costs 1200 1737 2004 Net cash outow for returns on investments and servicing of nance 527 1506 1695
UK corporation tax paid 305 425 557 NonUK tax paid 12 9 5 Taxation paid 317 434 562 Capital expenditure and nancial investment Purchase of tangible xed assets 2684 2580 4069 Sale of tangible xed assets 76 94 2645 Purchase of xed asset investments 1 1 37 Disposal of xed asset investments 132 106 107 Net cash outow for capital expenditure and nancial investment 2477 2381 1354 Free cash ow before acquisitions disposals and dividends 2071 1708 1648 Acquisitions and disposals Purchase of subsidiary undertakings net of 1m cash acquired 2003  13m 2002  nil 32 56 896 Investments in joint ventures 29 133 235 Disposal of subsidiary undertakings net of nil cash disposed 2003  nil 2002  28m  3 1959 Sale of investments in joint ventures and associates 1 2916 4957 Net cash outow inow for acquisitions and disposals 60 2842 5785 Equity dividends paid 645 367 Cash inow before management of liquid resources and nancing 1366 4183 7433 Management of liquid resources 17 1123 1729 1864
Issue of ordinary share capital  42 6057 Repurchase of ordinary share capital 144 Inow on demerger of mmO New loans 1326 20 30 Repayment of loans 3627 2471 1851 Net decrease in shortterm borrowings  64 10155 Net cash outow from nancing 2445 2473 5479 Increase decrease in cash in the year 44 19 90 Decrease in net debt in the year resulting from cash ows 19 1222 4225 13930 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 82 Group cash flow statement for the year ended 31 March 2004 Notes Fixed assets Intangible assets 20 204 218 Tangible assets 21 15487 15888 Investments in joint ventures 22 Share of gross assets and goodwill 496 741 Share of gross liabilities 399 610 Total investments in joint ventures 97 131 Investments in associates 22 24 27 Other investments 22 256 397 Total investments 22 377 555 Total xed assets 16068 16661 Current assets Stocks 89 82
Falling due within one year 4017 4413 Falling due after more than one year 1172 630 Total debtors 23 5189 5043 Investments 24 5163 6340 Cash at bank and in hand 109 91 Total current assets 10550 11556 Creditors amounts falling due within one year Loans and other borrowings 25 1271 2548 Other creditors 26 7277 7132 Total creditors amounts falling due within one year 8548 9680 Net current assets 2002 1876 Total assets less current liabilities 18070 18537 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year Loans and other borrowings 25 12426 13456 Provisions for liabilities and charges Deferred taxation 27 2191 2017 Total provisions for liabilities and charges 2504 2376 Minority interests 46 63 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 28 37 432 434 Share premium account 28 2 2 Capital redemption reserve 28 2 Other reserves 28 998 998 Prot and loss account 28 1660 1208 Total equity shareholders funds 28 3094 2642 18070 18537 The nancial statements on pages 74 to 134 were approved by the board of directors on 19 May 2004 and were signed on its behalf by Sir Christopher Bland
Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ian Livingston Group Finance Director BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 83 Group balance sheet as at 31 March 2004 1.
Changes in accounting policy and presentation and discontinued activities a Changes in accounting policy and presentation There have been no changes to accounting policies in the 2004 nancial year.
A small number of changes in the presentation of the notes to the nancial statements have been made and comparative gures have been restated accordingly as explained in the notes where material.
On 1 June 2001 BT disposed of its interests in Japan Telecom and JPhone Communications and on 29 June 2001 its interest in Airtel.
On 22 June 2001 BT sold Yell its classied advertising directory businesses in the UK and the USA.
These activities together with mmO which was demerged on 19 November 2001 are shown as discontinued operations in the prot and loss accounts.
The eliminations are intragroup eliminations.
The interest charge allocated to mmO up to the date of the demerger has been calculated assuming that mmO net debt at the date of the demerger of 500 million had been in existence for the whole of the period and had been bearing an interest charge of 8% per annum.
The interest charge allocated to Yell up to the date of disposal represents amounts payable on intercompany loans charged at an arms length rate of interest.
The taxation charge allocated to discontinued activities up to the date of demerger or disposal represents amounts charged to these entities before recognising credit for group relief surrendered to entities within continuing activities.
Segmental analysis The group provides telecommunication services principally in the UK and essentially operates as a unitary business.
Its main services and products are xed voice and data calls the provision of xed exchange lines to homes and businesses the provision of communication services to other operators the provision of private services to businesses and the supply of telecommunication equipment for customers premises.
The turnover of each line of business is derived as follows and BT Retail derives its turnover from the supply of exchange lines and from the calls made over these lines the provision of ICT products and services the leasing of private circuits and other private services the sale and rental of customer premises equipment to the groups UK customers and other lines of business and from its narrowband and broadband internet access products. interconnecting the groups UK network to other operators. subsidiaries.
The business also derives revenues from providing web hosting facilities to end customers and through BT lines of business.
Segmented information on the lines of business is given below for the years ended 31 March 2004 31 March 2003 and 31 March 2002 as required by the UK accounting standard SSAP 25 and the US accounting standard SFAS No.
131 SFAS 131.
There is extensive trading between the lines of business and protability is dependent on the transfer price levels.
These intragroup trading arrangements and operating assets are subject to periodic review and have changed in some instances.
In addition the group moved management responsibility of BT Openworld to BT Retail.
Comparative gures have been restated for these and other changes and in certain instances have been determined using apportionments and allocations.
Turnover
Depreciation and amortisation
Total operating prot loss External Internal
Year ended 31 March 2004 m m m m m m BT Retail 12630 904 13534 163 1 1434 BT Wholesale 3445 7414 10859 1919  1682 BT Global Services 2410 3372 5782 624 37 153 Other  124 Intragroup  11691 11691 Group totals 18519  18519 2936 34 2839 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 84 Notes to the financial statements 2.
Segmental analysis continued
Depreciation and amortisation
Total operating prot loss External Internal
Year ended 31 March 2003 m m m m m m BT Retail 12979 903 13882 202 3 1524 BT Wholesale 3525 7722 11247 1923 1 1757 BT Global Services 2183 3234 5417 632 180 214 Other  166 Intragroup  11860 11860 Group totals 18727  18727 3035 329 2901
Depreciation and amortisation
Total operating prot loss External Internal
Year ended 31 March 2002 m m m m m m BT Retail 12139 1145 13284 248 6 888 BT Wholesale 3735 8590 12325 1914  2070 BT Global Services 2185 2493 4678 2835 144 2481 Concert  1123 1123 Other 458 843 Intragroup  11935 11935 Total continuing activities 18117 330 18447 5345 1443 1489 mmO 2273 392 2665 648 5 461 Other Intragroup  724 724 Total discontinued activities 2442 330 2112 656 62 371 Group totals 20559  20559 6001 1381 1860 Transactions between divisions are at prices set in accordance with those agreed with Ofcom and previously Oftel where the services provided are subject to regulation.
Other transactions are at arms length.
The following tables show the capital expenditure on plant equipment and property the net operating assets or liabilities and the net book value of associates and joint ventures by line of business for the years ended 31 March 2004 and 2003.
Net operating assets comprise tangible and intangible xed assets stocks debtors less creditors excluding loans and other borrowings and provisions for liabilities and charges excluding deferred tax.
Year ended or as at 31 March 2004
Net operating assets liabilities Interest in associates and joint ventures BT Retail 118 40 9 BT Wholesale 1809 11940 BT Global Services 479 1291 89 Total 2673 13379 121 Year ended or as at 31 March 2003
Net operating assets liabilities Interest in associates and joint ventures BT Retail 109 430 8 BT Wholesale 1652 12041 BT Global Services 445 1912 141 Total 2445 13740 158 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 85 Notes to the financial statements 2.
Segmental analysis continued Information about geographic areas Turnover with external customers Attributable to UK 17190 17536 16703 Attributable to nonUK countries 1329 1191 1414 Total continuing activities 18519 18727 18117 Attributable to UK   1555 Attributable to nonUK countries Total discontinued activities   2442 Group turnover 18519 18727 20559 Turnover attributable to nonUK countries comprises the external turnover of group companies and branches operating outside the UK income from nonUK operators for calls terminating in or in transit through the UK and turnover with nonUK joint ventures and associates.
The group turnover from continuing activities as disclosed in the group prot and loss account includes intragroup trading with discontinued activities.
Group xed assets are located UK 14591 14785 Europe excluding the UK 1029 1227 Americas 305 510 Asia and Pacic 143 139 Total 16068 16661 Geographical segment analysis in accordance with the requirements of SSAP 25 is as follows Total turnover on basis of origin UK 17198 17544 16428 Europe excluding the UK 1272 2151 2449 Americas 151 155 2000 Asia and Pacic 293 332 608 Total continuing activities 18914 20182 21485 UK   1635 Europe excluding the UK   927 Americas  36 Asia and Pacic   559 Total discontinued activities   3157 Total 18914 20182 24642 The total turnover from continuing activities as disclosed in the group prot and loss account includes intragroup trading with discontinued activities.
Group turnover on basis of origin UK 17190 17536 16703 Europe excluding the UK 1124 978 1113 Americas 151 153 147 Asia and Pacic 54 60 154 Total continuing activities 18519 18727 18117 UK   1555 Europe excluding the UK   851 Americas  36 Total discontinued activities   2442 Total 18519 18727 20559 The group turnover from continuing activities as disclosed in the group prot and loss account includes intragroup trading with discontinued activities.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 86 Notes to the financial statements 2.
Segmental analysis continued The analysis of turnover by geographical area is stated on the basis of origin.
In an analysis of turnover by destination incoming and transit international calls by country of origin and turnover with nonUK joint ventures and associates would be treated differently but would not lead to a materially different geographical analysis.
See Information about geographic areas above.
Group operating prot loss UK 2999 3220 2628 Europe excluding the UK 132 627 2829 Americas 9 28 153 Asia and Pacic 3 72 Total continuing activities 2873 2572 46 UK  4 Europe excluding the UK   429 Americas   6 Asia and Pacic   2 Total discontinued activities   433 Total 2873 2572 479 Share of operating losses prots of associates and joint ventures including goodwill amortisation Europe excluding the UK 48 305 240 Americas  1 1135 Asia and Pacic 15 27 51 Total continuing activities 34 329 1443 UK  5 Europe excluding the UK  20 Asia and Pacic  37 Total discontinued activities  62 Total 34 329 1381 2004 2003
Interest in associates and joint ventures
Net operating assets liabilities Interest in associates and joint ventures
UK 11419 7 11426 12196 8 12188 Europe excluding the UK 1742 24 1766 1652 76 1728 Americas 199  199 85  85 Asia and Pacic 19 90 109 23 90 67 Total 13379 121 13500 13740 158 13898 Net operating assets liabilities comprise tangible and intangible xed assets stocks debtors less creditors excluding loans and other borrowings and provisions for liabilities and charges excluding deferred tax.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 87 Notes to the financial statements 3.
Turnover
Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover comprised Joint ventures Continuing activities 352 425 2752 Discontinued activities  76 352 425 2828
Continuing activities 43 1030 1297 Discontinued activities   639 43 1030 1936 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 395 1455 4764 Concert the joint venture with ATandT was formed on 5 January 2000 and was unwound on 1 April 2002 see note 18.
The groups share of trading with Concert in the 2002 nancial year primarily in respect of international calls made to and from the UK and for services provided to Concert in the UK for the multinational customers transferred to Concert is eliminated in arriving at total turnover including the proportionate share of the groups associates and joint ventures and is added back in arriving at group turnover.
Other operating income 2004 Seconded staff administration and other services provided to Concert   135 Total continuing activities 177 215 361 Discontinued activities  1 Total other operating income 177 215 362 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 88 Notes to the financial statements 5.
Operating costs Total Group Staff costs Wages and salaries 3672 3621 4013 Social security costs 316 275 304 Pension costs note 31 404 322 382 Employee share ownership Total staff costs 4412 4254 4724 Own work capitalised 677 583 659 Depreciation note 21 2921 3011 3680 Amortisation and impairment of goodwill and other intangibles note 20 15 24 2321 Payments to telecommunications operators 3963 3940 4299 Other operating costs 5189 5724 7035 Total operating costs 15823 16370 21400 Operating costs included the following Early leaver costs Research and development 334 380 362 Rental costs relating to operating leases including plant and equipment hire of 25 million 2003  34 million 2002  51 million 370 395 283 Foreign currency gains 5 12 1 Amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items comprising Rectication costs 30 Property rationalisation provision  198 Goodwill impairment in subsidiary undertakings   1955 Asset impairments   324 Costs relating to the Concert unwind   172 Costs relating to the demerger of mmO BT Retail call centre rationalisation costs  68 BT Wholesale bad debt release costs 23 79 Total exceptional items 7 198 2707 Goodwill amortisation 12 20 352 Total amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items 19 218 3059 Amount set aside for the year for allocation of ordinary shares in the company to eligible employees.
Includes 61 million of leaver costs associated with the rationalisation of the BT Retail call centres in the year ended 31 March 2002.
The directors believe that the nature of the groups business is such that the analysis of operating costs required by the Companies Act 1985 is not appropriate.
As required by the Act the directors have therefore adapted the prescribed format so that operating costs are disclosed in a manner appropriate to the groups principal activity.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 89 Notes to the financial statements 5.
Operating costs continued Continuing activities Staff costs Wages and salaries 3672 3621 3659 Social security costs 316 275 270 Pension costs note 31 404 322 367 Employee share ownership Total staff costs 4412 4254 4321 Own work capitalised 677 583 623 Depreciation note 21 2921 3011 3266 Amortisation and impairment of goodwill and other intangibles note 20 15 24 2079 Payments to telecommunications operators 3963 3940 4289 Other operating costs 5189 5724 5522 Total operating costs 15823 16370 18854 Operating costs included the following Early leaver costs Research and development 334 380 362 Rental costs relating to operating leases including plant and equipment hire of 25 million 2003  34 million 2002  51 million 370 395 277 Foreign currency gains 5 12 1 Amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items comprising Rectication costs 30 Property rationalisation provision  198 Goodwill impairment in subsidiary undertakings   1955 Asset impairments   324 Costs relating to the Concert unwind   172 Costs relating to the demerger of mmO BT Retail call centre rationalisation costs  68 BT Wholesale bad debt release costs 23 79 Total exceptional items 7 198 2696 Goodwill amortisation 12 20 121 Total amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items 19 218 2817 Amount set aside for the year for allocation of ordinary shares in the company to eligible employees.
Includes 61 million of leaver costs associated with the rationalisation of the BT Retail call centres in the year ended 31 March 2002.
Discontinued activities Staff costs Wages and salaries   354 Social security costs  34 Pension costs  15 Total staff costs   403 Own work capitalised   36 Depreciation   414 Amortisation and impairment of goodwill and other intangibles   242 Payments to telecommunications operators  10 Other operating costs   1513 Total operating costs   2546 Operating costs included the following Early leaver costs  5 Rental costs relating to operating leases  6 Amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items comprising Costs relating to the demerger of mmO Goodwill amortisation   231 Total amortisation of goodwill and exceptional items   242 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 90 Notes to the financial statements 6.
Groups share of operating loss prot of associates and joint ventures The groups share of operating loss prot of associates and joint ventures comprised Joint ventures Continuing activities 38 119 1483 Discontinued activities  19 38 119 1464
Continuing activities 4 210 40 Discontinued activities  Groups share of operating loss prot of associates and joint ventures 34 329 1381
Exceptional costs relating to the impairment of goodwill 26  433 Exceptional costs relating to the impairment of investments and release charge of related exit costs  150 780 Exceptional costs relating to the Concert unwind  81 Amortisation of goodwill arising in joint ventures and associates  253 Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings In December 2003 the group sold its 7.8% interest in Inmarsat Ventures plc for total cash consideration of US118 million 67 million realising a prot on disposal of 32 million.
Other gains of 6 million and losses of 2 million were recognised during the year ended 31 March 2004.
The consideration received in relation to these disposals was 6 million.
In the year ended 31 March 2003 disposals of subsidiary undertakings resulted in losses of 9 million the consideration received in relation to these disposals was 3 million.
In January 2003 the group sold its 26% interest in Cegetel Groupe SA to Vivendi Universal SA for consideration of e4000 million 2603 million in cash.
The prot on disposal was 1509 million before the recognition of an exceptional interest charge of 293 million on closing out xed interest rate swaps following receipt of the sale proceeds and includes a writeback of 862 million of goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
In December 2002 the group sold its interest in Blu SpA for consideration of 29 million.
The prot on disposal was 19 million.
In October 2002 the group sold its 2% interest in Mediaset for consideration of 87 million in cash.
The prot on disposal was 14 million.
In May 2002 and November 2002 the group sold its remaining holding of shares in BSkyB received for the exchange of the residual interest in British Interactive Broadcasting for consideration of 192 million recognising a prot of 131 million.
Other gains of 39 million and losses of 12 million were recognised during the year ended 31 March 2003.
These gains and losses included a writeback of 7 million of goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
The consideration received in relation to these disposals was 114 million.
In June 2001 the group sold its interest in the Yell Group comprising mainly the Yellow Pages unit of BT Yellow Pages Sales Limited and Yellow Book USA Inc. and its subsidiary undertakings.
The consideration for this sale was 1960 million and a prot of 1128 million was realised.
This prot includes a writeback of 9 million of goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
In December 2001 the group sold its wholly owned subsidiary Clear Communications Limited which operates in New Zealand for consideration of 119 million.
A loss of 126 million was recognised on this sale of which 45 million relates to goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
Other disposals of subsidiary companies in the year ended 31 March 2002 resulted in gains on disposal of 10 million.
A prot of 120 million was recognised for the exchange of the residual interest in British Interactive Broadcasting for BSkyB shares in May 2001.
The consideration received was 241 million of BSkyB shares and the prot recognised relates to those shares that were marketable.
In June 2001 the group sold its effective 20% interest in Japan Telecom Co.
Limited and its 20% interest in JPhone Communications Co.
Limited to Vodafone plc for 3075 million in cash.
Under the sale agreement the group also sold shares representing 4.9% of JPhone Communications Co.
Limited obtained by exercising an option in June 2001 for 634 million in cash.
The realised prot on the sale of the 20% interest in Japan Telecom Co.
Limited and JPhone Communications Co.
Limited and the sale of the 4.9% share of JPhone Communications Co.
Limited obtained through the exercise of options was 2358 million.
In June 2001 the group sold its 17.81% interest in Airtel Movil SA to Vodafone plc for 1084 million in cash.
The prot on disposal was 844 million.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 91 Notes to the financial statements 7.
Prot on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings continued Other gains of 135 million and losses of 80 million were also recognised during the year ended 31 March 2002.
These gains and losses included a writeback of 14 million of goodwill taken directly to reserves before April 1998.
The consideration received in relation to these disposals was 860 million including deferred and noncash amounts of 63 million.
Prot on sale of property xed assets In December 2001 the group entered into a sale and leaseback transaction with Telereal under which substantially all of the groups interest in most of its UK freehold and long leasehold properties and its obligations in respect of rack rented properties were transferred to Telereal for cash consideration of 2380 million.
Of the total prot from the sale of property in the year to 31 March 2002 1019 million relates to this transaction.
Amounts written off investments Amounts written off investments were nil 2003  7 million 2002  535 million.
In the year ended 31 March 2002 these were mainly attributable to investments in ATandT Canada 347 million and Impsat 157 million.
Interest receivable Income from listed investments 13 25 Other interest receivable Joint ventures 2 114 Associates  57 Total interest receivable 298 195 360 Includes an exceptional credit of 34 million in the year ended 31 March 2004 being one off interest recognised on full repayment of loan notes received as part of the original consideration from the disposal of Yell.
Interest payable Interest payable and similar charges in respect of Bank loans and overdrafts 87 82 184 Interest payable on nance leases 19 10 Other borrowings abc 1114 1527 1685 Group 1220 1609 1879 Joint ventures 19 17 60 Associates  843 Total interest payable 1239 1634 1982 Includes an exceptional charge of 89 million in the year ended 31 March 2004 being the premium on repurchasing 813 million of the groups issued bonds.
Includes an exceptional charge of 293 million in the year ended 31 March 2003 on the termination of interest rate swap agreements following the receipt of the Cegetel sale proceeds.
Includes an exceptional charge of 162 million in the year ended 31 March 2002 on the novation of interest rate swap agreements as a consequence of the property sale and leaseback transaction with Telereal.
Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 2004 United Kingdom Corporation tax at 30% 328 447 275 Taxation on the groups share of results of associates  2 Prior year adjustments  12 NonUK taxation Current 37 47 23 Taxation on the groups share of results of associates  81 50 Taxation on the groups share of results of joint ventures  34 Prior year adjustments  26 7 Total current taxation 365 561 377 Deferred taxation charge credit at 30% Origination and reversal of timing differences 184 29 34 Prior year adjustments 10 73 32 Total deferred taxation 174 102 66 Total tax on prot loss on ordinary activities 539 459 443 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 92 Notes to the financial statements 12.
Tax on prot loss on ordinary activities continued The tax credit relating to exceptional items is 29 million 2003  139 million 2002  143 million.
A tax charge on recognised gains and losses not included in the prot and loss account of 47 million 2003  16 million 2002  11 million related to exchange movements offset in reserves.
Current tax and total tax on prot on ordinary activities differs from the amount computed by applying the corporation tax rate to prot on ordinary activities before taxation.
The differences were attributable to the following factors % % % UK corporation tax rate 30.0 30.0 30.0 Nondeductible depreciation amortisation and impairment 0.9 0.4 92.6 Nondeductible nonUK losses 1.6 3.3 17.8 Higher taxes on nonUK prots 0.2 0.4 0.8 Excess depreciation over capital allowances 3.2 3.4 9.7 Pension provisions and prepayments 9.9 3.2 11.5 Other timing differences 2.8 0.7 0.5 Lower effective tax on gain on disposal of xed asset investments and group undertakings 1.3 16.5 66.3 Higher lower effective tax on gain on disposal of non qualifying assets  2.0 44.6 Prior year adjustments  2.0 0.5 Other 3.2 0.8 1.7 Current tax  effective corporation tax rate 18.7 17.7 25.8 Deferred taxes on excess depreciation over capital allowances 3.2 3.4 9.7 Pension provisions and prepayments 9.9 3.2 11.5 Other timing differences 2.8 0.7 0.5 Prior year adjustments 0.5 2.3 2.2 Total tax  effective corporation tax rate 27.7 14.5 30.3 Factors that may affect future tax charges The group operates in countries where the tax rate is different to the UK corporate tax rate primarily the USA the Netherlands the Republic of Ireland Germany and Spain.
As at 31 March 2004 the group had overseas corporate tax losses estimated to be 1 billion which are not recognised as deferred tax assets.
In addition the group has unutilised capital losses estimated to be in excess of 10 billion which were not recognised as deferred tax assets.
Minority interests Minority interests in losses prots Group 8 47 Associates  816 Total minority interests 8 12 23 Dividends 2004 pence per share pence per share pence per share Interim dividend paid 3.20 2.25  278 194 Proposed nal dividend 5.30 4.25 2.0telTotal dividends 8.50 6.50 2.0telIn addition to the nal dividend for the year ended 31 March 2002 of 173 million there was a demerger distribution of 19490 million representing the net assets of mmO including purchased goodwill as at the date of demerger.
Of the demerger distribution 9 million represents a cash dividend paid by British Telecommunications plc to mmO plc as part of the demerger process.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 93 Notes to the financial statements 15.
Earnings loss per share The basic earnings loss per share are calculated by dividing the prot for the nancial year attributable to shareholders by the weighted average number of shares in issue after deducting the companys shares held by employee share ownership trusts and treasury shares.
In calculating the diluted earnings loss per share share options outstanding and other potential ordinary shares have been taken into account.
The weighted average number of shares in the years were 2004 millions of shares millions of shares millions of shares Basic 8621 8616 8307 Dilutive ordinary shares from share options outstanding and shares held in trust 55 52 70 Total diluted 8676 8668 8377 Options over 259 million shares 2003  177 million 2002  16 million were excluded from the calculation of the total diluted number of shares as they were antidilutive.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 94 Notes to the financial statements 15.
Earnings loss per share continued The items in the calculation of earnings loss per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items in the years were pence per share pence per share pence per share Attributable to exceptional items and goodwill amortisation from continuing activities Rectication costs 0.3  30 Goodwill amortisation 0.1 0.3 2.0 12 22 162 Property rationalisation costs  2.3   198 Goodwill impairment in subsidiary undertakings   23.5   1955 Asset impairment in subsidiary undertakings   3.9   324 Costs relating to the Concert unwind   3.0   253 Costs relating to the demerger of mmO BT Retail call centre rationalisation costs   0.8   68 BT Wholesale bad debts release costs 0.2  0.9 23  79 Goodwill impairment in associates and joint ventures 0.3  5.2 26  433 Impairment of investment in associates and joint ventures and release charge for related exit costs  1.8 9.4  150 780 Prot on sale of xed asset investments 0.4 19.8 2.0 32 1700 169 Loss on sale of group undertakings  0.1 1.8  9 148 Prot on sale of property xed assets   12.8   1062 Amounts written off investments   6.4   535 Finance cost of novating interest rate swaps  3.4 2.0  293 162 Interest receivable on Yell loan notes 0.4  34 Premium on repurchasing bonds 1.1  89 Tax credit 0.3 1.6 1.
Net charge credit attributable to exceptional items and goodwill amortisation from continuing activities 0.5 17.0 43.6 39 1460 3623 Attributable to discontinued activities Costs relating to the demerger of mmO Prot on sale of group undertakings   14.0   1160 Prot on sale of xed asset investments   38.6   3208 Goodwill amortisation   3.0   243 Results of discontinued activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items after tax and minority interest   2.7   231 Net credit attributable to discontinued activities   46.8   3883 Basic earnings per shareprot for the nancial year after goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 16.4 31.2 12.0 1417 2686 995 Less Basic earnings per shareprot for the nancial year attributable to discontinued activities   46.8   3883 Basic earnings loss per shareprot loss for the nancial year before discontinued activities 16.4 31.2 34.8 1417 2686 2888 Less Basic loss earnings per shareloss prot for the nancial year attributable to exceptional items and goodwill amortisation from continuing activities 0.5 17.0 43.6 39 1460 3623 Basic earnings per shareprot for the nancial year from continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 16.9 14.2 8.8 1456 1226 735 Earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items is provided to help readers evaluate the performance of the group.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 95 Notes to the financial statements 16.
Reconciliation of operating prot loss to operating cash ows 2004 Group operating prot loss 2873 2572 479 Depreciation 2921 3011 3680 Amortisation and impairment 15 24 2321 Increase decrease in stocks 6 31 43 Decrease increase in debtors 414 764 545 Decrease increase in creditors 171 294 803 Increase in pension prepayment and decrease in pension liabilities 655 314 537 Decrease increase in provisions 49 171 52 Other 47 58 81 Net cash inow from operating activities 5389 6023 5257 Analysed as Continuing activities 5389 6023 5023 Discontinued activities   234 Net cash inow from operating activities 5389 6023 5257 Management of liquid resources 2004 Purchase of shortterm investments and payments into shortterm deposits over 3 months 5306 3990 7601 Sale of shortterm investments and withdrawals from shortterm deposits over 3 months 4467 4082 4695 Net movement of shortterm investments and shortterm deposits under 3 months not repayable on demand 1962 1821 1042 Net cash inow outow from management of liquid resources 1123 1729 1864 Movements in all shortterm investments and deposits not repayable on demand are reported under the heading of management of liquid resources.
Acquisitions and disposals Acquisition of subsidiary companies and businesses Year ended 31 March 2004
Consideration
Cash 33 Deferred 3 Total 36 Year ended 31 March 2003
Other
Total
Consideration
Cash 13 13 Carrying value of Concert global venture 338  338 In addition net cash of 56 million was received in settlement of the unwind of the Concert global venture.
Year ended 31 March 2002 Esat Digifone
Total
Consideration
Deferred 8 8 On 5 January 2004 the group acquired the UK trade and assets of BT Expedite Limited formerly NSB Retail plc for consideration of 17 million 2 million deferred.
The net liabilities acquired amounted to 1 million giving rise to goodwill of 18 million which is being amortised over a period of 5 years.
On 15 March 2004 the group acquired controlling interest in Transcomm plc for consideration of 15 million.
The groups share of the net assets acquired was 2 million giving rise to goodwill of 13 million which is being amortised over a period of 13 years.
On 13 January 2004 the group took full control of Siosistemi SpA for consideration of 4 million including deferred consideration of 1 million.
Net assets of 1 million were acquired giving rise to goodwill of 4 million which is being amortised over a period of 10 years.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 96 Notes to the financial statements 18.
Acquisitions and disposals continued On completion of the unwind of Concert on 1 April 2002 the former Concert businesses customer accounts and networks were returned to the two parent companies with BT and ATandT each taking ownership of substantially those parts of the Concert global venture originally contributed by them.
As part of the settlement with ATandT for the unwind of the Concert global venture BT received net cash of US72 million 56 million.
This net settlement included the receipt of US350 million reecting the allocation of the businesses and the payment of US278 million to achieve the equal division of specied working capital and other liability balances.
The results of the acquired businesses both pre and post acquisition cannot be separately identied and therefore cannot be reported.
Book value and fair value Fixed assets 398 Current assets 301 Current liabilities 405 Provisions for liabilities and charges 2 Longterm debt 10 Groups share of original book value and fair value of net assets 282 Net receivable from ATandT 56 Total net assets acquired 338
Total cost 338 The consideration was satised through the unwind of the Concert global venture the carrying value of which was 338 million.
Accordingly there is no further prot or loss on the unwind and no goodwill on the acquisition.
During the year ended 31 March 2003 the acquisition of other subsidiary companies and businesses and the consideration given comprised Book value and fair value Fixed assets 1 Current liabilities 1 Groups share of original book value of net assets and fair value to group Goodwill 13 Total cost 13 On 18 April 2001 the group took full control of O Communications Ireland formerly Esat Digifone.
Under an agreement made in 2000 the group purchased from Telenor its 49.5% interest in Esat Digifone for 869 million.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition was being amortised over 20 years until it was demerged with mmO Book value and fair value Minority interest 7 Groups share of original book value of net liabilities 7 Goodwill 876 Total cost 869 Other subsidiary companies During the year ended 31 March 2002 the acquisition of interests in other subsidiary companies and the consideration given comprised Book value and fair value Fixed assets 3 Current assets 5 Current liabilities 6 Groups share of original book value of net assets and fair value to group 2 Goodwill 33 Total cost 35 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 97 Notes to the financial statements 18.
Acquisitions and disposals continued Acquisition of associates and joint ventures On 31 July 2003 the groups effective interest in Albacom SpA increased by 3% to 26%.
During the year ended 31 March 2002 the group increased its interest in Blu SpA.
Year ended 31 March 2002
Group share of original book value of net assets and fair value to the group 16 Goodwill 50 Total cost 66 On 31 January 2002 one of the venture partners in Blu exercised a put option for BT to purchase a 9% interest for 66 million.
The cost of 66 million arising on this purchase was written off.
In addition in the year ended 31 March 2002 the value of BTs investment was reviewed and provision was made for the associated impairment and exit costs.
In December 2002 the group sold its interest in Blu note 7.
Disposal of subsidiaries and the demerger of mmO In the year ended 31 March 2003 BT disposed of subsidiaries with net assets of 12 million.
Consideration amounted to 3 million resulting in a loss on disposal of 9 million.
The table below analyses the disposal of subsidiaries and the demerger of mmO for the year ended 31 March 2002.
Year ended 31 March 2002 mmO
Other
Total
Net assets demerged or disposed of Fixed assets 20459 467 211 21137 Stocks 109 98  207 Debtors 1381 400 19 1800 Cash Creditors amounts falling due within one year 1790 153 46 1989 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year  10  10 Provisions 229   229 Intercompany loans 561   561 Goodwill previously written off to reserves  9 44 53 Net assets disposed of 19490 832 235 20557 Prot loss on disposal  1128 116 1012 Consideration 19490 1960 119 21569 Cash  1859 119 1978 Demerger distribution 19490   19490 Loan notes  60  60 Other 41  41 Total 19490 1960 119 21569 In addition 9 million deferred consideration was received during the year ended 31 March 2002 in settlement of the disposals on 18 July 1999 of BT New Towns Cable and Westminster Cable Limited.
Amounts included in the cash ow statement for the year ended 31 March 2002 attributable to mmO and Yell and the results of mmO and Yell included in the results for the year ended 31 March 2002 to the date of demerger and disposal respectively were mmO
Net cash ow from operating activities 227 7 Capital expenditure 865 2 Decrease in cash in the year 262 4 Results of mmO and Yell included to date of demergerdisposal Group turnover 2665 171 Total operating loss prot 461 33 Loss prot before taxation 569 27 Taxation charge 24 9 Loss prot for the nancial year 593 18 On 19 November 2001 BT completed the demerger of mmO the groups former mobile phone business in
UK Limited formerly BT Cellnet Limited O Communications Ireland Limited formerly Esat Digifone Limited Telfort Mobiel BV Viag Interkom GmbH and Co Manx Telecom and Genie.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 98 Notes to the financial statements 18.
Acquisitions and disposals continued On 22 June 2001 BT completed the sale of the Yell Group.
The Yell Group consisted of the Yellow Pages division of British Telecommunications plc Yellow Pages Sales Limited and Yellow Book USA Inc. group undertakings.
Net debt At 1 April Cash ow
Other
Currency movement At 31 March Analysis of net debt Cash in hand and at bank 91 18    109 Overnight deposits 268 24    292 Bank overdrafts 4 2    2 Other current asset investments 6072 1123  74 4 4871 Shortterm investments and cash less bank overdrafts 6427 1079  74 4 5270 Debt due within one year excluding bank overdrafts 2544 2144  869  1269 Debt due after one year 13456 157 1 874  12426 Total debt excluding bank overdrafts 16000 2301 1 5  13695 Net debt 9573 1222 1 69 4 8425 Reconciliation of net cash ow to movement in net debt Increase decrease in cash in the year 44 19 90 Cash outow from decrease in debt 2301 2515 11976 Cash outow inow from increase in liquid resources 1123 1729 1864 Decrease in net debt resulting from cash ows 1222 4225 13930 Currency and translation movements 4 67 32 Increase decrease in debt on acquisition or disposal of subsidiary undertakings 1 13 75 Other noncash movements 69 43 268 Decrease in net debt in the year 1148 4128 14241 Net debt at 1 April 9573 13701 27942 Net debt at 31 March 8425 9573 13701 On the demerger mmO had net debt of approximately 500 million of which BT Group was owed approximately 440 million in addition to ordinary trading account balances. on 19 November 2001.
Intangible assets
Telecommunication licences and other
Cost
1 April 2003 2578 21 2599 Acquisitions 35 1 36 Disposals  13 13 Currency movements 28  28 Total cost at 31 March 2004 2585 9 2594
1 April 2003 2371 10 2381 Charge for the year 12 3 15 Disposals  6 6 Total amortisation at 31 March 2004 2383 7 2390 Net book value at 31 March Net book value at 31 March BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 99 Notes to the financial statements 21.
Tangible xed assets Land and buildings Plant and equipment
Total
Cost
1 April 2003 955 34346 958 36259 Acquisitions of subsidiary undertakings 7 38  45
20 691 1942 2653 Transfers 75 1969 2044 Disposals and adjustments 120 1388 10 1518 Currency movements 8 77 26 111 Total cost at 31 March 2004 929 35579 820 37328
1 April 2003 352 20064  20416 Acquisitions of subsidiary undertakings 5 35  40 Charge for the year 53 2868  2921 Disposals and adjustments 67 1352  1419 Currency movements 3 49  52 Total depreciation at 31 March 2004 340 21566  21906 Net book value at 31 March 2004 589 14013 820 15422 Engineering stores   65 65 Total tangible xed assets at 31 March 2004 589 14013 885 15487 Net book value at 31 March 2003 603 14282 958 15843 Engineering stores   45 45 Total tangible xed assets at 31 March 2003 603 14282 1003 15888 The net book value of land and buildings comprised Freehold 363 374 Long leases over 50 years unexpired 13 27 Short leases 213 202 Total net book value of land and buildings 589 603 The net book value of assets held under nance leases included within plant and equipment was 620 million at 31 March 2004 2003  6 million.
The depreciation charge for the year to 31 March 2004 on those assets was 174 million 2003  1 million.
Expenditure on tangible xed assets comprised Plant and equipment Transmission equipment 1324 1277 Exchange equipment 150 228 Other network equipment 585 466 Computers and ofce equipment 205 281 Motor vehicles and other 316 162 Land and buildings 73 40 2653 2454 Increase decrease in engineering stores 20 9 Total expenditure on tangible xed assets 2673 2445 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 100 Notes to the financial statements 22.
Fixed asset investments Interests in associates and joint ventures
Loans
Share of post acquisition losses
Total
Cost
Additions 23 9  19 51 Disposals 8  26 197 231 Share of losses for the year   54  54 Currency movements 2 1 1 2 4 Other movements   13  13 Total cost at 31 March 2004 608 28 302 405 739 Provisions and amounts written off 1 April 2003 221   188 409 Disposals 11   41 52 Increase in the year 3   2 5 Total provisions and amounts written off at 31 March 2004 213   149 362 Net book value at 31 March 2004 395 28 302 256 377 Net book value at 31 March 2003 374 20 236 397 555 Subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures Details of the principal operating subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates are set out on page 134.
Associates and joint ventures 2004
Goodwill 1 1 Loans  1 Share of other net assets 23 25 Total associates 24 27 Joint ventures Loans 28 19 Share of other net assets 69 112 Total joint ventures 97 131 Net book value at 31 March 121 158 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 101 Notes to the financial statements 22.
Fixed asset investments continued The groups proportionate share of its associates and joint ventures assets and liabilities in aggregate at 31 March was as follows Fixed assets 347 570 Current assets 149 186 Current liabilities 217 344 Net current liabilities 68 158 Longterm liabilities 187 271 Minority interests  4 Share of net assets 92 137 The groups proportionate share of its associates and joint ventures losses less prots before taxation excluding minority interests totalled 51 million prots less losses 2003  310 million losses less prots 2002 1463 million and its share of their losses less prots attributable to shareholders excluding minority interests totalled 51 million for the year ended 31 March 2004 prots less losses 2003  229 million losses less prots 2002  1548 million.
Other investments Other investments include ordinary shares of the company with a net book value of 53 million 2003 61 million and a market value of 54 million 2003  50 million held in trust for the BT Incentive Share Plan the BT Retention Share Plan the BT Executive Share Plan and the BT Deferred Bonus Plan note 34.
In the 2003 nancial year they also include ordinary shares of the company with a net book value of 37 million and a market value of 25 million held in trust for employee sharesave schemes.
In the group balance sheet at 31 March 2004 listed investments were held with a book value of 22 million 2003  22 million and a market value of 20 million 2003  15 million.
Debtors 2004 Trade debtors 2126 2240 Amounts owed by joint ventures trading 5 9 Other debtors 327 517 Accrued income 1392 1486 Pension fund prepayment 1172 630 Other prepayments 167 161 Total debtors 5189 5043 Trade debtors are stated after deducting 345 million 2003    491 million for doubtful debts.
The amount charged to the group prot and loss account for doubtful debts for the year ended 31 March 2004 was 136 million net of an exceptional credit of 23 million 2003    264 million 2002 369 million including an exceptional charge of 79 million.
Falling due after more than one year.
Current asset investments 2004 Listed investments 1247 267 Other shortterm deposits and investments 3916 6073 Total current asset investments 5163 6340 Market value of listed investments 1247 268 Included within other shortterm deposits and investments is 144 million invested with a swap counterparty 2003    149 million.
The counterparty has security over this investment in the event of BT defaulting on the swap.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 102 Notes to the financial statements 25.
Loans and other borrowings 2004 US dollar 8.875% notes 2030 minimum 8.625% 1686 1928 5.75% bonds tel3.5% indexed linked notes tel8.625% bonds tel7.75% notes 2016 minimum 7.5% Euro 7.125% notes 2011 minimum 6.875% 734 1368 US dollar 8.375% notes 2010 minimum 8.125% 1795 2049 US dollar 8.765% bonds telEuro 11.875% senior notes 2009 3 3 US dollar convertible 2008 0.75% 97 US dollar 7% notes tel12.25% bonds tel7.375% notes 2006 minimum 7.125% Euro 6.375% notes 2006 minimum 6.125% 1861 1858 US dollar 7.875% notes 2005 minimum 7.624% 1902 1942 US dollar 6.75% bonds telEuro 5.875% notes 2004 minimum 5.625% US dollar oating rate notes 2003 7.125% bonds 2003  500 Total listed bonds debentures and notes 11875 15317 Lease nance 1099 13 Bank loans due 20042009 average effective interest rate 9.8% 480 558 Floating rate note 20042009 average effective interest rate 4.1% 101 112 Floating rate loan 2006 average effective interest rate 4.6% 140 Bank overdrafts and other shortterm borrowings 2 4 Total loans and other borrowings 13697 16004 The interest rate payable on these notes will be subject to adjustment from time to time if either Moodys or Standard and Poors SandP reduces the rating ascribed to the groups senior unsecured debt below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of SandP.
In this event the interest rate payable on the notes and the spread applicable to the oating notes will be increased by 0.25% for each ratings category adjustment by each ratings agency.
In addition if Moodys or SandP subsequently increase the rating ascribed to the groups senior unsecured debt then the interest rate then payable on notes and the spread applicable to the oating notes will be decreased by 0.25% for each rating category upgrade by each rating agency but in no event will the interest rate be reduced below the minimum interest rate reected in the table above.
Apart from the lease nance all borrowings at 31 March 2004 are unsecured.
Lease nance is repayable by instalments.
Repayments fall due as follows Within one year or on demand 1271 2548 Between one and two years 4361 846 Between two and three years 777 4031 Between three and four years 854 501 Between four and ve years 100 606 After ve years 6334 7472 Total due for repayment after more than one year 12426 13456 Total loans and other borrowings 13697 16004 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 103 Notes to the financial statements 26.
Other creditors 2004 Trade creditors 2307 2772 Amounts owed to joint ventures trading 1 3 Corporation taxes 441 406 Other taxation and social security 448 438 Other creditors 1365 1389 Accrued expenses 729 718 Deferred income 1532 1040 Dividends payable 454 366 Total other creditors 7277 7132 Provisions for liabilities and charges Provisions for liabilities and charges excluding deferred taxation
Pension provisions
Total
Balances at 1 April Charged against prot for the year  5 16 21 Unwind of discount 5   5 Utilised in the year 70 2  72 Total provisions at 31 March Property provisions comprise amounts provided for obligations to complete nearly nished new properties and remedial work to be undertaken on properties and the onerous lease provision on rationalisation of the groups London ofce portfolio.
The provisions will be utilised over the remaining lease periods.
Provision for unfunded pension obligations which will be utilised over the remaining lives of the beneciaries.
Other provisions include amounts provided for legal or constructive obligations arising from insurance claims and litigation which will be utilisedas the obligations are settled.
Deferred taxation Deferred tax is provided for in full on certain timing differences BT does not discount the provision.
Balance at 1 April 2003 2017 Charge against prot for the year 174 Total deferred tax provisions at 31 March 2004 2191 Tax effect of timing differences due to Excess capital allowances 1960 2035 Pension prepayment 335 167 Other 104 185 Total provision for deferred taxation 2191 2017 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 104 Notes to the financial statements 28.
Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds
Share premium account
Other
Prot and loss account
Balances at 1 April 2001 7573   2848 7329 12054 Rights issue 2272   3604  5876 Shares issued to special purpose trust Other allotments of ordinary shares prior to demerger  52 million shares issued 61   160  221 Distribution relating to demerger of mmO 19490 19490 Capital reduction on 21 November 2001 9537    9537 Goodwill previously written off to reserves taken back to the prot and loss account note 7  68 68 Employee share option schemes  1 million shares issued note 34 2  2 Movement relating to BTs employee share ownership trust Unrealised gain on start up of joint ventures    5  5 Realisation of gain made on start up of joint ventures    2  2 Movement in other reserves due to demerger    2  2 Currency movements including 36 million net movements in respect of foreign currency borrowings Prot for the nancial year  995 995 Dividends 2.0p per ordinary share  173 173 Balances at 1 April 2002 434 2  1025 1819 358 Goodwill previously written off to reserves taken back to the prot and loss account Employee share option schemes  0.2 million shares issued note 34 Transfer between reserves Currency movements including 106 million net movements in respect of foreign currency borrowings Prot for the year  2686 2686 Dividends 6.5p per ordinary share  560 560 Balances at 1 April 2003 434 2  998 1208 2642 Purchase of own shares shares cancelled 2  2  64 64 shares held as treasury shares  80 80 Currency movements including 133 million net movements in respect of foreign currency borrowings Prot for the year  1417 1417 Dividends 8.5p per ordinary share  732 732 Balances at 31 March  1660 3094 The groups rights issue closed on 15 June 2001 when British Telecommunications plc was the parent company of the group.
A total of 1976 million ordinary shares of 25p each was issued at 300p per share in a 3 for 10 rights issue.
Of the total of 5876 million raised net of 52 million expenses 494 million was credited to share capital and 5382 million to the share premium account of British Telecommunications plc.
Following the introduction of BT Group plc as the parent company of the group the increase in consolidated share capital has been restated to reect the nominal value of BT Group plc shares and the balance has been credited to other reserves.
In connection with outstanding share options at the date of demerger 57 million British Telecommunications plc ordinary shares were issued on 14 November 2001 to a special purpose trust.
Of the consideration of 173 million 159 million was credited to the share premium account of British Telecommunications plc.
Following the introduction of BT Group plc as the parent company of the group the increase in consolidated share capital has been restated to reect the nominal value of BT Group plc shares and the balance has been credited to other reserves.
The demerger distribution of 19490 million represents the net assets of mmO including purchased goodwill as at the date of the demerger.
See also the note on the face of the group prot and loss account for the year ended 31 March 2002.
Following the approval of the Court the nominal value of BT Group shares was reduced from 115p each to 5p each on 21 November 2001 by way of a reduction of capital under section 135 of the Companies Act 1985.
The surplus of 9537 million arising from this reduction has been credited to group prot and loss reserve.
Aggregate goodwill at 31 March 2004 in respect of acquisitions completed prior to 1 April 1998 of 385 million 2003  385 million 2002  1254 million has been written off against retained earnings in accordance with the groups accounting policy.
The goodwill written off against retained earnings will be charged in the prot and loss account on the subsequent disposal of the business to which it related.
During the year ended 31 March 2002 the company issued shares at a market value of 154 million in respect of the exercise of options awarded under its principal savingsrelated share option scheme.
Employees paid 84 million to the group for the issue of these shares and the balance of 70 million comprised contributions to the qualifying employee share ownership trust from group undertakings.
The cumulative foreign currency translation adjustment which increased retained earnings at 31 March 2004 was 133 million 2003  222 million 2002  217 million.
During the year ended 31 March 2004 the company repurchased 80571000 of its own shares of 5p each representing 1% of the calledup share capital for an aggregate consideration of 144 million.
Of the total shares repurchased 36222000 shares with an aggregate nominal value of 2 million were cancelled immediately and 44349000 shares with an aggregate nominal value of 2 million are held as treasury shares.
Release of statutory reserves in subsidiary undertakings on cessation of associated activities.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 105 Notes to the financial statements 28.
Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds continued Reorganisation and demerger On 19 November 2001 the legal separation of the mmO business from the rest of the former British Telecommunications plc group was completed and BT Group plc BT Group became the ultimate parent company of British Telecommunications plc BT.
The legal structure of the transaction was such that BT transferred the mmO business to mmO plc and BT Group Investments Limited BTGI became the immediate parent company of BT on 16 November 2001.
On 19 November 2001 mmO plc transferred the shares in BTGI to BT Group as consideration for the issue to former BT shareholders of one ordinary share of 115 pence in the company credited as fully paid for each ordinary share in BT held on 16 November 2001.
On 21 November 2001 following the approval of the Court the nominal value of BT Group shares was reduced from 115 pence per ordinary share to 5 pence per ordinary share by way of a reduction of capital under section 135 of the Companies Act 1985.
The surplus of 9537 million arising from this capital reduction has been credited to the group prot and loss reserve.
The transfer of BTGI to the company has been accounted for as a group reconstruction in accordance with the principles of merger accounting set out in Financial Reporting Standard 6 FRS 6 and Schedule 4A to the Companies Act 1985.
The consolidated nancial statements are therefore presented as if the company had been the parent company of the group throughout the year ended 31 March 2001 and up to the date of the demerger.
The results of mmO have been included in discontinued activities in all three years.
The transfer of BT to BTGI on 16 November 2001 was a group reorganisation effected for nonequity consideration.
This transaction has been accounted for in these nancial statements using the principles of merger accounting as if BT had been owned and controlled by BTGI throughout the year ended 31 March 2001 and up to 16 November 2001.
This is not in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 since the group reorganisation does not meet all the conditions for merger accounting.
If acquisition accounting had been applied to account for the reorganisation whereby BTGI became the parent company of BT this would have resulted in all the separable assets and liabilities of the BT Group as at 16 November 2001 being recorded at their fair values substantial goodwill and goodwill amortisation charges arising and only the post demerger results being reected within the BT Group consolidated nancial statements.
The directors consider that to have applied acquisition accounting in preparing these nancial statements would have failed to give a true and fair view of the groups state of affairs and results.
This is because in substance BT Group is the successor to BT and its shareholders have had a continuing interest in the BT business both before and after the demerger.
The directors consider that it is not practicable to quantify the effects of this departure from the requirements of the Companies Act 1985.
In the companys nancial statements its investment in BTGI is stated at the nominal value of shares issued.
In accordance with sections 131 and 133 of the Companies Act 1985 no premium was recorded on the ordinary shares issued see note 37.
On consolidation the difference between the nominal value of the shares issued and the aggregate share capital share premium and capital redemption reserve of BT at the date of the demerger the merger difference has been debited to the other reserves.
Related party transactions In the year ended 31 March 2004 the groups turnover with its associates and joint ventures amounted to 1 million 2003  3 million 2002  15 million and the group purchased 60 million 2003  69 million 2002  99 million in services and products from these undertakings.
Interest for the year of nil 2003  nil 2002  1 million was receivable on debt due from these undertakings.
The amount of debt outstanding with these undertakings at 31 March 2004 was 28 million 2003  20 million.
The maximum debt outstanding during the year was 43 million 2003  92 million.
As at the latest practicable date 14 May 2004 the amount of debt outstanding was 28 million.
There were a number of transactions during the year between the company and its subsidiary undertakings which are eliminated on consolidation and therefore not disclosed.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 106 Notes to the financial statements 30.
Financial commitments contingent liabilities and subsequent events Contracts placed for capital expenditure not provided in the accounts 879 616 Operating lease payments payable within one year of the balance sheet date were in respect of leases expiring Within one year 8 11 Between one and ve years 29 26 After ve years 330 317 Total payable within one year 367 354 Future minimum operating lease payments for the group at 31 March 2004 were as follows 2004 Payable in the year ending 31 Marchtel 361tel 367 2009 369 Thereafter 9088 Total future minimum operating lease payments 10914 Operating lease commitments were mainly in respect of leases of land and buildings.
At 31 March 2004 other than disclosed below there were no contingent liabilities or guarantees other than those arising in the ordinary course of the groups business and on these no material losses are anticipated.
The group has insurance cover to certain limits for major risks on property and major claims in connection with legal liabilities arising in the course of its operations.
Otherwise the group generally carries its own risks.
The group has provided guarantees relating to certain leases entered into by O UK Limited prior to its demerger with mmO on 19 November 2001 mmO plc has given BT a counterindemnity for these guarantees.
The maximum likely exposure is US76 million 41 million as at 31 March 2004 although this could increase by a further US582 million 317 million in the event of credit default in respect of amounts used to defease future lease obligations.
The guarantee lasts until O UK Ltd has discharged all its obligations which is expected to be when the lease ends on 30 January 2017.
The group has guaranteed part of the bank borrowings of its joint venture Albacom SpA under the terms of the joint ventures renancing in the 2004 nancial year.
This expires on the earlier of the loan being repaid or 31 October 2011.
The guarantee is triggered if Albacom fails to meet the repayment schedule under the terms of the loan and is effectively capped at e34.5 million.
The company does not believe there are any pending legal proceedings which would have a material adverse effect on the nancial position or results of operations of the group.
Proceedings have been initiated in Italy against 21 defendants including a former BT employee in connection with the Italian UMTS auction.
Blu in which BT held a minority interest participated in that auction process.
The evidential hearings are continuing in Rome.
If the proceedings are successful BT could be held liable with others for any damages.
The company has concluded that it is not appropriate to make a provision in respect of any such potential claim.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 107 Notes to the financial statements 31.
Pension costs
The group continues to account for pension costs in accordance with UK Statement of Standard Accounting Practice No.
24 Pension Costs SSAP 24.
In addition disclosures have been presented in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard No.
17 Retirement Benets FRS 17.
The group offers retirement plans to its employees.
The groups main scheme the BT Pension Scheme BTPS is a dened benet scheme where the benets are based on employees length of service and nal pensionable pay.
The BTPS is funded through a legally separate trustee administered fund.
This scheme has been closed to new entrants since 31 March 2001 and replaced by a dened contribution scheme.
Under this dened contribution scheme the prot and loss charge represents the contribution payable by the group based upon a xed percentage of employees pay.
The total pension costs of the group including discontinued activities expensed within staff costs in the year was 404 million 2003  322 million 2002  382 million of which 376 million 2003  306 million 2002  373 million related to the groups main dened benet pension scheme the BTPS.
The increase in the pension cost reects the amortisation charge for the pension decit partly offset by a reduction in the number of active members of the BTPS and the interest credit relating to the balance sheet prepayment.
This total pension cost includes the cost of providing enhanced pension benets to leavers which amounted to 1 million 2003  60 million 2002  46 million.
In the year ended 31 March 2002 this prot and loss charge of 46 million was not the full cash cost of 186 million because there was a pension fund accounting surplus including the provision on the balance sheet of 140 million that was fully utilised before making a charge to the prot and loss account.
The pension cost applicable to the groups main dened contribution schemes in the year ended 31 March 2004 was 7 million 2003  4 million 2002  5 million and 0.7 million 2003  0.4 million 2002  0.3 million of contributions to the schemes were outstanding at 31 March 2004.
The group occupies four properties owned by the scheme on which an annual rental of 3 million is payable.
The BTPS assets are invested in UK and overseas equities UK and overseas properties xed interest and index linked securities deposits and shortterm investments.
At 31 March 2004 the UK equities included 33 million 2003  37 million 2002  55 million ordinary shares of the company with a market value of 58 million 2003  58 million 2002  154 million.
BT Pension Scheme Funding valuation A triennial valuation is carried out for the independent scheme trustees by a professionally qualied independent actuary using the projected unit method.
The purpose of the valuation is to design a funding plan to ensure that present and future contributions should be sufcient to meet future liabilities.
The triennial valuation as at 31 December 2002 forms the basis of determining the groups pension fund contributions for the year ending 31 March 2004 and future periods until the next valuation is completed.
The funding valuation is performed at 31 December because this is the nancial year end of the BTPS.
The valuation basis for funding purposes is broadly as follows and scheme assets are valued at market value at the valuation date and and scheme liabilities are measured using a projected unit method and discounted at the estimated rate of return reecting the assets of the scheme.
The last three triennial valuations were determined using the following longterm assumptions Real rates per annum Nominal rates per annum valuation % valuation % valuation % valuation % valuation % valuation % Return on existing assets relative to market values 4.52 2.38 3.80 7.13 5.45 7.95 after allowing for an annual increase in dividends of 1.00 1.00 0.75 3.53 4.03 4.78 Return on future investments 4.00 4.00 4.25 6.60 7.12 8.42 Average increase in retail price index    2.50 3.00 4.00 Average future increases in wages and salaries 1.50 1.75 1.75 4.04 4.80 5.82 Average increase in pensions    2.50 3.00 3.754.00 There is a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 1.25% for the rst three years.
The mortality assumption reects improvements in life expectancy since the 1999 valuation and incorporates further future improvements.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 108 Notes to the financial statements 31.
Pension costs continued The assumed rate of investment return salary increases and mortality all have a signicant effect on the funding valuation.
A 0.25 percentage point change in these assumptions would have the following effects on the funding decit Impact on funding decit
Decrease bn 0.25 percentage point change in Investment return 0.9 0.9 Wage and salary increases 0.2 0.2 An additional year of life expectancy would result in a 0.7 billion increase in the decit.
At 31 December 2002 the assets of the BTPS had a market value of 22.8 billion 1999  29.7 billion and were sufcient to cover 91.6% 1999  96.8% of the benets accrued by that date after allowing for expected future increases in wages and salaries but not taking into account the costs of providing incremental pension benets for employees leaving under release schemes since that date.
This represents a funding decit of 2.1 billion compared to 1.0 billion at 31 December 1999.
The funding valuation uses conservative assumptions whereas had the valuation been based on the actuarys view of the median estimate basis the funding decit would have been reduced to 0.4 billion.
Although the market value of equity investments had fallen the investment income and contributions received by the scheme exceeded the benets paid by 0.3 billion in the year ended 31 December 2002.
As a result of the triennial funding valuation the group agreed to make employers contributions at a rate of 12.2% of pensionable pay from April 2003 and annual deciency payments of 232 million.
This compared to the employers contribution rate of 11.6% and annual deciency payments of 200 million that were determined under the 1999 funding valuation.
In the year ended 31 March 2004 the group made regular contributions of 284 million 2003  278 million 2002  303 million and additional special contributions for enhanced pension benets to leavers in the year ended 31 December 2002 of 130 million in the 2004 nancial year 2003  129 million 2002  400 million and deciency contributions of 612 million 2003  200 million 2002  200 million which includes the early payment of 380 million scheduled for payment in subsequent years.
Under the terms of the trust deed that governs the BTPS the group is required to have a funding plan that should address the decit over a maximum period of 20 years whilst the agreed funding plan addresses the decit over a period of 15 years.
The group will continue to make deciency payments until the decit is made good.
The BTPS was closed to new entrants on 31 March 2001 and the age prole of active members will consequently increase.
Under the projected unit method the current service cost as a proportion of the active members pensionable salaries is expected to increase as the members of the scheme approach retirement.
Despite the scheme being closed to new entrants the projected payment prole extends over more than 60 years.
SSAP 24 accounting valuation The SSAP 24 valuation is broadly on the following basis and scheme assets are valued at market value and and scheme liabilities are measured using the projected unit method and discounted at the estimated rate of return reecting the assets of the scheme.
The pension costs for the 2003 and 2002 nancial years were based on the SSAP 24 valuation at 31 March 2000.
At 31 March 2000 there was a SSAP 24 decit of 0.2 billion and the regular cost for the 2003 and 2002 nancial years was 11.6% of pensionable salaries.
The SSAP 24 valuation at 31 March 2000 was based on the same assumptions as the December 1999 funding valuation with the exception that over the long term it has been assumed that the return on the existing assets of the scheme relative to market values would be a nominal 5.6% per annum which equates to a real return of 2.5% per annum.
The pension cost for the 2004 nancial year was based upon the SSAP 24 valuation at 31 March 2003.
At 31 March 2003 there was a SSAP 24 decit of 1.4 billion before taking account of the balance sheet prepayment and the regular cost is 11.3% of pensionable salaries.
The SSAP 24 valuation at 31 March 2003 is based on the 31 December 2002 funding valuation rolled forward and uses the same assumptions as set out above with the following exceptions and return on existing assets is assumed to be a nominal 7.1% per annum which equates to a real return of 4.7% and average increase in retail price index is assumed to be 2.25% per annum and and the average future increases in wages and salaries is assumed to include a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 0.75% for the rst three years before returning to 1.5%.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 109 Notes to the financial statements 31.
Pension costs continued The cumulative difference since the adoption of SSAP 24 between the cash contributions paid by the group to the pension scheme and the prot and loss charge is reected on the balance sheet.
The cumulative cash contributions exceed the prot and loss charge and the resulting difference is shown as a prepayment on the balance sheet.
At 31 March 2004 the prepayment was 1172 million 2003  630 million with the increase being principally due to the additional special and deciency contributions in the year.
The pension charge to the prot and loss account will also include the amortisation of the combined pension fund position and pension prepayment over the average remaining service lives of scheme members which amounts to 13 years and the cost of enhanced pension benets provided to leavers.
FRS 17  Retirement benets The group continues to account for pensions in accordance with SSAP 24.
Full implementation of FRS 17 has been deferred by the Accounting Standards Board and would apply to the group for the 2006 nancial year.
However in the 2006 nancial year the group will adopt International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS.
The requirements for disclosure under FRS 17 remain in force between its issue and adoption of IFRS and the required information is set out below.
FRS 17 species how key assumptions should be derived and applied.
These assumptions are often different to the assumptions adopted by the pension scheme actuary and trustees in determining the funding position of pension schemes.
The accounting requirements under FRS 17 are broadly as follows and scheme assets are valued at market value at the balance sheet date and scheme liabilities are measured using a projected unit method and discounted at the current rate of return on high quality corporate bonds of equivalent term to the liability and and movement in the scheme surplusdecit is split between operating charges and nancing items in the prot and loss account and in the statement of total recognised gains and losses actuarial gains and losses.
The nancial assumptions used to calculate the BTPS liabilities under FRS 17 at 31 March 2004 are Real rates per annum Nominal rates per annum % % % % % % Average future increases in wages and salaries 1.00 1.50 1.50 3.63 3.78 4.04 Average increase in pensions in payment and deferred pensions   2.60 2.25 2.50 Rate used to discount scheme liabilities 2.83 3.08 3.41 5.50 5.40 6.00 Ination  average increase in retail price index   2.60 2.25 2.50 There is a short term reduction in the real salary growth assumption to 0.75% for the rst two years 2003  three years.
The expected nominal rate of return and fair values of the assets of the BTPS at 31 March were 31 March 2004 31 March 2003 31 March 2002 Expected long term rate of return per annum Asset fair value Expected long term rate of return per annum Asset fair value Expected long term rate of return per annum Asset fair value % bn % % bn % % bn % NonUK equities 8.2 8.1 30 8.2 6.4 30 8.0 8.1 30 Fixedinterest securities 5.3 4.0 15 5.2 3.1 14 5.6 3.0 11 Indexlinked securities 4.4 2.3 9 4.3 1.7 8 4.8 1.9 7 Cash and other 4.0   4.0 0.4 1 4.5 0.2 1 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 110 Notes to the financial statements 31.
Pension costs continued The longterm expected rate of return on investments does not affect the level of the decit but does affect the level of the expected return on assets within the net nance cost charged to the prot and loss account under FRS 17.
The net pension decit set out below under FRS 17 is as if this standard was fully applied.
The fair value of the BTPS assets the present value of the BTPS liabilities based on the nancial assumptions set out above and the resulting decit together with those of unfunded pension liabilities at 31 March 2004 and 31 March 2003 are shown below.
The fair value of the BTPS assets is not intended to be realised in the short term and may be subject to signicant change before it is realised.
The present value of the liabilities is derived from longterm cash ow projections and is thus inherently uncertain.
31 March 2004 31 March 2003
Present value of liabilities
Assets
Present value of liabilities
BTPS 26900 32000 5100 21500 30500 9000 Other liabilities 3636 3333 Total decit 5136 9033 Deferred tax asset at 30% 1541 2710 Net pension liability 3595 6323 If the above amounts had been recognised in the nancial statements the groups net assets and prot and loss reserve at 31 March would be as follows Net assets deciency Net assets as reported 3094 2642 SSAP 24 pension prepayment net of deferred tax 820 441 SSAP 24 pension provision net of deferred tax 25 23 Net pension liability under FRS 17 3595 6323 Net deciency including net pension liability 1296 4099 Prot and loss reserve Prot and loss reserve as reported 1660 1208 SSAP 24 pension prepayment net of deferred tax 820 441 SSAP 24 pension provision net of deferred tax 25 23 Net pension liability under FRS 17 3595 6323 Prot and loss reserve including net pension liability 2730 5533 On the basis of the above assumptions and in compliance with FRS 17 the amounts that would have been charged to the consolidated prot and loss account and the statement of total recognised gains and losses for the year ended 31 March 2004 would be as follows Analysis of amounts that would be charged to operating prot on an FRS 17 basis Current service cost 438 444 Past service cost 1 60 Total operating charge 439 504 Amount that would be charged credited to net interest payable on an FRS 17 basis Expected return on pension scheme assets 1560 1983 Interest on pension scheme liabilities 1615 1694 Net nance expense return 55 289 Amount that would be charged to prot before taxation on an FRS 17 basis 494 215 Analysis of the amount that would be recognised in the consolidated statement of total recognised gains and losses on an FRS 17 basis Actual return less expected return on pension scheme assets 4130 6995 Experience losses gains arising on pension scheme liabilities 290 1056 Changes in assumptions underlying the present value of the pension scheme liabilities 500 1660 Actuarial gain loss recognised 3340 7599 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 111 Notes to the financial statements 31.
Pension costs continued The net pension cost of 494 million for the year ended 31 March 2004 2003  215 million under FRS 17 is 90 million higher 2003  107 million lower than the prot and loss charge recognised under SSAP 24.
The movements in the net pension liability on an FRS 17 basis during the year were Decit at 1 April 9033 1830 Current service cost 438 444 Contributions 1051 611 Past service costs 1 60 Other nance expense income 55 289 Actuarial gain loss recognised 3340 7599 Decit at 31 March 5136 9033 Net pension liability post tax at 31 March 3595 6323 The history of experience gains losses which would have been recognised under FRS 17 were 2004 2003 Difference between expected and actual return on scheme assets Amount m 4130 6995 Percentage of scheme assets 15.4% 32.5% Experience gains and losses on scheme liabilities Amount m 290 1056 Percentage of the present value of scheme liabilities 0.9% 3.5% Total amount recognised in statement of total recognised gains and losses Amount m 3340 7599 Percentage of the present value of scheme liabilities 10.4% 24.9% Directors emoluments The emoluments of the directors for the year ended 31 March 2004 and the benets received under the longterm incentive plans were in summary as follows Salaries 3150 3212 2223 Performancerelated and special bonus 2074 2309 1691 Deferred bonus in shares 1037 1484 492 Other benets 467 644 160 6728 7649 4566 Payments to nonexecutive directors 337 294 414 Total emoluments 7065 7943 4980 Gain on the exercise of share options Value of shares vested under the Executive Share Plan and Retention Share Plan 412 411 483 The amount for the year ended 31 March 2002 is entirely attributable to former directors.
More detailed information concerning directors remuneration shareholdings pension entitlements share options and other longterm incentive plans is shown in the report on directors remuneration on pages 58 to 71.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 112 Notes to the financial statements 33.
People employedtel Year end
Year end
Year end
Number of employees in the group Total continuing activities 99.9 103.1 104.7 107.4 108.6 114.6 UK   5.8 NonUK   4.4 Total discontinued activities   10.2 Employee share schemes The company has a share ownership scheme used for employee share allocations prot sharing an employee share investment plan savingsrelated share option schemes for its employees and those of participating subsidiaries further share option schemes for selected group employees and an employee stock purchase plan for employees in the United States.
It also has several share plans for executives.
Share option schemes The major share option scheme the BT Group Employee Sharesave Scheme is savings related and the share options are normally exercisable on completion of a three or ve year Save As You Earn contract.
A similar savings related scheme exists for group employees based outside the UK.
Following the scheme of arrangement and demerger in November 2001 all options under the savings related schemes became exercisable for a period of six months.
On expiry of this period these options lapsed to the extent to which they had not been exercised.
Shortly before the scheme of arrangement 57 million shares were allotted to a special purpose trust to satisfy options which were likely to be exercised during that six month period.
Participants in the BT Share Option Scheme the BT US Stock Option Plan the BT Worldwide Share Option Scheme and the BT Global Share Option Plan the Executive Option Plans were given the opportunity to i conditionally on the scheme of arrangement being sanctioned by the Court release their options over British Telecommunications plc shares in consideration for the grant of options in their employers new holding company BT Group plc or mmO plc or ii if their options were already exercisable exercise their options over ordinary shares irrespective of whether the scheme of arrangement was sanctioned by the Court or iii if their options were not already exercisable conditionally on the scheme of arrangement being sanctioned by the Court exercise their options immediately following that time but prior to the reduction of BT Groups share capital.
To the extent that they had not already been exercised these options lapsed on 16 November 2001 the effective date of the scheme of arrangement.
The BT Group Legacy Option Plan was operated on 17 December 2001 following the scheme of arrangement and demerger in November 2001.
Replacement unapproved options over BT Group shares were granted to all participants in the Executive Option Plans who had released their options over British Telecommunications plc shares.
The value of the replacement options was determined by averaging the combined prices of BT Group plc and mmO plc shares over the 20 dealing days following the demerger on 19 November 2001.
This resulted in a factor of 1.3198 being applied to the former option over British Telecommunications plc shares in order to give the number of BT Group shares under the new option.
The option prices of the original options were also adjusted to take account of the different number of shares under option.
On the demerger of mmO BTs share option plans ceased to operate and were replaced by similar BT Group Employee Sharesave schemes and the BT Group Global Share Option Plan.
In the 2004 nancial year options over 55 million shares were granted under the BT Group Share Option
The options will be exercisable subject to continued employment and meeting corporate performance targets on the third anniversary of the date of grant.
A second award of options over 64 million shares was also granted.
This second award will vest in three equal tranches on each of the rst three anniversaries of the date of grant subject to continued employment.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 113 Notes to the financial statements 34.
Employee share schemes continued Options outstanding under these share option schemes at 31 March 2004 and 2003 together with their exercise prices and dates were as follows Normal dates of exercise Option price per share millions Option price per share millions BT Group Employee Sharesave schemes 2006 154p173p 30 2008 154p 123 Total 233 164 BT Group Legacy Option Plan 19942009  277p727p 2 20012011 318p602p 16 318p602p 17 Total 16 19 BT Group Global Share Option Plan 20042014 176p199.5p 63 20052012 163p263p 61 163p263p 66 20062014 176p199.5p 54 Total 178 66 Total outstanding options 427 249 The option prices of shares under the BT Group Legacy Option Plan were adjusted at the time of the demerger as detailed on page 113.
The weighted average fair value of share options granted during the year ended 31 March 2004 has been estimated on the date of grant using a binomial option pricing model.
The following weighted average assumptions were used in that model an expected life extending one month later than the rst exercise date estimated annualised dividend yield of approximately 5% 2003  5% 2002  5% risk free interest rates of approximately 4% 2003  5% 2002  6% and expected volatility of approximately 25% 2003  40% 2002  34%.
The weighted average fair value of the share options granted in the year ended 31 March 2004 was 42p 2003  55p 2002  55p for options exercisable three years after the date of grant and 51p 2003  72p 2002  55p for options exercisable ve years after the date of grant.
The weighted average fair value of options granted under the BT Group Global Share Option Plan has been estimated as 41p.
The weighted average fair value of options granted under the Special Incentive Award has been estimated as 42p.
The total value of share options granted by BT in the year ended 31 March 2004 was 22 million 2003  41 million 2002  88 million.
In accordance with UK accounting practices no compensation expense is recognised for the fair value of options granted where the exercise price equals the market price at date of grant or options granted under approved Sharesave schemes.
See United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles  IV Accounting for share options for the treatment under US GAAP.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 114 Notes to the financial statements 34.
Employee share schemes continued Options granted exercised and lapsed under these share option schemes during the years ended 31 March 2002 2003 and 2004 and options exercisable at 31 March 2002 2003 and 2004 were as follows
Savings related schemes millions
Total millions
Weighted average exercise price Outstanding 31 March  218p852p 448p Exercised  8  8 240p332p 321p Outstanding 31 March 2003 164  85 249 163p727p 231p Outstanding 31 March 2004 233  194 427 154p727p 196p Exercisable 31 March 2002  47 7 54 218p852p 395p Exercisable 31 March 2003   11 11 255p727p 491p Exercisable 31 March 2004   13 13 255p727p 476p The BT Group Employee Sharesave schemes.
The BT Employee Sharesave schemes.
Incentive Share Plan and Retention Share Plan The BT Incentive Share Plan ISP and the BT Retention Share Plan RSP were introduced for employees of the group in 2000.
Under the plans company shares are acquired by an employee share ownership trust and are conditionally awarded to participants.
Under the ISP participants are normally only entitled to these shares in full at the end of a threeyear period if the company has met the relevant predetermined corporate performance measure and if the participants are still employed by the group.
If the company has exceeded the predetermined corporate performance measure the participants may be awarded up to double the shares conditionally awarded.
The corporate performance measure is BTs total shareholder return TSR measure against those top 100 companies listed on the London Stock Exchange as rated by the Financial Times the FTSE 100 index at the beginning of the relevant performance period.
Awards made under the ISP in 2000 and 2001 did not vest as the company did not meet the corporate performance measure.
Under the RSP the length of retention period before awards vest is exible.
Awards may vest in annual tranches.
The shares are transferred at the end of a specied period only if the individual is still employed by the group.
During the 2004 nancial year 720472 2003 374039 shares vested in 7 2003  11 participants in the RSP.
Executive Share Plan and Deferred Bonus Plan The BT Executive Share Plan ESP was introduced for employees of the group in 1994.
Under the ESP company shares are acquired by an employee share ownership trust and are conditionally awarded to participants.
Participants are only entitled to these shares in full at the end of a veyear period under the ESP if at the end of the period the company has met the relevant predetermined corporate performance measure.
Awards of shares were granted in each of the years from 1994 to 1999 under the ESP.
The corporate performance measure is BTs total shareholder return TSR measure against those top 100 companies listed on the London Stock Exchange as rated by the FTSE 100 index at the beginning of the relevant performance period.
The sixth veyear performance cycle of the ESP ended on 31 March 2004 and on the basis of the corporate performance measure the companys Total Shareholder Return TSR target relative to other companies in the FTSE 100 no shares vested.
The fth veyear performance cycle of the ESP ended on 31 March 2003 and on the basis of the corporate performance measure no shares vested.
The fourth veyear performance cycle of the ESP ended on 31 July 2002 and on the basis of the corporate performance measure 32.5% of the shares vested on 1 August 2002 in 65 participants and 1.0 million shares were transferred to those participants.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 115 Notes to the financial statements 34.
Employee share schemes continued The BT Deferred Bonus Plan DBP was established in 1998 and awards are granted annually to employees of the group.
Under this plan shares in the company are acquired by an employee share ownership trust and transferred to participants at the end of three years if he or she has continued to be employed by the group throughout that period.
On 1 August 2003 653899 shares 1 August 2002  657592 were transferred to 225 participants 1 August 2002  223 at the end of the threeyear deferred period.
At 31 March 2004 30.5 million shares 2003  31.7 million shares in the company were held in trust for employee share schemes of which no shares 2003  15.5 million shares were held for the ISP 3.0 million shares 2003  2.9 million shares were held for the RSP no shares 2003  2.3 million shares were held for the ESP and 6.5 million shares 2003  4.2 million shares were held for the DBP.
Dividends or dividend equivalents earned on the shares during the conditional periods are reinvested in company shares for the potential benet of the participants.
Additional information relating to the plans is as follows Year ended 31 March 2004
RSP
ESP
DBP
Total
Value of range of possible future transfers nil to  5.3  11.4 16.7 Provision for the costs of the plans charged to the prot and loss account in year  7.8  6.7 14.5 Nominal value of shares held in trust  0.2  0.3 0.5 Market value of shares held in trust  5.3  11.4 16.7 Year ended 31 March 2003
RSP
ESP
DBP
Total
Value of range of possible future transfers nil to 24.3 4.6 3.6 6.7 39.2 Provision for the costs of the plans charged credited to the prot and loss account in year  0.2 0.2 5.8 5.4 Nominal value of shares held in trust 0.8 0.1 0.1 0.2 1.2 Market value of shares held in trust 24.3 4.6 3.6 6.7 39.2 Of the total BT Group plc shares held 21.0 million shares were held at 31 March 2004 in trust for future awards under employee share schemes.
These shares had a nominal value of 1 million and a market value of 37.2 million at 31 March 2004.
The values of possible future transfers of shares under the plans were based on the BT Group plc share price at 31 March 2004 of 177p 2003  157p.
The provisions for the costs of the ISP RSP and ESP were based on best estimates of the companys performance over the plans conditional periods relating to those portions of the plan conditional periods from commencement up to the nancial year end.
Employee Share Investment Plan From December 2001 the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan ESIP was in operation.
The ESIP which has been approved by the Inland Revenue gives UK employees an opportunity to purchase shares partnership shares monthly out of pretax salary up to a maximum value of 1500 per year.
During the 2004 nancial year 6.0 million shares 2003  5.3 million shares were purchased by the Trustee of the ESIP on behalf of 13974 2003  12092 employees at a total cost of 11.1 million 2003  10.6 million.
The free shares element of the ESIP allows BT to provide free shares to UK employees which are held in trust for at least three years.
A phantom plan which delivers cash awards equivalent to the value of the free shares operates for employees outside the UK.
In 2004 1% of pretax prots amounting to 20 million was set aside for the ESIP and the phantom plan for employees outside the UK 2003  36 million.
The allocation of this sum was subject to two performance targets one of increasing earnings per share by 15% and the other of reducing customer dissatisfaction by 25% with only the rst target being achieved.
The ESIP replaced the BT Employee Share Ownership Scheme which operated for employee prot sharing until 2001.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan The BT Group Employee Stock Purchase Plan ESPP for employees in the US enables participants to purchase ADSs quarterly at a price the Base Option Price which is 85% of the market price of an ADS at the start of the offer and in the case of employees who have joined the ESPP after the start of the offer 85% of the market price on the date of joining whichever is higher.
Up to 15 May 2004 69164 new shares have been issued and 226218 shares have been transferred to participants out of treasury under the ESPP.
As the ADS price was less than the Base Option Price of US31.72 from July 2002 to April 2003 the ESPP was suspended in accordance with the rules of the ESPP from April 2003 until the end of the rst offer in December 2003.
A second offer was launched in December 2003 with a Base Option Price of US25.61 and will run until December 2004.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 116 Notes to the financial statements 35.
Auditors
The auditors remuneration for the year ended 31 March 2004 for the group was 3790000 2003 2943000 2002  2702000.
The audit fees payable to the companys auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP for the company and UK subsidiary undertakings statutory accounts were 2482000 2003 1910000 2002  1656000.
The audit fee of the company was 32000 2003  31000 2002 44000.
The following fees for audit and nonaudit services were paid or are payable to the companys auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP for the years ended 31 March 2004 31 March 2003 and 31 March 2002 Audit services Statutory audit 3767 2916 2649 Regulatory audit 1950 1690 1142 5717 4606 3791 Further assurance services Rights issue restructuring and demerger projects   14161 Corporate nance advice 462 265 982 Other 82 829 1960 544 1094 17103 Tax services 2656 2245 1883 Other services Systems advice  3765 2565 Other 110 766 1537 110 4531 4102 Total 9027 12476 26879 Total fees paid or payable to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP in the UK for non audit services in the year ended 31 March 2004 were 4545000 2003  8980000 2002  22683000.
In order to maintain the independence of the external auditors the Board has determined policies as to what non audit services can be provided by the companys external auditors and the approval processes related to them.
Under those policies work of a consultancy nature will not be offered to the external auditors unless there are clear efciencies and value added benets to the company.
Under the terms of BTs main licence the group is required to publish audited regulatory nancial statements.
The fees for regulatory work principally reect the audit fees associated with those regulatory nancial statements.
The fees for tax services include tax compliance and tax advisory services.
The fees for systems advice in the year ended 31 March 2003 related to advisory services provided in connection with the implementation of certain billing systems.
These services which were provided by PwC Consulting the consulting business of PricewaterhouseCoopers that was sold to IBM in October 2002 commenced in 2002 and were completed in 2003.
Financial instruments and risk management The group holds or issues nancial instruments mainly to nance its operations for the temporary investment of shortterm funds and to manage the currency and interest rate risks arising from its operations and from its sources of nance.
In addition various nancial instruments  for example trade debtors and trade creditors arise directly from the groups operations.
The group nances its operations primarily by a mixture of issued share capital retained prots deferred taxation longterm loans and shortterm loans principally by issuing commercial paper and mediumterm notes.
The group borrows in the major longterm debt markets in major currencies.
Typically but not exclusively the bond markets provide the most costeffective means of longterm borrowing.
The group uses derivative nancial instruments primarily to manage its exposure to market risks from changes in interest and foreign exchange rates.
The derivatives used for this purpose are principally interest rate swaps gilt locks currency swaps and forward currency contracts.
The types of nancial instrument used for investment of shortterm funds are prescribed in group treasury policies with limits on the exposure to any one organisation.
Shortterm investing in nancial instruments is undertaken on behalf of the group by substantial external fund managers who are limited to dealing in debt instruments and certain dened derivative instruments and are given strict guidelines on credit diversication and maturity proles.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 117 Notes to the financial statements 36.
Financial instruments and risk management continued During the year ended 31 March 2004 the groups net debt reduced from 9.6 billion to 8.4 billion due to working capital inows.
During the 2004 nancial year the group restructured some of its swaps portfolio to mitigate credit risk to certain counter parties.
As a result the group terminated 7 billion of crosscurrency interest rate swaps and replaced these with new swaps which had the same economic hedging effect.
This resulted in the group paying 445 million in reducing gross debt and receiving 420 million of interest.
The interest receipt has been included in deferred income and will be amortised to the prot and loss account over the term of the underlying debt.
The groups xedoating interest rate prole is 7624 at 31 March 2004.
During the year ended 31 March 2003 the groups net debt reduced from 13.7 billion to 9.6 billion.
2.6 billion was realised from the disposal of the groups interest in Cegetel Groupe SA in the year and the group has closed out 2.6 billion of associated xed interest rate swaps.
The groups xedoating interest rate prole therefore remained at 8812 at 31 March 2003.
During the year ended 31 March 2002 net debt was reduced from 27.9 billion to 13.7 billion mainly by the groups rights issue disposal of its Yell business its Japanese and Spanish interests and the property sale and leaseback transaction.
The proceeds of the rights issue and sale of assets were applied mainly in reducing shortterm borrowings.
The group repaid substantially all of its mediumterm notes and commercial paper in that year.
As a result of the demerger of the mmO business including its European operations the group swapped an additional e7 billion into oating rate sterling debt.
This in conjunction with the novation of 1 billion xed rate swaps to Telereal for the property transaction enabled the group to maintain its xedoating ratio at approximately 8812 at 31 March 2002.
The group uses nancial instruments to hedge some of its currency exposures arising from its nonUK assets liabilities and forward purchase commitments.
The group also hedges some of its interest liabilities.
The nancial instruments used comprise borrowings in foreign currencies forward foreign currency exchange contracts gilt locks and interest and currency swaps.
There has been no change in the nature of the groups risk prole between 31 March 2004 and the date of these nancial statements.
The notional amounts of derivatives summarised below do not necessarily represent amounts exchanged by the parties and thus are not necessarily a measure of the exposure of the group through its use of derivatives.
The amounts exchanged are calculated on the notional amounts and other terms of the derivatives which relate to interest and exchange rates.
The group has entered into interest rate swap agreements with banks and other institutions to vary the amounts and periods for which interest rates on borrowings are xed.
Under interest rate swaps the group agrees with other parties to exchange at specied intervals the differences between xed rate and oating rate interest amounts calculated by reference to an agreed notional principal amount.
Under gilt locks forward sales of UK government longdated treasury stock were entered into for periods of up to one year.
This hedge effectively xed in the interest on part of the groups then future borrowings all of which have now been taken on.
At 31 March 2004 the group had outstanding interest rate swap agreements having a total notional principal amount of 5210 million 2003  5170 million.
Cross currency swaps and forward foreign exchange contracts have been entered into to reduce the foreign currency exposure on the groups operations and the groups net assets.
The group also enters into forward foreign exchange contracts to hedge investments interest expense and purchase and sale commitments denominated in foreign currencies principally US dollars and the euro.
The remaining terms of the currency swaps are up to 30 years and the terms of currency forward exchange contracts are typically less than one year.
The purpose of the groups foreign currency hedging activities is to protect the group from the risk that the eventual net inows and net outows will be adversely affected by changes in exchange rates.
At 31 March 2004 the group had outstanding foreign currency swap agreements and forward exchange contracts having a total notional principal amount of 11367 million 2003  14545 million.
The fair values of forward foreign currency contracts at 31 March 2004 were 301 million 2003 673 million for purchases of currency and 1223 million 2003  1041 million for sales of currency.
These fair values have been estimated by calculating their present values using the market discount rates appropriate to the terms of the contracts in effect at the balance sheet dates.
At 31 March 2004 the group had deferred unrealised gains of nil 2003  2 million and losses of 5 million 2003  nil based on dealerquoted prices from hedging purchase and sale commitments and in addition had deferred realised net gains of 3 million 2003  10 million.
These are included in the prot and loss account as part of the hedged purchase or sale transaction when it is recognised or as gains or losses when a hedged transaction is no longer expected to occur.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 118 Notes to the financial statements 36.
Financial instruments and risk management continued c Concentrations of credit risk and credit exposures of nancial instruments The group considers that it is not exposed to major concentrations of credit risk.
The group however is exposed to creditrelated losses in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to nancial instruments but does not expect any counterparties to fail to meet their obligations.
The group limits the amount of credit exposure to any one counterparty.
The group does not normally see the need to seek collateral or other security.
The longterm debt instruments issued in December 2000 and February 2001 both contained covenants that if the group credit rating was downgraded below A3 in the case of Moodys or below A minus in the case of SandP additional interest would accrue from the next interest coupon period at the rate of 0.25 percentage points for each ratings category adjustment by each ratings agency.
In May 2001 Moodys downgraded BTs credit rating to Baa1 which increased BTs interest charge by approximately 32 million per annum.
BTs current credit rating from SandP is A minus.
Based upon the total debt of 9 billion outstanding on these instruments at 31 March 2004 BTs annual interest charge would increase by approximately 45 million if BTs credit ratings were to be downgraded by one credit rating category by both agencies below a longterm debt rating of Baa1A minus.
If BTs credit rating with Moodys was to be upgraded by one credit rating category the annual interest charge would be reduced by approximately 23 million.
The following table shows the carrying amounts and fair values of the groups nancial instruments at 31 March 2004 and 2003.
The carrying amounts are included in the group balance sheet under the indicated headings with the exception of derivative amounts which are included in debtors or other creditors or as part of net debt as appropriate.
The fair values of the nancial instruments are the amount at which the instruments could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties other than in forced or liquidation sale.
Carrying amount Fair value
Assets
Cash at bank and in hand Shortterm investments 5117 6311 5117 6319 Fixed asset investments 23telLiabilities Shortterm borrowings Longterm borrowings excluding nance leases 11800 15966 13506 17720 Derivatives relating to investments and borrowings net Assets  10  229 Liabilities 748  1182 Derivative nancial instruments held or issued to hedge the current exposure on expected future transactions net Assets  2  2
The fair values of listed shortterm investments were estimated based on quoted market prices for those investments.
The carrying amount of the other shortterm deposits and investments approximated to their fair values due to the short maturity of the instruments held.
The fair values of listed xed asset investments were estimated based on quoted market prices for those investments.
The fair value of the groups bonds debentures notes and other longterm borrowings has been estimated on the basis of quoted market prices for the same or similar issues with the same maturities where they existed and on calculations of the present value of future cash ows using the appropriate discount rates in effect at the balance sheet dates where market prices of similar issues did not exist.
The fair value of the groups outstanding foreign currency and interest rate swap agreements was estimated by calculating the present value using appropriate discount rates in effect at the balance sheet dates of affected future cash ows translated where appropriate into pounds sterling at the market rates in effect at the balance sheet dates.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 119 Notes to the financial statements 36.
Financial instruments and risk management continued The following information is provided in accordance with the requirements of FRS 13  Derivatives and other nancial instruments disclosures.
Except for disclosures under currency exposures below the nancial information excludes all of the groups shortterm debtors and creditors.
Financial liabilities After taking into account the various interest rate swaps and forward foreign currency contracts entered into by the group the interest rate prole of the groups nancial liabilities at 31 March was 2004 2003
Fixed rate nancial liabilities Floating rate nancial liabilities
Total
Fixed rate nancial liabilities Floating rate nancial liabilities
Total
Sterling 7747 5950  13697 8814 7172  15986 Euro   18 18 Total 7747 5950  13697 8814 7172 18 16004 For the xed rate nancial liabilities the average interest rates and the average periods for which the rates are xed are 2004 2003
Weighted average interest rate %
Years
Weighted average interest rate %
Years
Sterling 8.7 13 8.5 13 The oating rate nancial liabilities bear interest at rates xed in advance for periods ranging from one day to one year by reference to LIBOR.
The nancial liabilities on which no interest is paid are due to mature within one year of the balance sheet date.
The maturity prole of nancial liabilities is as given in note 25.
Financial assets After taking into account the various interest rate swaps and forward foreign currency contracts entered into by the group the interest rate prole of the groups nancial assets at 31 March was 2004 2003
Fixed rate nancial assets Floating rate nancial assets Financial assets on which no interest is paid
Fixed rate nancial assets Floating rate nancial assets Financial assets on which no interest is paid
Sterling 1310 3962 167 5439 457 5974 255 6686 Total 1310 3962 231 5503 457 5974 317 6748 The sterling xed rate nancial assets yield interest at a weighted average of 4.5% 2003  4.3% for a weighted average period of 22 months 2003  16 months.
The oating rate nancial assets bear interest at rates xed in advance for periods up to one year by reference to LIBOR.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 120 Notes to the financial statements 36.
Financial instruments and risk management continued Currency exposures The table below shows the currency exposures of the groups net monetary assets liabilities in terms of those transactional exposures that give rise to net currency gains and losses recognised in the prot and loss account.
Such exposures comprise the monetary assets and monetary liabilities of the group that are not denominated in the operating or functional currency of the operating unit involved other than certain nonsterling borrowings treated as hedges of net investments in nonUK operations.
At 31 March these exposures were as follows 2004 2003
US dollar
Other
Total
Sterling
US dollar
Other
Total
Functional currency of group operation Sterling 43 7 151  1 1 Euro 2 24 3 6   3 Other  13   4 Total 3  1 2 The amounts shown in the table above take into account the effect of any currency swaps forward contracts and other derivatives entered into to manage those currency exposures.
At 31 March 2004 the group also held various forward currency contracts that the group had taken out to hedge expected future foreign currency purchases and sales.
Fair values of nancial assets held for trading 2004 Net gain included in prot and loss account 61 34 Fair value of nancial assets held for trading at 31 March 785 2610 The net gain was derived from government bonds commercial paper and similar debt instruments.
The average fair value of nancial assets held during the year ended 31 March 2004 did not differ materially from the year end position.
Hedges
Gains and losses on instruments used for hedging are not recognised until the exposure that is being hedged is itself recognised.
Unrecognised and deferred gains and losses on instruments used for hedging and those recognised in the years ended 31 March 2004 and 31 March 2003 are as follows 2004 2003
Losses
Gains
Losses
Gains and losses recognised in the year but arising in previous years unrecognised at the balance sheet date 306 740 1088 878 carried forward in the year end balance sheet pending recognition in the prot and loss account 56telexpected to be recognised in the following year unrecognised at balance sheet date 9 16 1 carried forward in the year end balance sheet pending recognition in the prot and loss account Excluding gains and losses on hedges accounted for by adjusting the carrying amount of a xed asset.
During the year ended 31 March 2003 the group entered into two derivatives contracts as an investment in a UK listed equity with limited net overall exposure.
At 31 March 2003 the two contracts had a net value of nil consisting of a futures purchase contract with a fair value of 68 million and a futures sales contract with a fair value of 68 million.
These contracts were closed out in April 2003.
Unused committed lines of credit Unused committed lines of credit for shortterm nancing available at 31 March 2004 totalled approximately 145 million 2003  575 million which was in support of a commercial paper programme or other borrowings.
These lines of credit are available for up to one year.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 121 Notes to the financial statements 37.
Company balance sheet Fixed assets Investment in subsidiary undertaking 9971 9971 Total xed assets 9971 9971 Current assets
Investments
Cash at bank and in hand 62 2 Total current assets 520 372 Creditors amounts falling due within one year Net current assets 50 2 Total assets less current liabilities 10021 9973 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 432 434 Share premium account 2 2 Capital redemption reserve 2 Prot and loss account 9585 9537 Total equity shareholders funds 10021 9973 Debtors consists of amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings of 456 million 2003  368 million.
The company invested in a listed investment with a book value and market value of 1 million 2003  1 million and short term loans to subsidiary undertakings of 1 million 2003  1 million.
Creditors consists of dividends payable of 454 million 2003  366 million amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings of 9 million 2003  nil and other creditors of 7 million 2003  4 million.
Capital and reserves are shown on page 123.
The nancial statements of the company on pages 122 to 123 were approved by the board of directors on 19 May 2004 and were signed on its behalf by Sir Christopher Bland Chairman Ben Verwaayen Chief Executive Ian Livingston Group Finance Director BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 122 Notes to the financial statements 37.
Company balance sheet continued
Share premium account
Prot and loss account
Balance at 1 April 2001 Issue of shares 9971    9971 Capital reduction 9537   9537 Movement relating to BTs employee share ownership trust  2   2 Prot for the nancial year Dividends 2.0p per ordinary share    173 173 Balances at 31 March 2002 434 2  9537 9973 Prot for the nancial year Dividends 6.5p per ordinary share    560 560 Balances at 31 March 2003 434 2  9537 9973 Movement relating to BTs employee share ownership trust Purchase of own shares shares cancelled 2  2 64 64 treasury shares    80 80 Prot for the nancial year Dividends 8.5p per ordinary share    732 732 Balances at 31 March 585 10021 The authorised share capital of the company throughout the years ended 31 March 2004 and 31 March 2003 was 13463 million representing 269260253468 ordinary shares of 5p each.
The allotted called up and fully paid ordinary share capital of the company at 31 March 2004 was 432 million 2003  434 million representing 8634629038 ordinary shares of 5p each 2003  8670849554.
Of the authorised but unissued share capital at 31 March 2004 26 million ordinary shares 2003  25 million were reserved to meet options granted under employee share option schemes described in note 34.
The share premium account representing the premium on allotment of shares is not available for distribution.
The prot for the nancial year dealt with in the prot and loss account of the company and after taking into account dividends from subsidiary undertakings was 924 million 2003  560 million.
As permitted by Section 230 of the Companies Act 1985 no prot and loss account of the company is presented.
During the year ended 31 March 2004 the company repurchased 80571000 of its own shares of 5p each representing 1% of the calledup share capital for an aggregate consideration of 144 million.
Of the total shares repurchased 36222000 shares with an aggregate nominal value of 2 million were cancelled immediately and 44349000 shares with an aggregate nominal value of 2 million are held as treasury shares.
Ordinary shares allotted during the year were as follows
Nominal value
Savings related schemes for the year ended 31 March 2004 1484 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 123 Notes to the financial statements The United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles are divided into the following sections 125 Differences between United Kingdom and United States generally accepted accounting principles 128 Net income and shareholders equity reconciliation statements 128 Minority interests 129 Accounting for share options 129 Consolidated statements of cash ows 129 Current asset investments 130 Pension costs 132 Income statement in US GAAP format 133 US GAAP developments BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 124 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles The groups consolidated nancial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the UK UK GAAP which differ in certain respects from those applicable in the US US GAAP.
The following are the main differences between UK and US GAAP which are relevant to the groups nancial statements.
Under UK GAAP the sale of BTs property portfolio is treated as a xed asset disposal and the subsequent leaseback is an operating lease.
Under US GAAP the transaction is regarded as nancing and the land and buildings are recorded on the balance sheet at their net book value an obligation equivalent to the cash proceeds is recognised and the gain on disposal is deferred until the properties are vacated by BT.
Rental payments made by BT are reversed and replaced by a nance lease interest charge and a depreciation charge.
Under UK GAAP pension costs are accounted for in accordance with UK Statement of Standard Accounting Practice No.
24 with costs being charged against prots over employees working lives.
Under US GAAP pension costs are determined in accordance with the requirements of US Statements of Financial Accounting Standards SFAS Nos.
87 and 88.
Differences between the UK and US GAAP gures arise from the requirement to use different actuarial methods and assumptions and a different method of amortising surpluses or decits.
Under UK GAAP the cost of providing incremental pension benets in respect of workforce reductions is taken into account when determining current and future pension costs unless the most recent actuarial valuation combined with the provision for pension costs in the group balance sheet under UK actuarial conventions shows a decit.
In this case the cost of providing incremental pension benets is included in redundancy charges in the year in which the employees agree to leave the group.
Under US GAAP the associated costs of providing incremental pension benets are charged against prots in the period in which the termination terms are agreed with the employees.
The fair value of termination benets for employees who are to be retained beyond their minimum contractual retention period is recognised on a straight line basis over the future service period.
Under UK GAAP the group does not capitalise interest.
To comply with US GAAP the estimated amount of interest incurred whilst constructing major capital projects is included in xed assets and depreciated over the lives of the related assets.
This included capitalisation of interest incurred on funding the 3G licences up to the date of the mmO demerger.
The amount of interest capitalised is determined by reference to the average interest rates on outstanding borrowings.
At 31 March 2004 under US GAAP gross capitalised interest of 358 million 2003  461 million with regard to the company and its subsidiary companies was subject to depreciation generally over periods of 3 to 25 years.
Under UK GAAP in respect of acquisitions completed prior to 1 April 1998 the group wrote off goodwill arising from the purchase of subsidiary undertakings associates and joint ventures on acquisition against retained earnings.
The goodwill is reected in the net income of the period of disposal as part of the calculation of the gain or loss on divestment.
All unamortised and preApril 1998 goodwill will be brought back to the prot and loss account on disposal.
Following the implementation of UK Financial Reporting Standard No.
10 FRS 10 goodwill arising on acquisitions completed after 1 April 1998 is capitalised and amortised on a straight line basis over its useful economic life.
Under US GAAP up to 31 March 2002 goodwill arising on the acquisition of subsidiaries associates and joint ventures was capitalised as an intangible asset and amortised over its useful life.
With effect from 1 April 2002 BT has adopted SFAS No.
142 and goodwill is no longer amortised but tested annually for impairment.
In connection with the adoption of SFAS No.
142 transitional and annual impairment reviews were performed.
There was no transitional impairment charge recorded.
As a result of the annual impairment review no goodwill impairment charge was recognised in the year ended 31 March 2004 2003  54 million.
Goodwill of 12 million 2003  20 million amortised under UK GAAP is written back through the income statement.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 125 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles Had the cessation of goodwill amortisation requirement of SFAS No.
142 been applied in prior periods results of operations would have been as follows Net income loss as adjusted for US GAAP 4134 732 Add back goodwill amortisation 34 Adjusted net income loss 4134 698 Adjusted basic earnings per American Depositary Share 4.80 0.84 Adjusted diluted earnings per American Depositary Share 4.80 0.84 f Mobile cellular telephone licences software and other intangible assets Certain intangible xed assets recognised under US GAAP purchase accounting requirements are subsumed within goodwill under UK GAAP.
Under US GAAP these separately identied intangible assets are valued and amortised over their useful lives of 20 years.
Under UK GAAP investments are held on the balance sheet at historical cost and own shares held in trust for share schemes are recorded in xed asset investments.
Gains and losses on instruments used for hedges are not recognised until the exposure being hedged is recognised.
Under US GAAP trading securities and availablefor sale securities are carried at market value with appropriate valuation adjustments recorded in prot and loss and shareholders equity respectively.
Certain derivative nancial instruments which qualify for hedge accounting under UK GAAP do not qualify for hedge accounting under US GAAP.
Under US GAAP nancial instruments do not qualify for hedge accounting due to the extensive documentation requirements.
These nancial instruments under US GAAP are carried at market value with valuation adjustments recorded in the prot and loss account.
The reassessment and purchase of derivatives in the year ended 31 March 2004 gave rise to an adjustment reducing net income by 133 million net of tax 2003  increase 610 million.
The net unrealised holding gain on equity investments held as availableforsale securities for the year ended 31 March 2004 was 5 million 2003  22 million 2002  271 million.
SFAS 133 became effective for BT on 1 April 2001 and the unamortised transitional adjustment of 9 million net of tax remains in shareholders equity at 31 March 2004.
Under UK GAAP assets contributed to a joint venture by the groups partners are measured at their net replacement cost.
Any difference between the groups share of the joint ventures resulting net assets and the net book value of assets contributed by the group to the joint venture including certain accrued start up costs is immediately reected by adjusting the groups investment in the joint venture and recording a deferred difference in shareholders equity.
Under US GAAP the assets contributed by all joint venture partners are carried at their historical net book value and any difference between the groups share of the joint ventures resulting net assets and the net book value of assets contributed by the group to the joint venture is amortised over the life of the items giving rise to the difference.
Certain share options have been granted under BT saveasyouearn plans at a 20% discount.
Under UK GAAP the share issues are recorded at their discounted price when the options are exercised.
Under US GAAP a plan is considered compensatory when the discount to market price is in excess of 15%.
Compensation cost is recognised for the difference between the exercise price of the share options granted and the quoted market price of the shares at the date of grant or measurement date and accrued over the vesting period of the options.
Under UK GAAP shares held by employee share ownership trusts are recorded as xed asset investments at cost less amounts written off.
Under US GAAP those shares not fully vested are regarded as treasury stock and recorded at cost as a deduction from shareholders equity.
Under UK GAAP the economic interest in the associates operating prots before minority interest is reported as part of the total operating prot.
For those associates in which a minority interest is recognised in their respective statements of prot and loss such minority interest is reported as minority interest in the consolidated prot and loss account.
Under US GAAP the minority interest in the associates is reclassied from minority interest and reported within the share of results of associates.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 126 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles k Deferred taxation Under UK GAAP provision is made for deferred tax in so far as a liability or asset arose as a result of transactions that had occurred by the balance sheet date and give rise to an obligation to pay more tax in the future or a right to pay less tax in the future.
Under US GAAP deferred taxation is provided for on a full liability basis.
Future tax benets are recognised as deferred tax assets to the extent that their realisation is more likely than not.
As a result of changes in circumstances previously recognised deferred tax liabilities were released in the 2003 nancial year.
At 31 March 2004 total deferred tax liabilities were 2780 million primarily in respect of accelerated capital allowances and total deferred tax assets were 2240 million primarily in respect of pension obligations.
Under UK GAAP dividends are recorded in the year in respect of which they are declared in the case of interim or any special dividends or proposed by the board of directors to the shareholders in the case of nal dividends.
Under US GAAP dividends are recorded in the period in which dividends are declared.
Under UK GAAP if there is an indication of impairment the assets should be tested for impairment and if necessary written down to the value in use calculated based on discounted future pretax cash ows related to the asset or the income generating unit to which the asset belongs.
US GAAP requires that an entity assess whether impairment has occurred based on the undiscounted future cash ows.
An impairment loss exists if the sum of these cash ows is less than the carrying amount of the asset.
The impairment loss recognised in the income statement is based on the assets fair value being either market value or the sum of discounted future cash ows.
Under UK GAAP the disposal of certain lines of business and joint ventures and associates are shown as discontinued activities.
Under US GAAP only the disposals of lines of business under SFAS No.
144 would be reported as discontinued operations.
There are timing differences between UK GAAP and US GAAP for recognition of gains on the sale of certain businesses.
Foreign exchange movements taken to reserves under UK GAAP are reported in the income statement under US GAAP.
Historical GAAP differences on disposed businesses are also shown under this line item.
Under UK GAAP in the 2003 nancial year a provision in connection with the rationalisation of the groups London ofce property portfolio was recorded.
Under US GAAP in accordance with SFAS No 146 these costs are not recognised until the group fully exits and therefore ceases to use the affected properties.
Under UK GAAP longterm contracts to design build and operate software solutions are accounted for under SSAP 9 Stocks and longterm contracts and FRS 5 Reporting the substance of transactions under which turnover is recognised as earned over the contract period.
Under US GAAP revenue of 77 million under these contracts is deferred in the 2004 nancial year under SOP 972 Software revenue recognition which requires vendor specic objective evidence to support the fair value of the separate elements to be delivered.
There was no impact on net income.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 127 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ii Net income and shareholders equity reconciliation statements The following statements summarise the material estimated adjustments gross of their tax effect which reconcile net income and shareholders equity from that reported under UK GAAP to that which would have been reported had US GAAP been applied.
Net income Years ended 31 March Net income applicable to shareholders under UK GAAP 1417 2686 995 Adjustment for Sale and leaseback of properties 85 114 1178 Pension costs 428 177 106 Redundancy charges 20  140 Capitalisation of interest net of related depreciation 23 17 398 Goodwill 12 35 11 Mobile licences software and other intangible asset capitalisation and amortisation net  26 32 Financial instruments 82 731 23 Deferred gain   313 Impairment 24 24 147 Employee share plans 8 11 8 Property rationalisation provision 142 147 Disposals of businesses  130 254 Deferred taxation 4 976 1320 661 4266 643 Tax effect of US GAAP adjustments 222 132 89 Net income loss as adjusted for US GAAP 883 4134 732 Basic earnings loss per American Depositary Share as adjusted for US GAAP Diluted earnings loss per American Depositary Share as adjusted for US GAAP Each American Depositary Share is equivalent to ten ordinary shares.
In the 2004 and 2003 nancial years all the adjustments relate to continuing operations 2002  2009 million reduction in relation to discontinued operations.
Net income from continuing operations was 883 million 2003 4134 million 2002  1680 million loss.
The adjustments to net income relating to discontinued operations are nil 2003  nil 2002 282 million.
Shareholders equity At 31 March Shareholders equity under UK GAAP 3094 2642 Adjustment for Sale and leaseback of properties 1377 1292 Pension costs 5714 6371 Redundancy charges 20 Capitalisation of interest net of related depreciation 195 225 Goodwill 124 113 Financial instruments 8 86 Impairment 100 124 Property rationalisation provision 5 147 Deferred taxation 59 63 Dividend declared after the nancial year end 454 366 3166 4023 Tax effect of US GAAP adjustments 1711 1765 Shareholders equity as adjusted for US GAAP 1455 2258 iii Minority interests Under US GAAP the income to minority interests would have been unchanged 2003  27 million reduction 2002  26 million reduction after adjusting for goodwill amortisation and accounting for associates and joint ventures.
Net assets attributable to minority interests would have been unchanged 2003  unchanged after adjusting for nancial instruments.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 128 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles iv Accounting for share options Under UK GAAP the company does not recognise compensation expense for the fair value at the date of grant of share options granted under the employee share option schemes.
Under US GAAP the company adopted the disclosureonly provisions in SFAS No.
123 Accounting for StockBased Compensation.
Accordingly the company accounts for share options in accordance with APB Opinion No.
25 Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees under which no compensation expense is recognised.
Had the group expensed recognised compensation cost for options granted in accordance with SFAS No.
123 the groups pro forma net income loss basic earnings loss per share and diluted earnings loss per share under US GAAP would have been 862 million 2003  4127 million 2002  792 million loss 10.0p 2003  47.9p 2002  9.5p loss and 9.9p 2003  47.6p 2002  9.5p loss respectively.
See note 34 for the SFAS No.
123 disclosures of the fair value of options granted under employee schemes at date of grant.
Under UK GAAP the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows are presented in accordance with UK Financial Reporting Standard No.
1 FRS 1.
The statements prepared under FRS 1 present substantially the same information as that required under SFAS No.
Under SFAS No.
95 cash and cash equivalents include cash and shortterm investments with maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase.
Under FRS 1 cash comprises cash in hand and at bank and overnight deposits net of bank overdrafts.
Under FRS 1 cash ows are presented for operating activities returns on investments and servicing of nance taxation capital expenditure and nancial investments acquisitions and disposals dividends paid to the companys shareholders management of liquid resources and nancing.
SFAS No.
95 requires a classication of cash ows as resulting from operating investing and nancing activities.
Cash ows under FRS 1 in respect of interest received interest paid net of that capitalised under US GAAP and taxation would be included within operating activities under SFAS No.
Cash ows from purchases sales and maturities of trading securities while not separately identied under UK GAAP would be included within operating activities under US GAAP.
Capitalised interest while not recognised under UK GAAP is included in investing activities under US GAAP.
Dividends paid are included within nancing activities under US GAAP.
The following statements summarise the statements of cash ows as if they had been presented in accordance with US GAAP and include the adjustments which reconcile cash and cash equivalents under US GAAP to cash at bank and in hand reported under UK GAAP.
Net cash provided by operating activities 4632 3395 1455 Net cash used provided by investing activities 3460 1253 3049 Net cash used in nancing activities 3093 2852 5611 Net decrease increase in cash and cash equivalents 1921 1796 1107 Effect of exchange rate changes on cash 5 13 50 Cash and cash equivalents under US GAAP at beginning of year 2933 1124 2281 Cash and cash equivalents under US GAAP at end of year 1007 2933 1124 Shortterm investments with original maturities of less than three months 898 2842 966 Cash at bank and in hand under UK GAAP at end of year 109 91 158 vi Current asset investments Under US GAAP investments in debt securities would be classied as either trading availableforsale or heldtomaturity.
Trading investments would be stated at fair values and the unrealised gains and losses would be included in income.
Securities classied as availableforsale would be stated at fair values with unrealised gains and losses net of deferred taxes reported in shareholders equity.
Debt securities classied as heldto maturity would be stated at amortised cost.
The following analyses do not include securities with original maturities of less than three months.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 129 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles vi Current asset investments continued At 31 March 2004 the group held trading investments as dened by US GAAP with fair values totalling 423 million 2003  935 million.
Heldtomaturity securities at 31 March 2004 and 2003 consisted of the following
Estimated fair value Commercial paper mediumterm notes and other investments at 31 March 2004 3629 3629 Commercial paper mediumterm notes and other investments at 31 March 2003 2565 2565 The contractual maturities of the heldtomaturity debt securities at 31 March 2004 were as follows
Estimated fair value Maturing on or before 31 March 2005 2253 2253 Maturing after 1 year through 5 years 1376 1376 Total at 31 March 2004 3629 3629 Available for sale investments at 31 March 2004 and 2003 consisted of the following
Estimated fair value Commercial paper mediumterm notes and other investments at 31 March telCommercial paper mediumterm notes and other investments at 31 March 2003 The contractual maturities of the available for sale investments at 31 March 2004 were as follows
Estimated fair value Maturing on or before 31 March telMaturing after 1 year through 5 years Total at 31 March telvii Pension costs The following position for the main pension scheme is computed in accordance with US GAAP pension accounting rules under SFAS No.
87 and SFAS No.
88 the effect of which is shown in the above reconciliation statements.
The pension cost determined under SFAS No.
87 was calculated by reference to an expected longterm rate of return on scheme assets of 7.35% 2003  6.9% 2002  6.5%.
The components of the pension cost for the main pension scheme comprised Service cost 388 453 564 Interest cost 1657 1707 1739 Expected return on scheme assets 1646 1813 1863 Amortisation of prior service costs 24 24 24 Amortisation of net obligation at date of limited application of SFAS No.
Recognised gains 378 22 67 Additional cost of termination benets 1 60 140 Pension cost for the year under US GAAP 804 461 589 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 130 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles vii Pension costs continued The information required to be disclosed in accordance with SFAS No.
132 concerning the funded status of the main scheme at 31 March 2003 and 31 March 2004 based on the valuations at 1 January 2003 and 1 January 2004 respectively is given below.
Minimum liability intangible asset and other comprehensive income Plan assets at fair value 26675 22757 Accumulated benet obligation 31137 28551 Minimum liability 4462 5794 Net amount recognised at end of year 2275 2497 Minimum additional liability 2187 3297 Intangible asset as at 31 March 2004 Unrecognised net transition obligation  2 Unrecognised prior service cost 79 103 Accumulated other comprehensive income 2108 3192 Changes in benet obligation 2004 Benet obligation at the beginning of the year 30277 29097 Service cost 388 453 Interest cost 1657 1707 Employees contributions 148 156 Additional cost of termination benets 1 60 Actuarial movement 1428 152 Other changes 5 13 Benets paid or payable 1456 1361 Benet obligation at the end of the year 32448 30277 The benet obligation and pension cost for the main pension scheme were determined using the following assumptions at 1 January 2002 2003 and 2004 per annum % per annum % per annum % Discount rate 5.5 5.6 6.0 Rate of future pay increases 3.6 3.8 4.0 Rate of future pension increases 2.6 2.25 2.5 Contributions expected to be paid to the plan during the next scal year are estimated at 290 million.
Changes in scheme assets 2004 Fair value of scheme assets at the beginning of the year 22757 26597 Actual return on scheme assets 4195 3255 Employers contributions 1026 607 Employees contributions 148 156 Other changes 5 13 Benets paid or payable 1456 1361 Fair value of scheme assets at the end of the year 26675 22757 Funded status under US GAAP 2004 Projected benet obligation in excess of scheme assets 5773 7520 Unrecognised net obligation at date of initial application of SFAS No.
Unrecognised prior service costs Other unrecognised net actuarial losses 3419 4918 Net amount recognised under US GAAP 2275 2497 The employers contributions for the year ended 31 March 2004 includes special contributions of 362 million paid in December 2003 and 380 million paid in March 2004 2003  329 million paid in December 2002.
The unrecognised net obligation at the date of initial application is being amortised over 15 years from 1 April 1988.
Unrecognised prior service costs on scheme benet improvements are being amortised over periods of 15 or 16 years commencing in the years of the introduction of the improvements.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 131 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles vii Pension costs continued Asset allocation The Trustees of the main pension scheme approve the target asset allocation as well as deviation limits.
The objective of the investment activities is to maximise investment return within an acceptable level of risk taking into consideration the liabilities of the main pension scheme.
Year ended 31 December 2003 Fair value bn %
Equities 17.1 65.0 64.75 Fixed interest bonds 3.9 14.8 15.25 Index linked securities 2.1 8.0 8.00 Property 3.2 12.2 12.00
Year ended 31 December 2002 Fair value bn %
Equities 14.8 64.9 64.75 Fixed interest bonds 3.4 15.0 15.25 Index linked securities 1.8 7.7 8.00 Property 3.1 13.9 12.00 Cash 0.4 1.5 The assumption for the expected return in scheme assets is a weighted average based on an assumed expected return for each asset class and the proportions held of each asset class at the beginning of the year.
The expected returns on bonds are based on the gross redemption yields at the start of the year.
Expected returns on equities and property are based on a combination of an estimate of the risk premium above yields on government bonds and consensus economic forecasts of future returns.
The expected return of 7.27% per annum used for the calculation of pension costs for the year ending 31 March 2005 is consistent with that adopted for FRS 17.
The group prot and loss accounts on pages 78 to 80 comply with UK GAAP and the directors believe they are in the most appropriate format for shareholders to understand the results of our business.
We believe that it is important to show our results before deducting goodwill amortisation and exceptional items because these items predominantly relate to corporate transactions rather than the trading activities of the group.
For SEC reporting purposes this presentation would be considered non GAAP and therefore the group has also prepared the following income statement which meets the SEC reporting format set forth in Item 10 of Regulation SX.
The nancial numbers disclosed in the following income statement are prepared under UK GAAP.
Revenue 18519 18727 18447 Operating expenses Payroll costs 3735 3671 3698 Depreciation and amortisation 2936 3035 5345 Payments to telecommunication operators 3963 3940 4289 Other operating expenses 5189 5724 5522 Total operating expenses 15823 16370 18854 Net operating income loss 2696 2357 407 Other income net 227 1910 936 Net interest expense 941 1439 1579 Income taxes 539 459 385 Minority interests 8 12 10 Equity in earnings losses of investees 34 329 1443 Income loss from continuing operations 1417 2686 2888 Discontinued operations   3883 Net income 1417 2686 995 Earnings per share  basic 16.4p 31.2p 12.0p Earnings per share  diluted 16.3p 31.0p 11.9p BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 132 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ix US GAAP developments In January 2003 the Financial Accounting Standards Board FASB issued Financial Interpretation No.
FIN 46 Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities and in December 2003 issued a revised interpretation FIN 46R.
The interpretation requires the primary beneciary to consolidate a variable interest entity if it has a variable interest that will absorb a majority of the entitys losses if they occur or receive a majority of the entitys expected returns or both.
BT had adopted FIN 46 in June 2003 and the further adoption of FIN 46R did not have a material effect on the results or statement of nancial position of the group.
In May 2003 the FASB issued SFAS No.
150 Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Characteristics of both Liabilities and Equity.
SFAS No.
150 establishes standards for how to classify and measure certain nancial instruments with characteristics of both liabilities and equity.
It requires that an issuer classify a nancial instrument that is within its scope as a liability or an asset in some circumstances.
On adoption SFAS No.
150 did not have a material effect on the results or statement of nancial position of the group.
In November 2002 the Emerging Issues Task Force reached a consensus on EITF 0021 Revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables.
BT adopted this consensus for contracts entered into after 15 June 2003.
Adoption of the consensus did not have a material impact on the results of the group.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 133 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles BT Group plc is the parent company of the group.
Brief details of its principal operating subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates at 31 March 2004 all of which were unlisted unless otherwise stated were as follows
Group interest in allotted capital
Subsidiary undertakings British Telecommunications plc Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary UK BT Australasia Pty Limited de Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary 100% preference
BT Cableships Limited Cableship owner 100% ordinary International BT Communications Management Limited Telecommunication services provider 100% ordinary UK BT Hong Kong Limited df Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary 100% preference Hong Kong BT Fleet Limited Fleet management company 100% ordinary UK BT Global Services Limited dg International telecommunication network systems provider 100% ordinary UK BT Holdings Limited Investment holding company 100% ordinary UK BT Germany GmbH and Co.
Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Germany BT Nederland NV Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Netherlands BT Americas Inc.
Communication related services and products provider 100% common USA BT Property Limited Property holding company 100% ordinary UK BT Subsea Cables Limited Cable maintenance and repair 100% ordinary UK BT ESPANA Compania de Servicios Globales de Telecommunicaciones
Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Spain BT Limited dj International telecommunication network systems provider 100% ordinary International BT US Investments LLC Investment holding company 100% ordinary USA Communications Networking Services
Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary UK Communications Global Network Services Limited Communication related services and products provider 100% ordinary Bermuda Esat Telecommunications Limited Telecommunication services provider 100% ordinary Ireland Farland BV cd Provider of transborder bre network across BTs partners in Europe 100% ordinary International Syntegra Limited Systems integration and application development 100% ordinary UK Syntegra Groep BV Systems integration and application development 100% common Netherlands Syntegra SA Systems integration and application development 100% ordinary France Syntegra USA Inc.
Systems integration and electronic business outsourcing services 100% common International The group comprises a large number of companies and it is not practical to include all of them in this list.
The list therefore only includes those companies that have a more signicant impact on the prot or assets of the group.
The proportion of voting rights held corresponds to the aggregate interest percentage held by the holding company and subsidiary undertakings.
All overseas undertakings are incorporated in their country of operations.
Subsidiary undertakings operating internationally are all incorporated in England and Wales except Farland BV and Syntegra USA Inc. which are incorporated in the Netherlands and USA respectively.
Held through intermediate holding company.
In June 2003 BT Pty Limited changed its name to BT Australasia Pty Limited.
In August 2003 BT Hong Kong Limited changed its name to BT Hong Kong Limited.
In June 2003 BT Global Networks Limited changed its name to BT Global Services Limited.
In September 2003 BT Ignite GmbH and Co. oHG changed its name to BT Germany GmbH and Co. oHG.
In October 2003 BT Ignite Espana SAU changed its name to BT ESPANA Compania de Servicios Globales de Telecommunicaciones S.
In April 2003 BT Worldwide Limited changed its name to BT Limited.
Share capital b billions m millions Activity Issued
Country of operations Joint Ventures Albacom SpA Communication related services and products provider e51m 26.0%
LG Telecom Mobile cellular telephone system provider and operator Won 1386b 16.59% Republic of South Korea Issued share capital comprises ordinary or common shares unless otherwise stated.
All investments are held through intermediate holding companies.
All overseas companies are incorporated in their country of operations.
Held through intermediate holding company.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 134 Subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates Year ended 31 March 2004 Unaudited Quarters 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Total turnover 4693 4667 4676 4878 18914 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 107 99 98 91 395 Group turnover 4586 4568 4578 4787 18519 Other operating income Group operating prot 72tel2873 Groups share of operating loss prot of associates and joint ventures 3 4 5 32 34 Total operating prot 72tel2839 Prot loss on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 1  33 4 36 Prot on sale of property xed assets 11 12 14 Net interest payable 225 234 260 222 941 Prot on ordinary activities before taxation 49tel1948 Tax on prot on ordinary activities 153 132 133 121 539 Prot on ordinary activities after taxation 34tel1409 Minority interests 61 1 8 Prot for the nancial period 35tel1417 Basic earnings per share 4.1p 4.3p 4.5p 3.5p 16.4p Diluted earnings per share 4.0p 4.3p 4.4p 3.5p 16.3p Prot before goodwill amortisation exceptional items and taxation 50tel2016 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 4.1p 4.4p 4.4p 3.9p 16.9p Diluted earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 4.1p 4.4p 4.4p 3.9p 16.8p Year ended 31 March 2003 Unaudited Quarters 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Total turnover 4998 5094 5124 4966 20182 Groups share of associates and joint ventures turnover 411 433 423 188 1455 Group turnover 4587 4661 4701 4778 18727 Other operating income Group operating prot 56tel2572 Groups share of operating prot of associates and joint ventures Total operating prot 61tel2901 Prot loss on sale of xed asset investments and group undertakings 70 4 99 1526 1691 Prot on sale of property xed assets 3314 11 Amounts written off investments  7   7 Net interest payable 300 295 285 559 1439 Prot on ordinary activities before taxation 384 489 567 1717 3157 Tax on prot on ordinary activities 107 165 116 71 459 Prot on ordinary activities after taxation 277 324 451 1646 2698 Minority interests 2 9 6 5 12 Prot for the nancial period 275 315 445 1651 2686 Basic earnings per share 3.2p 3.7p 5.2p 19.1p 31.2p Diluted earnings per share 3.2p 3.6p 5.1p 19.0p 31.0p Prot before goodwill amortisation exceptional items and taxation 32tel1829 Basic earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2.5p 3.7p 4.1p 3.9p 14.2p Diluted earnings per share before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items 2.5p 3.7p 4.1p 3.9p 14.1p BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 135 Quarterly analysis of turnover and profittel 2003 2004 Financial ratios Basic earnings per share on continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items  pence 29.5 19.3 8.8 14.2 16.9 Basic earnings loss per share on continuing activities  pence 29.2 20.7 34.8 31.2 16.4 Basic earnings loss per share  pence 27.6 25.7 12.0 31.2 16.4 Return on capital employed % de de Interest cover The ratio is based on prot before tax goodwill amortisation and interest on longterm borrowings to average capital employed.
Capital employed is represented by total assets excluding goodwill less current liabilities excluding corporate taxes and dividends payable and provisions other than those for deferred taxation.
Yearend gures are used in the computation of the average except in the case of shortterm investments and borrowings where average daily balances are used in their place.
The number of times net interest payable is covered by total operating prot before goodwill amortisation.
Interest cover based on continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was 3.3 times 2003  2.6 times.
Return on capital employed is based upon the continuing activities.
Return on capital employed on continuing activities before goodwill amortisation and exceptional items was 15.3% 2003  15.7%.
Expenditure on research and development Total expenditure 345 364 362tel Expenditure on tangible xed assets Plant and equipment Transmission equipment 1239 1655 1373 1277 1324 Exchange equipment 41tel150 Other network equipment 63tel585 Computers and ofce equipment 41tel205 Motor vehicles and other 25tel316 Land and buildings 3147 3860 3110 2454 2653 Increase decrease in engineering stores 13 3 10 9 20 Total continuing activities 3160 3857 3100 2445 2673 Total discontinued activities 520 1129 808 Total expenditure on tangible xed assets 3680 4986 3908 2445 2673 Increase decrease in creditors 112 230 161 135 11 Cash outow on purchase of tangible xed assets 3568 4756 4069 2580 2684 Financial statistics have been restated where necessary to provide consistency with the presentation of the 2004 nancial year gures.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 136 Financial statistics Years ended 31 Marchtel 2003 2004 Call growth decline % growth decline in UK xednetwork call volumes minutes over the previous year 2 Growth is estimated by reference to growth in absolute call minutes.
UK exchange line connections Business 000 8450 8918 9072 9198 9071 % growth decline over previous year 5.9 5.5 1.7 1.4 1.4 Residential 000 20035 19981 20093 20357 20550 % growth decline over previous year 0.1 0.3 0.6 1.3 0.9 Service providers 000 % growth decline over previous year  29.5 16.4 62.5 314 Total exchange line connections 000 28580 28966 29221 29646 29998 % growth over previous year 1.9 1.4 0.9 1.5 1.2tel 2003 2004 People employed Continuing activities 000 120.8 116.8 108.6 104.7 99.9 Discontinued activities 000 16.0 20.2 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 137 Operational statistics Years ended 31 March The business of BT is affected by a number of factors not all of which are wholly within BTs control.
Although many of the factors inuencing BTs performance are macro economic and likely to affect the performance of businesses generally some aspects of BTs business make it particularly sensitive to certain areas of business risk.
This section highlights some of those specic areas.
However it does not purport to be an extensive analysis of the factors affecting the business and some risks may be unknown to us and other risks currently believed to be immaterial could turn out to be material.
All of these could materially adversely affect our business turnover prots assets liquidity and capital resources.
They should also be considered in connection with the forward looking statements in this document and the cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements on page 141 of this document.
If BTs activities are subject to signicant price and other regulatory controls its market share competitive position and future protability may be affected Most of BTs xed network activities in the UK are subject to signicant regulatory controls.
The controls regulate among other things the prices BT may charge for many of its services and the extent to which it has to provide services to its competitors.
In recent years the effect of these controls has been to cause BT to reduce its prices.
BT cannot assure its shareholders that the regulatory authorities will not increase the severity of the price controls nor extend the services to which controls apply including any new services that BT may offer in the future nor extend the services which it has to provide its competitors.
These controls may adversely affect BTs market share the severity of competition and its future protability.
During 2004 Ofcom is undertaking a strategic review of the UK telecommunications market in order to formulate the principles on which it can base its regulatory decisions in the future.
This review is scheduled to be completed before the end of 2004.
It is not possible to predict the outcome or implications for BT of Ofcoms review.
Further details on the regulatory framework in which BT operates can be found in Business Review  regulation competition and prices on pages 17 to 23 of this document.
BT faces strong competition in UK xed network services BT continues to have a signicant market share in some aspects of UK xed network services.
In particular in the 2004 nancial year we estimate we had a market share of 70% of consumer calls and 42% of business calls in the UK.
Regulators have promoted competition in this area by allowing BTs competitors to site equipment in or adjacent to its exchanges local loop unbundling to make it easier for BTs customers to route some or all of their calls over competitors networks carrier preselection and by the introduction of a wholesale access product wholesale line rental.
Reduction in BTs market share in the xed network may lead to a fall in BTs turnover and an adverse effect on protability.
Unlike its competitors BT continues to be obliged by the current regulatory regime to serve customers in the United Kingdom whether or not such provision of service is economic and the competitive measures described above may have the effect of accelerating the diversion of its more protable existing customers without it being able to reduce its costs commensurately.
These changes in the regulatory environment and ensuing increased competition on its xed network may cause adverse effects on its business results of operations nancial condition and prospects.
BTs business is dependent on the ability to exploit technological advances quickly and successfully BT operates in an industry with a recent history of fast technological changes.
It expects that new products and technologies will emerge and that existing products and technologies will develop further.
BT needs to continually develop its services and products to exploit those next generation technologies.
However BT cannot predict the actual effect of these technological changes on its business or on its ability to provide competitive services.
For example there is evidence of substitution by customers using mobile phones for daytoday voice calls in place of making such calls over the xed network.
Additionally some calls are now being routed over the internet in place of the traditional switched network.
If these trends accelerate BTs xed network assets may be used uneconomically and its investment in these assets may not be recovered through prots on xednetwork calls and line rentals.
Impairment writedowns may be incurred and margins may decline if xed costs cannot be reduced in line with falling turnover.
BT is carrying out a transformation strategy including the targeting of signicant growth in new business areas BT has a strategy to transform its business.
This may result in changes to its products services markets and culture.
If the groups transformation strategy is unsuccessful there is a risk that the future turnover and protability will decline.
In particular BT has targeted signicant growth in new business areas such as broadband mobility and Information and Communications Technology ICT solutions.
In view of the likely level of competition and uncertainties regarding the level of economic activity there can be no certainty that BT will meet its growth targets in these areas with a consequential impact on future turnover and protability.
BTs businesses may be adversely affected if they fail to perform on major contracts BT has entered into a number of complex and high value services contracts with customers.
Failure to manage and meet BTs commitments under these contracts may lead to a reduction in BTs future turnover protability and cash generation.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 138 Risk factors BTs businesses may be adversely affected if their networks or systems experience any signicant failures or interruptions BTs businesses are dependent on their ability to transfer substantial volumes of data speedily and without interruption.
Any signicant failure or interruption of such data transfer due to factors outside their control could have a material adverse effect on the businesses and their results from operations.
BT has a business continuity strategy designed to deal with such catastrophic events including for example major terrorist action industrial action extreme virus attack hurricane or ooding that may impact the ability to maintain an effective service to customers.
A failure to deliver that strategy may result in a material loss and there can be no assurance that material adverse events will not occur.
Declining investment returns and longer life expectancy may result in the funding cost of the dened benet pension scheme becoming a signicant burden on the nancial resources of BT The dened benet pension scheme the BT Pension Scheme BTPS was closed to new members on 31 March 2001 and has been replaced by a dened contribution scheme BTRP.
The latest full triennial actuarial valuation of the BTPS was completed as at 31 December 2002.
As a result BT agreed to make normal contributions of 12.2% of pensionable pay and annual deciency payments of 232 million.
This will apply until the next triennial actuarial valuation is completed as at 31 December 2005.
In March 2004 a 380 million prepayment of deciency contributions was made representing most of the deciency contributions for the 2005 and 2006 nancial years.
The results of future scheme valuations will be impacted by the future investment market performance interest rates and the general trend towards longer life expectancy all of which are outside the control of BT.
In the event that investment returns decline or life expectancy increases the cash funding cost to BT may increase and may have a signicant effect on the nancial resources of BT.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 139 Risk factors 141 Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 142 Listings 142 Share and ADS prices 142 Capital gains tax CGT Rights issue Demerger of mmO 143 Analysis of shareholdings 143 Dividends 144 Dividend mandate 144 Dividend investment plan 144 Global Invest Direct 145 Total shareholder return 145 Results announcements 145 Individual savings accounts ISAs 145 ShareGift 145 Unclaimed Assets Register 146 Exchange rates 146 Memorandum and Articles of Association
Articles
149 Material contracts
149 Taxation US Holders Taxation of dividends Taxation of capital gains US information reporting and backup withholding UK stamp duty UK inheritance and gift taxes in connection with ordinary shares andor ADSs 152 Exchange controls and other limitations affecting security holders 152 Documents on display 152 Publications 153 Electronic communication 153 Shareholder communication Private shareholders Institutional investors and analysts BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 140 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements Certain statements in this annual report are forwardlooking and are made in reliance on the safe harbour provisions of the US Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
These statements relate to analyses and other information which are based on forecasts of future results and estimates of amounts not yet determinable.
These statements include without limitation those concerning BTs strategy and its ability to achieve it BTs debt reduction plans growth of and opportunities available in the communications industry and BTs positioning to take advantage of those opportunities expectations regarding competition market shares prices and growth expectations regarding the convergence of technologies growth and opportunities in new wave business ICT broadband mobility and managed services BTs network development and plans for the 21st century network plans for the launch of new products and services network performance and quality the impact of regulatory initiatives on operations including the regulation of the UK xed wholesale and retail businesses BTs possible or assumed future results of operations andor those of its associates and joint ventures BTs future dividend policy capital expenditure and investment plans adequacy of capital nancing plans demand for and access to broadband and the promotion of broadband by thirdparty service providers and those preceded by followed by or that include the words believes expects anticipates intends or similar expressions.
Although BT believes that the expectations reected in these forwardlooking statements are reasonable it can give no assurance that these expectations will prove to have been correct.
Because these statements involve risks and uncertainties actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forwardlooking statements.
Factors that could cause differences between actual results and those implied by the forwardlooking statements include but are not limited to material adverse changes in economic conditions in the markets served by BT and its lines of business future regulatory actions and conditions in its operating areas including competition from others in the UK and other international communications markets selection by BT and its lines of business of the appropriate trading and marketing models for its products and services technological innovations including the cost of developing new products and the need to increase expenditures for improving the quality of service the anticipated benets and advantages of new technologies not being realised developments in the convergence of technologies prolonged adverse weather conditions resulting in a material increase in overtime staff or other costs the timing of entry and protability of BT and its lines of business in certain communications markets signicant changes in market shares for BT and its principal products and services uctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates and general nancial market conditions affecting BTs performance.
Certain of these factors are discussed in more detail elsewhere in this annual report including without limitation in Risk factors.
T undertakes no obligation to update any forward looking statements whether as a result of new information future events or otherwise.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 141 Additional information for shareholders Listings The principal listing of BT Groups ordinary shares is on the London Stock Exchange.
American Depositary Shares ADSs each representing 10 ordinary shares have been issued by JPMorgan Chase Bank as Depositary for the American Depositary Receipts ADRs evidencing the ADSs and are listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
ADSs also trade but are not listed on the London Stock Exchange.
Trading on the New York Stock Exchange is under the symbol BTY.
Share and ADS prices Pence per ordinary share US per
High pence
High
Low
Years ended 31 March Year ended 31 March 2003 1 July  30 September 2002 255.00 154.00 39.62 24.80 1 October  31 December 2002 219.00 154.00 35.19 24.30 1 January  31 March 2003 209.00 141.00 33.65 23.16 Year ended 31 March 2004 1 July  30 September 2003 206.75 180.00 33.70 28.90 1 October  31 December 2003 190.50 171.25 34.22 29.76 1 January  31 March 2004 189.75 173.25 34.80 32.40
November 2003 188.75 171.25 32.04 29.76 December 2003 188.25 171.75 34.22 30.17 February 2004 182.00 173.25 34.60 32.70 The pre19 November 2001 prices shown have been adjusted for the rights issue and demerger that occurred in the 2002 nancial year.
The prices are the highest and lowest closing middle market prices for BT ordinary shares as derived from the Daily Ofcial List of the London Stock Exchange and the highest and lowest sales prices of ADSs as reported on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape.
Fluctuations in the exchange rate between the pound sterling and the US dollar affect the dollar equivalent of the pound sterling price of the companys ordinary shares on the London Stock Exchange and as a result are likely to affect the market price of the ADSs on the New York Stock Exchange.
Capital gains tax CGT The rights issue in June 2001 and the demerger of mmO in November 2001 adjusted the value for capital gains tax purposes of BT shares.
Rights issue An explanatory note on the effects of the rights issue on the CGT position relating to BT shareholdings is available from the Shareholder Helpline see page 153.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 142 Additional information for shareholders Demerger of mmO capital gains tax calculation The conrmed ofcial opening prices for BT Group and mmO shares on 19 November 2001 following the demerger were 285.75p and 82.75p respectively.
This means that of the total combined value of 368.50p 77.544% is attributable to BT Group and 22.456% to mmO Accordingly for CGT calculations the base cost of your BT Group shares and mmO shares is calculated by multiplying the acquisition cost of your BT shareholding by 77.544% and 22.456% respectively.
Analysis of shareholdings Ordinary shares of 5p each
Number of holdings
Number of shares held millions
1600  9999 180231 11.3 513 5.9 10000  99999 5468 0.3 111 1.3 5000000 and above abcd Total 1604265 100.0 8634 100.0 31 million shares were held in trust by Ilford Trustees Jersey Limited for allocation to employees under the employee share plans.
Under the BT Employee Share Ownership Scheme and the BT Group Employee Share Investment Plan 7 million and 39 million shares respectively were held in trust on behalf of 105657 and 89129 participants respectively who were benecially entitled to the shares.
137 million shares were held in the corporate nominee BT Group EasyShare on behalf of 124279 benecial owners.
208 million shares were represented by ADSs.
Analysis by size of holding is not available for this holding.
14.3% of the shares were in 1572571 individual holdings of which 135432 were joint holdings and 85.7% of the shares were in 31694 institutional holdings.
So far as the company is aware the company is not directly or indirectly owned or controlled by another corporation or by the UK Government or any other foreign government or by any other natural or legal person severally or jointly.
There are no arrangements known to the company the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change in control of the company.
At 14 May 2004 there were 8590507813 ordinary shares outstanding and 44121225 shares were held as treasury shares.
At the same date approximately 21.2 million ADSs equivalent to 212 million ordinary shares or approximately 2.5% of the total number of ordinary shares outstanding on that date were outstanding and were held by 2461 record holders of ADRs.
At 31 March 2004 there were 3577 shareholders with a US address on the register of shareholders.
Dividends
Since shortly after its incorporation in 1984 British Telecommunications plc paid interim dividends annually in February and nal dividends in September.
However as part of BTs debt reduction and restructuring plans neither a nal dividend for the year ended 31 March 2001 nor an interim dividend for the year ended 31 March 2002 was paid to shareholders.
A nal dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2003 was paid on 8 September 2003 to shareholders on the register on 8 August 2003 and an interim dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2004 was paid on 9 February 2004 to shareholders on the register on 30 December 2003.
The dividends paid or payable on BT shares and ADSs for the last ve years are shown in the following table.
The dividends on the ordinary shares exclude the associated tax credit.
The amounts shown are not those that were actually paid to holders of ADSs.
For the tax treatment of dividends paid on or after 6 April 1999 see Taxation of dividends below.
The dividends on the ADSs paid before 5 April 1999 include the associated UK tax credit available to certain benecial owners who are resident in the United States or Canada for tax purposes but before deduction of UK withholding taxes.
Dividends have been translated from pounds sterling into US dollars using exchange rates prevailing on the date the ordinary dividends were paid.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 143 Additional information for shareholders Per ordinary share Per ADS Per ADS Years ended 31 March
Final pence
Interim
Final
Total
Interim
US
Final
US
Total
US
Qualifying holders of ADSs on record as of 6 August 2004 are entitled to receive the nal dividend which will be paid on 14 September 2004 subject to approval at the annual general meeting.
The US dollar amount of the nal dividend of 53 pence per ADS to be paid to holders of ADSs will be based on the exchange rate in effect on 6 September 2004 the date of payment to holders of ordinary shares.
As dividends paid by the company are in pounds sterling exchange rate uctuations will affect the US dollar amounts received by holders of ADSs on conversion by the Depositary of such cash dividends.
Dividend mandate Any shareholder wishing dividends to be paid directly into a bank or building society account should contact the Shareholder Helpline see page 153.
Dividends paid in this way will be paid through the Bankers Automated Clearing System BACS.
Alternatively a form may be downloaded from the internet at siteaboutbt.
Dividend investment plan The dividend investment plan replaced the share dividend plan for shareholders following the 1999 interim dividend.
Under the dividend investment plan cash from participants dividends is used to buy further BT Group shares in the market.
Shareholders could elect to receive additional shares in lieu of a cash dividend for the following dividends Date paid Price per share pence 2000 nal 18 September 2000 809.6 2001 interim 12 February 2001 621.8 2002 nal 9 September 2002 191.19 2003 interim 10 February 2003 178.23 2003 nal 8 September 2003 184.41 2004 interim 9 February 2004 175.98 Global Invest Direct Details of the direct purchase plan run by the ADR Depositary JPMorgan Chase Bank Global Invest Direct including reinvestment of dividends are available from JPMorgan Chase Bank on 1tel toll free within the USA or 1tel from outside the USA or on written request to the ADR Depositary.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 144 Additional information for shareholders Total Shareholder Return Total shareholder return TSR is the measure of the returns that a company has provided for its shareholders reecting share price movements and assuming reinvestment of dividends.
It is therefore a good indicator of a companys overall performance.
Over the past ve years as shown in the TSR chart below BT after performing very strongly in the rst year has suffered falls in its share price like many stocks in the telecoms media and technology TMT sector.
BTs
TSR as adjusted for the rights issue and demerger over the last ve years was negative 72% compared to a FTSE 100 TSR fall of negative 20%.
However over the past year both BT and the FTSE 100 have delivered a very positive performance BT positive 18% and the FTSE 100 positive 26%.
In the period between the demerger on 19 November 2001 and 31 March 2004 BTs share price outperformed the European Telecoms sector for most of the period.
However BT shares have not matched the sector recovery in the most recent months resulting in an underperformance versus the European Telecom sector by around 8% as shown in the share price performance chart over the 28 month period.
0304 0203 0102 0001 9900 BTs total shareholder return TSR performance over five financial years to 31 March 2004 1 April 1999  100.
Source Datastream The graph shows our TSR performance adjusted for the rights issue and demerger of our mobile business in the 2002 financial year relative to the FTSE 100.
BT
FTSE 100
European Telecom Sector BT share price performance vs European Telecom Sector since demerger %
Mar
Mar
Nov
Source Bloomberg The graph shows relative price performance of BT and European Telecom sector since demerger.
Results announcements Expected announcements of results 1st quarter 29 July 2004 2nd quarter and half year 11 November 2004 3rd quarter and nine months February 2005 4th quarter and full year May 2005 2005 annual report and accounts published June 2005 Individual savings accounts ISAs Information about investing in BT shares through an ISA may be obtained from Halifax Share Dealing Limited Trinity Road Halifax W. orkshire HX1 2RG telephonetel.
ISAs are also offered by other organisations.
ShareGift
The Orr Mackintosh Foundation operates a charity share donation scheme for shareholders with small parcels of shares whose value makes it uneconomic to sell them.
Details of the scheme are available from ShareGift at www. haregift. rg or telephonetel or can be obtained from the Shareholder Helpline.
Unclaimed Assets Register BT is among a growing number of companies who subscribe to the Unclaimed Assets Register which provides a search facility for nancial assets such as shareholdings and dividends which have become separated from their owners.
The Register donates a proportion of its public search fees to charity via ShareGift.
For further information on the Unclaimed Assets Register visit site or telephonetel.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 145 Additional information for shareholders Exchange rates BT publishes its consolidated nancial statements expressed in pounds sterling.
The following tables detail certain information concerning the exchange rates between pounds sterling and US dollars based on the noon buying rate in New York City for cable transfers in pounds sterling as certied for customs purposes by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York the Noon Buying Rate.
Years ended 31 Marchtel 2003 2004
Month
November
December
January
February
March
April
The average of the Noon Buying Rates in effect on the last day of each month during the relevant period.
On 14 May 2004 the most recent practicable date for this annual report the Noon Buying Rate was US1.7572 to 1.00.
Memorandum and Articles of Association The following is a summary of the principal provisions of BTs memorandum and articles of association Memorandum and Articles a copy of which has been led with the Registrar of Companies.
Memorandum
The Memorandum provides that its principal objects are among other things to carry on any business of running operating managing and supplying telecommunication systems and systems of any kind for conveying receiving storing processing or transmitting sounds visual images signals messages and communications of any kind.
Articles
In the following description of the rights attaching to the shares in the company a holder of shares and a shareholder is in either case the person entered on the companys register of members as the holder of the relevant shares.
Shareholders can choose whether their shares are to be evidenced by share certicates i. in certicated form or held in electronic i. system in the UK.
Subject to the restrictions described below on a show of hands every shareholder present in person or by proxy at any general meeting has one vote and on a poll every shareholder present in person or by proxy has one vote for each share which they hold.
Voting at any meeting of shareholders is by a show of hands unless a poll is demanded by the chairman of the meeting or by at least ve shareholders at the meeting who are entitled to vote or their proxies or by one or more shareholders at the meeting who are entitled to vote or their proxies and who have between them at least 10% of the total votes of all shareholders who have the right to vote at the meeting.
No person is unless the Board decide otherwise entitled to attend or vote at any general meeting or to exercise any other right conferred by being a shareholder if he or any person appearing to be interested in those shares has been sent a notice under section 212 of the Companies Act 1985 which confers upon public companies the power to require information with respect to interests in their voting shares and he or any interested person has failed to supply to the company the information requested within 14 days after delivery of that notice.
These restrictions end seven days after the earlier of the date the shareholder complies with the request satisfactorily or the company receives notice that there has been an approved transfer of the shares.
Whenever the share capital of the company is split into different classes of shares the special rights attached to any of those classes can be varied or withdrawn either i with the sanction of an extraordinary resolution passed at a separate meeting of the holders of the shares of that class or ii with the consent in writing of the holders of at least 75% in nominal value of the issued shares of that class.
At any separate meeting the necessary quorum is two persons holding or representing by proxy not less than onethird in nominal amount of the issued shares of the class in question but at any adjourned meeting any person holding shares of the class or his proxy is a quorum.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 146 Additional information for shareholders The company can issue new shares and attach any rights and restrictions to them as long as this is not restricted by special rights previously given to holders of any existing shares.
Subject to this the rights of new shares can take priority over the rights of existing shares or existing shares can take priority over them or the new shares and the existing shares can rank equally.
The company may by ordinary resolution i consolidate and divide all or any of its share capital into shares of a larger amount ii divide all or part of its share capital into shares of a smaller amount iii cancel any shares which have not at the date of the ordinary resolution been taken or agreed to be taken by any person and reduce the amount of its share capital by the amount of the shares cancelled and iv increase its share capital.
The company may also i buy back its own shares and ii by special resolution reduce its share capital any capital redemption reserve and any share premium account.
The companys shareholders can declare dividends by passing an ordinary resolution provided that no dividend can exceed the amount recommended by the directors.
Dividends must be paid out of prots available for distribution.
If the directors consider that the prots of the company justify such payments they can pay interim dividends on any class of shares of the amounts and on the dates and for the periods they decide.
Fixed dividends will be paid on any class of shares on the dates stated for the payments of those dividends.
The directors can offer ordinary shareholders the right to choose to receive new ordinary shares which are credited as fully paid instead of some or all of their cash dividend.
Before they can do this the companys shareholders must have passed an ordinary resolution authorising the directors to make this offer.
Any dividend which has not been claimed for 10 years after it was declared or became due for payment will be forfeited and will belong to the company unless the directors decide otherwise.
If the company is wound up whether the liquidation is voluntary under supervision of the court or by the court the liquidator can with the authority of an extraordinary resolution passed by the shareholders divide among the shareholders all or any part of the assets of the company.
This applies whether the assets consist of property of one kind or different kinds.
For this purpose the liquidator can place whatever value the liquidator considers fair on any property and decide how the division is carried out between shareholders or different groups of shareholders.
The liquidator can also with the same authority transfer any assets to trustees upon any trusts for the benet of shareholders which the liquidator decides.
The liquidation of the company can then be nalised and the company dissolved.
No past or present shareholder can be compelled to accept any shares or other property under the Articles which could give them a liability.
Certicated shares of the company may be transferred in writing either by an instrument of transfer in the usual standard form or in another form approved by the Board.
The transfer form must be signed or made effective by or on behalf of the person making the transfer.
The person making the transfer will be treated as continuing to be the holder of the shares transferred until the name of the person to whom the shares are being transferred is entered in the register of members of the company.
The Board may refuse to register any transfer of any share held in certicated form and which is in favour of more than four joint holders or and unless the transfer form to be registered is properly stamped to show payment of any applicable stamp duty and delivered to the companys registered ofce or any other place the Board decide.
The transfer must have with it the share certicate for the shares to be transferred any other evidence which the Board ask for to prove that the person wanting to make the transfer is entitled to do this and if the transfer form is executed by another person on behalf of the person making the transfer evidence of the authority of that person to do so.
Transfers of uncerticated shares must be carried out using a relevant system as dened in the Uncerticated Securities Regulations 1995 the Regulations.
The Board can refuse to register a transfer of an uncerticated share in the circumstances stated in the Regulations.
If the Board decide not to register a transfer of a share they must notify the person to whom that share was to be transferred no later than two months after the company receives the transfer or instruction from the operator of the relevant system.
The Board can decide to suspend the registration of transfers for up to 30 days a year by closing the register of shareholders.
The register must not be closed without the consent of the operator of a relevant system as dened in the Regulations in the case of uncerticated shares.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 147 Additional information for shareholders g Untraced shareholders BT may sell any shares after advertising its intention and waiting for three months if the shares have been in issue for at least 10 years during that period at least three dividends have become payable on them and have not been claimed and BT has not heard from the shareholder or any person entitled to the dividends by transmission.
The net sale proceeds belong to BT but it must pay those proceeds to the former shareholder or the person entitled to them by transmission if that shareholder or that other person asks for them.
Every year the company must hold an annual general meeting.
The Board can call an extraordinary general meeting at any time and under general law must call one on a shareholders requisition.
The only limitation imposed by the Articles on the rights of nonresident or foreign shareholders is that a shareholder whose registered address is outside the UK and who wishes to receive notices of meetings of shareholders or documents from BT must give the company an address within the UK to which they may be sent.
Directors remuneration Excluding remuneration referred to below each director will be paid such fees for his services as the Board decide not exceeding 50000 a year and increasing by the percentage increase of the UK Retail Prices Index as dened by Section  Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 for any 12month period beginning 1 April 1999 or an anniversary of that date.
The company may by ordinary resolution decide on a higher sum.
This resolution can increase the fee paid to all or any directors either permanently or for a particular period.
The directors may be paid their expenses properly incurred in connection with the business of the company.
The Board can award extra fees to a director who holds an executive position acts as chairman or deputy chairman serves on a Board committee at the request of the Board or performs any other services which the Board consider extend beyond the ordinary duties of a director.
The directors may grant pensions or other benets to among others any director or former director or persons connected with them.
However BT can only provide these benets to any director or former director who has not been an employee or held any other ofce or executive position in the company or any of its subsidiary undertakings or to relations or dependants of or people connected to those directors or former directors if the shareholders approve this by passing an ordinary resolution.
Directors votes A director need not be a shareholder but a director who is not a shareholder can still attend and speak at shareholders meetings.
Unless the Articles say otherwise a director cannot vote on a resolution about a contract in which the director has a material interest this will also apply to interests of a person connected with the director.
The director can vote if the interest is only an interest in BT shares debentures or other securities.
A director can however vote and be counted in a quorum in respect of certain matters in which he is interested as set out in the Articles.
Subject to the relevant legislation the shareholders can by passing an ordinary resolution suspend or relax among other things the provisions relating to the interest of a director in any contract or arrangement or relating to a directors right to vote and be counted in a quorum on resolutions in which he is interested to any extent or ratify any particular contract carried out in breach of those provisions.
Directors interests If the legislation allows and the director has disclosed the nature and extent of the interest to the Board the director can i have any kind of interest in a contract with or involving BT or in which BT has an interest or with or involving another company in which BT has an interest ii have any kind of interest in a company in which BT has an interest including holding a position in that company or being a shareholder of that company iii hold a position other than auditor in BT or another company in which BT has an interest on terms and conditions decided by the Board and iv alone or through some rm with which the director is associated do paid professional work other than as auditor for BT or another company in which BT has an interest on terms and conditions decided by the Board.
A director does not have to hand over to BT any benet received or prot made as a result of anything permitted to be done under the Articles.
When a director knows that they are interested in a contract with BT they must tell the other directors.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 148 Additional information for shareholders Retirement of directors Provisions of the legislation which read with the Articles would prevent a person from being or becoming a director because that person has reached the age of 70 do not apply to the company.
At every annual general meeting any director who was elected or last reelected a director at or before the annual general meeting held in the third year before the current year shall retire by rotation.
Any director appointed by the directors automatically retires at the next following annual general meeting.
A retiring director is eligible for reelection.
Directors borrowing powers To the extent that the legislation and the Articles allow the Board can exercise all the powers of the company to borrow money to mortgage or charge its business property and assets present and future and to issue debentures and other securities and give security either outright or as collateral security for any debt liability or obligation of the company or another person.
The Board must limit the borrowings of the company and exercise all the companys voting and other rights or powers of control exercisable by the company in relation to its subsidiary undertakings so as to ensure that the aggregate amount of all borrowings by the group outstanding net of amounts borrowed intragroup among other things at any time does not exceed 35 billion.
Material contracts The following contracts not being contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business have been entered into in the two years preceding the date of this document by BT or another member of the group and are or may be material to the group or have been entered into by BT or another member of the group and contain a provision under which a member of the group has an obligation or entitlement which is or may be material to BT or such other member of the group.
Cegetel
On 5 December 2002 Vivendi Universal Vivendi served a notice exercising its preemption rights under the Shareholders Agreement in respect of Cegetel Groupe SA Cegetel to acquire BTs entire shareholding a 26% interest  in Cegetel from Cegetel Holdings I BV Sarl Cegetel Holdings a BT group company for e4.0 billion 2.6 billion in cash.
This preemption right became exercisable as a result of Cegetel Holdings having entered into a share purchase agreement for the sale of its shareholding in Cegetel to Vodafone AG for e4.0 billion in cash in October 2002.
Vivendi paid e2.7 billion of the consideration to Cegetel Holdings on 17 January 2003 and the transaction was completed when Vivendi paid the balance of e1.3 billion on 22 January 2003.
Taxation US Holders This is a summary only of the principal US federal income tax and UK tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs by US Holders as dened below who hold their ordinary shares or ADSs as capital assets.
It does not address all aspects of US federal income taxation and does not address aspects that may be relevant to persons who are subject to special provisions of US federal income tax law including US expatriates insurance companies taxexempt organisations nancial institutions securities brokerdealers traders in securities who elect a marktomarket method of accounting persons subject to alternative minimum tax investors that directly indirectly or by attribution own 10% or more of the outstanding share capital or voting power of BT persons holding their ordinary shares or ADSs as part of a straddle hedging transaction or conversion transaction persons who acquired their ordinary shares or ADSs pursuant to the exercise of options or otherwise as compensation or persons whose functional currency is not the US dollar amongst others.
Those holders may be subject to US federal income tax consequences different from those set forth below.
For purposes of this summary a US Holder is a benecial owner of ordinary shares or ADSs that for US federal income tax purposes is an individual citizen or resident of the United States a corporation or other entity taxable as a corporation for US federal income tax purposes created or organised in or under the laws of the United States or any state thereof an estate the income of which is subject to US federal income taxation regardless of its source or a trust if a US court can exercise primary supervision over the administration of the trust and one or more US persons are authorised to control all substantial decisions of the trust.
If a partnership holds ordinary shares or ADSs the tax treatment of a partner generally will depend upon the status of the partner and the activities of the partnership.
A partner in a partnership that holds ordinary shares or ADSs is urged to consult its own tax advisor regarding the specic tax consequences of owning and disposing of the ordinary shares or ADSs.
In particular this summary is based on i current UK tax law and UK Inland Revenue practice and US law and US Internal Revenue Service IRS practice including the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended Treasury regulations rulings judicial decisions and administrative practice all as currently in effect ii the United KingdomUnited States Income Tax Convention that entered into force on 25 April 1980 as in effect on 1 January 2003 the 1980 Convention iii the United KingdomUnited States Convention relating to estate and gift taxes and iv the new United KingdomUnited States Tax Convention that entered into force on BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 149 Additional information for shareholders 31 March 2003 the New Convention all as in effect on the date of this Annual Report all of which are subject to change or changes in interpretation possibly with retroactive effect.
US Holders should be aware that the New Convention generally will have effect in respect of dividends paid on or after 1 May 2003.
However a US Holder entitled to benets under the 1980 Convention may elect to have the provisions of the 1980 Convention continue for an additional twelve months if the election to apply the 1980 Convention would result in greater benets to the Holder.
If a US Holder were to make an effective election the discussion below with respect to dividend payments made pursuant to the 1980 Convention would continue to apply to dividends paid by BT prior to 1 May 2004.
The discussion below notes instances where the relevant provisions of the New Convention will produce a materially different result for a US Holder.
US Holders should note that certain articles in the New Convention limit or restrict the ability of a US Holder to claim benets under the New Convention and that similar provisions were not contained in the 1980 Convention.
US Holders should consult their own tax advisors as to the applicability of the Conventions and the consequences under UK US federal state and local and other laws of the ownership and disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs.
Taxation of dividends The UK currently does not apply a withholding tax on dividends under its internal tax laws.
For US federal income tax purposes a distribution including any additional dividend income arising from a foreign tax credit claim as described below will be treated as ordinary dividend income to the extent paid out of the current or accumulated earnings and prots as determined for US tax purposes based on the US dollar value of the distribution calculated by reference to the spot rate in effect on the date the distribution is actually or constructively received by a US Holder of ordinary shares or by the Depositary in the case of ADSs.
Distributions by BT in excess of its current and accumulated earnings and prots will be treated rst as a taxfree return of capital to the extent of the US Holders adjusted tax basis in the ordinary shares or ADSs and thereafter taxable as capital gain.
Dividends paid by BT will not be eligible for the US dividends received deduction.
For dividends paid on or before 5 April 1999 US Holders were generally entitled to receive the cash dividend plus a Treaty payment from the Inland Revenue of one quarter of the dividend subject to a UK withholding tax of 15% of the aggregate amount paid.
As an example for illustration purposes only a US Holder who was entitled to a dividend of 80 was also entitled to a Treaty payment of 20 reduced by the withholding tax of 15% on the gross amount of 100 i.
15 leaving a net cash payment of 85.
The full dividend plus the full Treaty payment including the UK tax withheld was taxable income for US purposes and the UK tax withheld generally was available as a US credit or deduction.
For dividends paid on or after 6 April 1999 and subject to the 1980 Convention as described above the Treaty payment reduces to one ninth of the dividend i. one tenth of the gross payment.
As a result of the UK withholding tax which cannot exceed the amount of the hypothetical Treaty payment US Holders will no longer receive any Treaty payment.
In the above example the cash dividend would be 80 and the hypothetical Treaty payment would be 8.89 one ninth of 80.
However since the UK withholding tax 15% of 88.89 would exceed the amount of the hypothetical Treaty payment no Treaty payment will be made and the US Holder will receive only the cash dividend here 80.
A US Holder will be taxable in the US on the full dividend and full hypothetical Treaty payment 88.89 and will be treated as having paid a foreign tax equal to the hypothetical Treaty payment here 8.89.
The effect on each US Holder will depend on circumstances that are particular to that Holder.
The foreign tax deemed paid generally will be available as a US credit or deduction.
A US Holder could elect to receive a foreign tax credit or deduction with respect to any UK withholding tax on IRS Form 8833 Treaty Based Return Position Disclosure Under Section 6114 or 7701b.
For purposes of calculating the foreign tax credit dividends paid on the ordinary shares or ADSs will be treated as income from sources outside the United States and generally will constitute passive income or for certain Holders nancial services income.
The rules relating to the determination of the foreign tax credit are very complex.
US Holders who do not elect to claim a credit with respect to any foreign taxes paid in a given taxable year may instead claim a deduction for foreign taxes paid.
A deduction does not reduce US federal income tax on a dollar for dollar basis like a tax credit.
The deduction however is not subject to the limitations applicable to foreign credits.
There will be no hypothetical Treaty payment and no notional UK withholding tax applied to a dividend payment made under the New Convention.
Therefore it will not be possible for US Holders to claim a foreign tax credit in respect of any dividend payment made by BT on or after 1 May 2003 or 1 May 2004 in the case of a US Holder who effectively elects to extend the applicability of the 1980 Convention as described above.
US Holders should consult their own tax advisors to determine whether the US Holder is eligible for benets under the 1980 Convention and the New Convention whether and to what extent a foreign tax credit will be available with respect to dividends received from BT whether it may be advisable in light of the Holders particular circumstances to elect to have the provisions of the 1980 Convention continue in force until 1 May 2004 and the treatment of any foreign currency gain or loss on any pounds sterling received with respect to ordinary shares that are not converted into US dollars on the date the pounds sterling are actually or constructively received.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 150 Additional information for shareholders Recent US tax law changes applicable to individuals Under 2003 US tax legislation some US Holders including individuals are eligible for reduced rates of US federal income tax currently a maximum of 15% in respect of qualied dividend income received in taxable years beginning after 31 December 2002 and beginning before 1 January 2009.
For this purpose qualied dividend income generally includes dividends paid by nonUS corporations if among other things certain minimum holding periods are met and either i the shares or ADSs with respect to which the dividend has been paid are readily tradeable on an established securities market in the United States or ii the nonUS corporation is eligible for the benets of a comprehensive US income tax treaty such as both Conventions which provides for the exchange of information.
BT currently believes that dividends paid with respect to its ordinary shares and ADSs will constitute qualied dividend income for US federal income tax purposes provided the individual US Holders of its ordinary shares and ADSs meet certain requirements.
Some of the eligibility requirements for non US corporations are not entirely certain however and further guidance from the IRS is anticipated.
In addition the IRS is expected to issue certication procedures in 2004 whereby a nonUS corporation will be required to certify as to the eligibility of its dividends for the reduced US federal income tax rates.
Taxation of capital gains Unless a US resident carries on a trade through a branch or agency in the UK and the disposal of ordinary shares andor ADSs is related to the activities of that trade UK capital gains tax is not charged on US residents who dispose of ordinary shares andor ADSs.
For US federal income tax purposes a US Holder generally will recognise capital gain or loss on the sale or other disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs in an amount equal to the difference between the US dollar value of the amount realised on the disposition and the US Holders adjusted tax basis determined in US dollars in the ordinary shares or ADSs.
Such gain or loss generally will be US source gain or loss and will be treated as longterm capital gain or loss if the ordinary shares have been held for more than one year at the time of disposition.
The deductibility of capital losses is subject to signicant limitations.
Capital gains recognised by an individual US Holder generally are subject to US federal income tax at preferential rates if specied holdings periods are met.
Passive foreign investment company status A nonUS corporation will be classied as a Passive Foreign Investment Company a PFIC for any taxable year if at least 75% of its gross income consists of passive income or at least 50% of the average value of its assets consist of assets that produce or are held for the production of passive income.
BT currently believes that it did not qualify as a PFIC for the taxable year ending 31 March 2004 for US federal income tax purposes.
If BT were to become a PFIC for any taxable year US Holders would suffer adverse tax consequences.
These consequences may include having gains realised on the disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs treated as ordinary income rather than capital gains and being subject to punitive interest charges on certain dividends and on the proceeds of the sale or other disposition of the ordinary shares or ADSs.
Furthermore dividends paid by BT would not be qualied dividend income and would be subject to the higher rates applicable to other items of ordinary income.
US Holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the potential application of the PFIC rules to BT.
US information reporting and backup withholding Dividends paid on and proceeds received from the sale or disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs may be subject to information reporting to the IRS and backup withholding at a current rate of 28%.
Certain exempt recipients such as corporations are not subject to these information reporting requirements.
Backup withholding will not apply however to a Holder who provides a correct taxpayer identication number or certicate of foreign status and makes any other required certication or who is otherwise exempt.
US persons who are required to establish their exempt status generally must furnish IRS Form W9 Request for Taxpayer Identication Number and
NonUS Holders generally will not be subject to US information reporting or backup withholding.
However such Holders may be required to provide certication of nonUS status in connection with payments received in the United States or through certain USrelated nancial intermediaries.
Amounts withheld as backup withholding may be credited against a Holders US federal income tax liability.
A Holder may obtain a refund of any excess amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules by timely ling the appropriate claim for refund with the IRS and furnishing any required information.
UK stamp duty A transfer of an ordinary share will generally be subject to UK stamp duty or UK stamp duty reserve tax at 0.5% of the amount or value of any consideration provided.
A transfer of an ordinary share into a clearance service or American depository system gives rise to a 1.5% charge of either the amount of the consideration provided or the value of the share issued.
No UK stamp duty will be payable on the transfer of an ADS assuming it is not registered in the UK provided that the transfer documents are executed and always retained outside the UK.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 151 Additional information for shareholders UK inheritance and gift taxes in connection with ordinary shares andor ADSs Where an individual holder who is not a UK national of ordinary shares andor ADSs falls within the scope of the UKUS Estate and Gift Tax Convention USdomiciled holders of ordinary shares andor ADSs will not generally be subject to UK inheritance tax on a gift of ordinary shares andor ADSs if the gift is subject to US federal gift tax.
Similarly ordinary shares andor ADSs passing on the death of a USdomiciled shareholder who is not a UK national will not generally be subject to UK inheritance tax if the estate is subject to US estate tax.
The rules and scope of domicile are complex and action should not be taken without advice specic to the individuals circumstances.
Exchange controls and other limitations affecting security holders There are currently no government laws decrees or regulations in the United Kingdom that restrict the export or import of capital including but not limited to UK foreign exchange control restrictions or that affect the remittances of dividends or other payments to nonresident holders of the companys ordinary shares except as otherwise described in Taxation US Holders above.
There are no limitations under the laws of the United Kingdom restricting the right of nonresidents to hold or to vote shares in the company.
Documents on display All reports and other information that BT les with the US Securities and Exchange Commission may be inspected at the SECs public reference facilities at Room 1200 450 Fifth Street Washington DC USA.
These reports may be accessed via the SECs website at www. ec. ov.
Publications
BT produces a series of reports on the companys nancial economic social and environmental performance.
Most of these reports which are available to shareholders on request can be accessed on the internet at siteaboutbt.
More detailed disclosures on BTs implementation of social ethical and environmental policies and procedures are available online through our fully and independently veried social and environment report at sitebetterworld.
Document Publication date Annual Review including summary nancial statement June Annual Report and Form 20F June Quarterly results releases July November February and May Current Cost Financial Statements for the Businesses and Activities and Statement of Standard Services as required by Ofcom August Social and Environment Report June Statement of Business Practice October 2003 For printed copies when available contact the Shareholder Helpline on Freefonetel or alternatively contact the Registrar in the UK at the address on page 153.
BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 152 Additional information for shareholders Electronic communication Shareholders can now choose to receive their shareholder documents electronically rather than by post.
Shareholders may elect to receive documents in this way by going to sitesignup and following the online instructions or by calling the Shareholder Helpline.
Shareholder communication BT is committed to communicating openly with each of its stakeholder audiences in the manner most appropriate to their requirements.
All investors can visit our website at siteaboutbt for more information about BT.
There are direct links from this page to sites providing information particularly tailored for shareholders institutional investors and analysts industry analysts and journalists.
An electronic copy of this document is available at siteaboutbt.
Private shareholders If private shareholders have any enquiries about their shareholding they should contact the Registrar the address can be found below.
Lloyds TSB Registrars maintain BT Groups share register and the separate BT Group EasyShare and BT Employee Share Ownership Scheme registers.
They also provide a Shareholder Helpline service on Freefonetel.
Institutional investors and analysts Institutional investors and equity research analysts may contact Investor Relations on tel
Industry analysts may contact tel
Shareholder Helpline Tel Freefonetel
Textphone Freefonetel From outside the UK Tel 44tel Fax tel71 Textphone 44tel email email The Registrar Lloyds TSB Registrars The Causeway Worthing West Sussex BN99 6DA United Kingdom
ADR Depositary JPMorgan Chase Bank JPMorgan Service Centre
Box 43013 Providence RI 029403013 United States Tel 1tel toll free or 1tel from outside the USA email email Website site General enquiries BT Group plc BT Centre 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ United Kingdom Tel 020 7356 5000 Fax 020 7356 5520 From overseas Tel 44tel Fax 44tel BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 153 Additional information for shareholders A full list of BT contacts and an electronic feedback facility is available at sitetalk.
Term used in UK annual report US equivalent or denition Accounts Financial statements Associates Equity investees Capital allowances Tax depreciation Capital redemption reserve Other additional capital Creditors Accounts payable and accrued liabilities Creditors amounts falling due within one year Current liabilities Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year Longterm liabilities Debtors amounts falling due after more than one year Other noncurrent assets Employee share schemes Employee stock benet plans Finance lease Capital lease Financial year Fiscal year Fixed asset investments Noncurrent investments Freehold Ownership with absolute rights in perpetuity Gearing Leverage Inland calls Local and longdistance calls Interests in associates and joint ventures Securities of equity investees Investment in own shares Treasury shares Loans to associates and joint ventures Indebtedness of equity investees not current Net book value Book value Operating prot Net operating income Other debtors Other current assets Own work capitalised Costs of groups employees engaged in the construction of plant and equipment for internal use Prot Income Prot and loss account statement Income statement Prot and loss account under capital and reserves in balance sheet Retained earnings Prot for the nancial year Net income Prot on sale of xed assets Gain on disposal of noncurrent assets Provision for doubtful debts Allowance for bad and doubtful accounts receivable Provisions Longterm liabilities other than debt and specic accounts payable Recognised gains and losses statement Comprehensive income Reserves Shareholders equity other than paidup capital Share based payment Stock compensation Share premium account Additional paidin capital or paidin surplus not distributable Shareholders funds Shareholders equity Stocks Inventories Tangible xed assets Property plant and equipment Trade debtors Accounts receivable net Turnover Revenues BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 154 Glossary of terms and US equivalents The information in this document that is referred to in the following table shall be deemed to be led with the Securities and Exchange Commission for all purposes Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 1 Identity of directors senior management and advisors Not applicable 2 Offer statistics and expected timetable Not applicable 3 Key information 3A Selected nancial data Five year nancial summary 2425 Additional information for shareholders Exchange rates 146 3B Capitalisation and indebtedness Not applicable 3C Reasons for the offer and use of proceeds Not applicable 3D Risk factors Risk factors 138139 4 Information on the company 4A History and development of the company Business review Introduction 7 Background 78 2002 restructuring 8 Demerger of mmO Concert 8 Acquisitions and disposals prior to the 2004 nancial year 8 Acquisitions and disposals in the 2004 nancial year 8
Financial review
Capital expenditure 43 4B Business overview Business review 623
Financial review
Geographical information 44 Our commitment to society 4748 Financial statistics 136 Operational statistics 137 Notes to the nancial statements People employed 113 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 141 4C Organisational structure Business review Introduction 7 Subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates 134 4D Property plant and equipment Financial review Prot on sale of property xed assets 3839 5 Operating and nancial review and prospects 5A Operating results Financial review 2646 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 141 5B Liquidity and capital resources Financial review 2646 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 141 Notes to the nancial statements Loans and other borrowings 103 Financial commitments contingent liabilities and subsequent events 107 Financial instruments and risk management 117121 5C Research and development patents and licences Business review Research and development and IT support 17 Financial statistics 136 5D Trend information Financial review 2646 Additional information for shareholders Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 141 5E Offbalance sheet arrangements Financial Review Offbalance sheet arrangements 42 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 155 Cross reference to Form 20F Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 5F Tabular disclosure of contractual obligations Financial Review Capital resources 42 6 Directors senior management and employees 6A Directors and senior management Board of directors and Operating Committee 4950 6B Compensation Report on directors remuneration 5871 Notes to the nancial statements Pension costs 108112 Directors emoluments 112 6C Board practices Board of directors and Operating Committee 4950 Report of the directors Directors 51 Corporate governance 5257 Report on directors remuneration 5871 Statement of directors responsibility 72 6D Employees Business review Motivate our people and live the BT values 1617 Notes to the nancial statements People employed 113 Operational statistics 137 6E Share ownership Report on directors remuneration 5871 Notes to the nancial statements Employee share schemes 113116 7 Major shareholders and related party transactions 7A Major shareholders Report of the directors Substantial shareholdings 51 Additional information for shareholders Analysis of shareholdings 143 7B Related party transactions Report of the directors Interest of management in certain transactions 51 Report on directors remuneration 5871 Notes to the nancial statements Related party transactions 106 7C Interests of experts and counsel Not applicable 8 Financial information 8A Consolidated statements and other nancial information See item 18 below.
Business review
Legal proceedings 23 Additional information for shareholders Dividends 143144 8B Signicant changes Financial review Capital resources 42 Notes to the nancial statements Financial commitments contingent liabilities and subsequent events 107 9 The offer and listing 9A Offer and listing details Additional information for shareholders Share and ADS prices 142 9B Plan of distribution Not applicable 9C Markets Additional information for shareholders Listings 142 9D Selling shareholders Not applicable 9E Dilution Not applicable 9F Expenses of the issue Not applicable 10 Additional information 10A Share capital Not applicable 10B Memorandum and articles of association Business review Background 78 Additional information for shareholders Memorandum and Articles of Association 146149 10C Material contracts Additional information for shareholders Material contracts 149 10D Exchange controls Additional information for shareholders Exchange controls and other limitations affecting security holders 152 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 156 Cross reference to Form 20F Required Item in Form 20F Where information can be found in this Annual Report Item Section Page 10E Taxation Additional information for shareholders Taxation US Holders 149150 10F Dividends and paying agents Not applicable 10G Statement by experts Not applicable 10H Documents on display Additional information for shareholders Documents on display 152 10I Subsidiary information Not applicable 11 Quantitative and qualitative Financial review disclosures about market risk Treasury policy Foreign currency and interest rate exposure Notes to the nancial statements Financial instruments and risk management 117121 12 Description of securities other than equity securities Not applicable 13 Defaults dividend arrearages and delinquencies Not applicable 14 Material modications to the rights of security holders and use of proceeds Not applicable 15 Controls and procedures Corporate governance US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 57 16A Audit committee nancial expert Corporate governance US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 57 16B Code of ethics Corporate governance US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 57 16C Principal accountants fees and services Notes to the nancial statements Auditors 117 Corporate Governance Audit Committee 54 17 Financial statements Not applicable 18 Financial statements Report of the independent auditors 73 Accounting policies 7577 Consolidated nancial statements 74123 United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 124133 Quarterly analysis of turnover and prot 135 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 157 21st century network 13 43 Accounting and presentation changes 84 Accounting policies 4546 7577 Additional information for shareholders 140153 Auditors remuneration 117 Auditors report to shareholders 73 Background 78 Balance sheet 25 43 83 Broadband 3 4 9 1012 13 19 28 3133 BT Exact 17 BT Global Services 3031 34 8485 BT Retail 3032 8485 BT Wholesale 3031 3234 8485 Business practice statement of 56 Business review 623 Call volume growth 137 Capital commitments 107 Capital expenditure 2 13 43 82 85 100 107 136 Capital gains tax 142 Cash ow statement 25 40 82 96 Cautionary statement 141 Chairmans message 3 Chief Executives statement 45 Community 16 47 48 Company balance sheet 122123 Competition and the UK economy 20 Concert global venture 8 26 36 37 85 88 8990 9697 Contact details 153 Contingent liabilities 107 Corporate governance 5257 Creditors 51 83 104 122 Cross reference to Form 20F 155157 Customer satisfaction 3 4 10 47 59 Debtors 76 83 102 122 Depreciation 31 33 35 76 89 90 96 100 Disposals 8 3738 9192 9699
Biographies 4950 Emoluments 112 Interests in shares 63 Proposed for election or reelection at AGM 51 Remuneration report on 5871 Report 51 Responsibility statement 72 Dividend investment plan 144 Dividends 2 3 24 40 41 7880 82 93 104 122 143144 Earnings loss per share 2 3 24 27 28 40 7880 9495 Economic and Monetary Union 4445 Electronic communication 153 Employee share schemes 113116 Employees 1617 32 113 137 Environment 45 4748 152 Exchange controls 152 Exchange lines 1 9 29 137 Financial calendar 152 Financial commitments 107 Financial headlines 2 Financial instruments 77 117121 Financial ratios 136 Financial review 2646 Financial statistics 136 Financing 4041 Fiveyear nancial summary 2425 Foreign currencies 4243 75 8990 118 121 Going concern 42 72 Goodwill 2627 30 35 37 7576 8990 95 96 99 101 Glossary of terms and US equivalents 154 Intangible assets 31 7576 83 99 Interest 24 27 29 39 4243 75 7880 82 92 118 120 Interest cover 39 136 Internal control and risk management 5556 Investments 8 26 3638 76 83 9192 101102 Joint ventures and associates 29 3637 76 7880 85 87 88 Legal proceedings 23 107 Licence 1718 45 76 Listings 142 Loans and other borrowings 42 103 Management Council 5456 Management of liquid resources 96 Material contracts 149 Memorandum and Articles of Association 146149 Minority interests 93 7880 83 102 128 mmO Mobility 45 12 New wave 2 4 9 28 Ofcom 7 1722 138 Oftel 7 17 1922 Other operating income 34 7880 88 Operating and Financial Review 648 Operating Committee 50 55 Operating costs 13 34 36 8990 Operating prot loss 3637 87 96 Operational statistics 137 Our commitment to society 4748 Pensions 16 44 61 7677 108112 Political donations 51 57 Price control 2022 138 Prot loss beforeafter tax 2 25 27 29 39 7880 135 Provisions for liabilities and charges 83 104 Publications 152 Purchase of own shares 3 39 105 123 Quarterly analysis of turnover and prot 135 Reconciliation of movement in shareholders funds 105106 Reconciliation of operating prot loss to operating cash ows 96 Redundancy costs 76 8990 Regulation 3 1723 45 Research and development 17 75 89 90 136 Restructuring 8 26 37 Return on capital employed 43 136 Rights issue 8 26 105 142 Risk factors 138139 Risk management 117121 SarbanesOxley Act 53 57 Segmental analysis 8487 Share and ADS prices 142 Share capital 25 83 105 122123 Share option schemes 105 113116 Shareholder communication 153 Shareholdings analysis 143 Staff costs 33 35 8990 Statement of total recognised gains and losses 81 Stocks 76 83 Strategy 3 10 Subsidiary undertakings 7 134 Substantial shareholdings 51 Suppliers payment policy 51 Tangible xed assets 25 43 76 83 100 136 Taxation 24 25 27 29 3940 77 7880 9293 104 Taxation US Holders 149150 Total shareholder return 64 145 Treasury policy 42 Turnover 2 9 24 27 28 30 75 7880 8487 88 135 US GAAP 46 124133 BT Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 158 Index Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Delivering today Investing for tomorrow BT Group plc Registered ofce 81 Newgate Street London EC1A 7AJ Registered in England and Wales No.
