Tellitstraight
Reuters Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 For more information www. bout.
01 Financial highlights 02 Chairmans statement 03 Chief Executives review 04 Five and three year summaries 05 Selected financial highlights 06 Company information 11 Operating and financial review 26 Directors report 27 Directors and senior managers 29 Corporate governance 32 Remuneration report 41 Statement of directors responsibilities 42 United Kingdom opinionUnited States opinion 43 Consolidated profit and loss account Consolidated statement of total recognised gains and losses 44 Notes on the consolidated profit and loss account 50 Consolidated cash flow statement 51 Notes on the consolidated cash flow statement 56 Consolidated balance sheet 57 Reconciliation of movements in shareholders funds Notes on the consolidated balance sheet 71 Balance sheet of Reuters Group PLC Notes on the balance sheet of Reuters Group PLC 72 Accounting policies 74 Summary of differences between UK and US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles GAAP 77 Notes on summary of differences between UK and US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles GAAP 81 Information for shareholders 93 Eleven year consolidated financial summary 94 Crossreference guide to Form 20F 95 Glossary 96 Financial diary for 2005 Where to find us FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 01
2004 2003 % Reuters Group m m change Revenue 2885 3235 11% Operating profit 197 130 51% Profit before tax 437 56 Profit after tax 364 34 Return on equity % 112.5% 15.7% Net fundsdebt 326 77 Basic earnings per ordinary share 25.1p 3.6p Diluted earnings per share 24.5p 3.5p Earnings per ADS Dividends per ordinary share 10.0p 10.0p Dividends per ADS see page 82 60.0p 60.0p
1 Each American Depositary Share ADS represents six ordinary shares.
2 A nominal exchange rate of US1.92  1 has been used for convenience.
3 Restated following the adoption of Urgent Issues Task Force subsequently referred to as UITF 17 and UITF38 and the reclassification of transactionrelated regulatory fees following recently issued SEC guidance see Accounting Basis on page 72.
This report comprises the annual report of Reuters Group PLC in accordance with the United Kingdom requirements and its annual report on Form 20F in accordance with the requirements of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission SEC for 2004.
A crossreference guide setting out the information in this report that corresponds to the Form 20F items is provided on pages 9495.
As used in this report Reuters Group and Group refer to Reuters Group PLC and its subsidiary undertakings including Instinet Group Incorporated Instinet Group joint ventures and associates.
The company refers to the parent Reuters Group PLC.
Reuters refers to Reuters Group excluding Instinet Group.
The consolidated financial statements of Reuters Group included in this report are presented in pounds sterling .
On 31 December 2004 the noon buying rate in New York City for cable transfers in foreign currencies as announced for customs purposes by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Noon Buying Rate was US1.92  1 on 4 March 2005 the Noon Buying Rate was US1.92  1.
For additional information on exchange rates between the pound sterling and the US dollar see exchange rates on page 85.
Reuters Groups consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United Kingdom UK GAAP.
UK GAAP differs in certain respects from accounting principles generally accepted in the United States US GAAP.
The material differences between UK GAAP and US GAAP relevant to Reuters Group are explained on pages 7480.
This report contains forwardlooking statements within the meaning of the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 with respect to Reuters Groups financial condition results of operations business and management strategy and plans and objectives.
For a discussion of risks associated with these statements see Risk Factors on pages 2325.
Reuters the sphere logo and Reuters product names referred to in the report are trade marks or registered trade marks of the Reuters Group of companies around the world.
Other trade marks of third parties are used in this report for the purpose of identification only.
It is a privilege to follow in the footsteps of Sir Christopher Hogg.
I am grateful for the warm and open welcome I have received from Tom Glocer and his team and my Board colleagues.
I hope to justify their confidence.
Reuters is one of the worlds great brands.
The principles which govern the company are special.
The people who work here are a unique blend.
And yet the business stumbled.
But a resolute team has fought back focused again on the core and rebuilt confidence and strength.
The benefits of Fast Forward are clear and will grow.
Momentum will be maintained in 2005 but we must also put in place a strategic framework for sustained growth in the years ahead.
There is growth potential in our core business in adjacent markets and in new sectors and geographies.
Our task is to identify opportunities which play to our competitive strengths and encompass risk which we understand.
In doing so we must start with the extraordinary brand that is Reuters.
What does it stand for today and to what can it realistically aspire How do we grow the company to fill the space occupied by the brand Where are the multiple skills and special values of Reuters people best deployed When can this deliver value to our shareholders and worth to society As Chairman my role is to lead the Board in a manner that allows the CEO to run the company effectively.
This requires the correct balance between detachment thereby avoiding interference and being sufficiently engaged to know when to intervene.
Our Board discussions should always be open candid and trusting.
We must be prepared to challenge confront disagree and probe.
But always in a way that is constructive and supportive of the business agenda.
As a Board we should be judged through the sustained success of the business.
I am excited by the challenge yet humbled by the responsibility.
Niall FitzGerald KBE
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
02 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 We must put in place a strategic framework for sustained growth in the years ahead.
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 ONE TO ONE WITH TOM GLOCER Our CEO answers the key questions about Reuters Q What was the high point of 2004 We increased Group operating profit by 51% to 197 million as our sales began to recover.
User accesses also started to climb again during the year reaching 328000 an increase of 14000 since the end of the first quarter.
Unfortunately our journalists and photographers are all too often exposed to danger as they report world events.
I deeply regret that in the last year three have lost their lives Adlan Khasanov in Chechnya and Dhia Najim and Rashid Khaled in Iraq.
Their deaths are a searing reminder of the heroism of Reuters journalists who put their lives on the line to report the reality of conflict to those of us who live in a safer environment.
Q You say Reuters is being transformed  from what to what In short from a company at the edge to a great company again.
The Reuters of three years ago was at a crisis point.
Our revenues were falling rapidly we were losing market share our costs were too high and our organisation was too complex.
Today twothirds of the way through Fast Forward Im pleased with our progress.
We have strengthened our product line we are meeting our cost savings targets and we have done much to simplify the company and reduce our portfolio.
Its a tough process and one that will continue this year but its worth it because I truly believe we are on the way to making Reuters a great company again.
Q What is being done to improve Reuters products The answer and our approach begins with identifying and understanding customer needs.
I think we are doing a much better job at this and the results show in new or significantly improved products such as Reuters 3000 Xtra Reuters Knowledge and Reuters Station.
What I believe we need to improve is speed of execution and responsiveness to customers.
Part of the answer lies in the cultural transformation we have underway at Reuters and part lies in organising ourselves better.
Towards this end we reorganised our Development and Operations groups at the beginning of 2005 to integrate our software developers directly into the Customer Segment business teams and focus on Customer Service.
Q What more can be done to improve customer satisfaction Our customer satisfaction score continued to improve during 2004 and I am proud of the way the Reuters culture is changing to put the customer at the heart of everything we do.
However our customer satisfaction took a hit in the fourth quarter in the wake of the power disruption we experienced last October at our London data centre.
It brought home to me just how integral we are to the way our customers run their businesses and how we can create a competitive advantage for Reuters by increasing our investment in business continuity and disaster recovery.
Q Where do you expect Reuters growth to come from in the next few years Our dialogue with customers investors and Reuters own staff has shifted from one of recovery to growth.
This is a challenge I take up eagerly.
We are hard at work on an ambitious growth strategy which will follow the completion of the Fast Forward transformation plan in 2005.
We start from a good base.
Our financial services market is returning to growth after several difficult years we will seek to outgrow the market by increasing share.
We are launching innovative trading systems to grow usage revenues alongside subscription revenues.
We are investing in parts of our business with high growth potential such as risk management systems and enterprise information products and we are expanding our business in emerging markets such as China and India.
Finally as we take steps to reinforce the power of the Reuters brand we believe there is more we can aspire to in the provision of information direct to consumers.
Tom Glocer
I am proud of the way the Reuters culture is changing to put the customer at the heart of everything we do.
REUTERS CUSTOMER SEGMENTS AND INSTINET GROUP THREE YEAR REVENUE SUMMARY REUTERS GROUP FIVE YEAR SUMMARY 04 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 REVENUE  m 2PROFITLOSS BEFORE TAX  m BASIC EARNINGSLOSS PER ORDINARY SHARE  Pence IVIDENDS PER ORDINARY SHARE  Pence SALES and TRADING  m RESEARCH and ASSET MANAGEMENT  m ENTERPRISE  m INSTINET GROUP  m MEDIA  m and 2002 revenues profitloss before tax and earningsloss per ordinary share have been restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 and the reclassification of transactionrelated regulatory fees following recently issued SEC guidance see Accounting Basis on page 72.
Reuters customer segment revenues exclude recoveries see note 1 on page 44.
SELECTED FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA The selected financial information set out below is derived in part from the consolidated financial statements.
The selected data should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes as well as the Operating and Financial Review.
The consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with UK GAAP which differs in certain respects from US GAAP.
For a summary of the material differences between UK and US GAAP and related information relevant to Reuters Group see pages 7480 of this report.
CONSOLIDATED PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT for the year ended 31 December
Restated
Restated
Restated
34tel 2001 2000 Notes m except per share data Amounts in accordance with UK GAAP Revenue 2885 3235 3593 3885 3592 Operating profitloss 197 130 142 302 411 Profitloss on ordinary activities before taxation 437 56 344 158 657 Profitloss on ordinary activities after taxation 364 34 367 51 521 Basic earningsloss per ordinary share 25.1p 3.6p 18.3p 3.3p 37.1p Diluted earningsloss per ordinary share 24.5p 3.5p 18.3p 3.2p 36.5p Basic earningsloss per ADS 150.5p 21.5p 109.7p 19.7p 222.8p Diluted earningsloss per ADS 146.9p 21.2p 109.7p 19.3p 219.1p Dividends declared per ordinary share 1 10.0p 10.0p 11.1p 11.1p 17.8p Dividends declared per ADS 1 Expressed in UK currency 60.0p 60.0p 66.7p 66.7p 106.7p Expressed in US currency 2 112.0c 103.2c 105.1c 95.6c 157.7c Weighted average number of ordinary shares in millions 1400 1396 1395 1404 1404 Amounts in accordance with US GAAP Revenue 3037 3421 3789 4045 3704 Operating profitloss 395 1 271 215 462 Incomeloss before taxes on income 565 51 233 207 656 Net incomeloss 436 23 111 93 537 Basic earningsloss per ordinary share 31.1p 1.6p 7.9p 6.6p 38.2p Diluted earningsloss per ordinary share 30.4p 1.6p 7.9p 6.5p 37.6p Basic earningsloss per ADS 186.9p 9.5p 47.6p 39.7p 229.4p Diluted earningsloss per ADS 182.4p 9.5p 47.6p 38.9p 225.5p Dividends declared per ordinary share 1 10.0p 10.0p 11.1p 18.0p 16.3p Dividends declared per ADS 1 Expressed in UK currency 60.0p 60.0p 66.7p 108.0p 97.7p Expressed in US currency 2 105.8c 105.1c 99.6c 155.3c 150.8c Weighted average number of ordinary shares in millions 1400 1396 1395 1404 1404 CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET DATA at 31 December
Restated
Restated
Restated
4tel 2001 2000 m m m m m Amounts in accordance with UK GAAP Total assets 2459 2869 3456 4538 3870 Longterm debt and provisions for charges excluding deferred tax 56tel394 Net assets 612 407 659 1273 1153 Shareholders equity 412 212 428 1109 1153 Share capital 35tel357 Amounts in accordance with US GAAP Total assets 2725 3031 3542 4382 3787 Longterm debt 52tel458 Net assets 817 468 793 1131 1189 Shareholders equity 61tel1189
1 Under UK GAAP  dividends declared are those declared in respect of the year for which selected financial data is presented.
Under US GAAP  dividends declared are those formally declared within each calendar twelvemonth period.
Dividends declared for 20002002 include UK tax credits.
Dividends declared for 2003 and 2004 exclude UK tax credits.
Amounts receivable could be higher for US shareholders who have elected to retain the benefits of the old USUK tax treaty.
For further information relating to dividends and the UK taxation of dividends see pages 8586.
2 Dividends expressed in US have been converted at the actual exchange rates used in the payment of dividends to US shareholders except that the final dividend declared in respect of 2004 payable to US ADS holders on 5 May 2005 has been converted at the Noon Buying Rate on 4 March 2005 for convenience.
3 Restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 and the reclassification of transactionrelated regulatory fees following recently issued SEC guidance see Accounting Basis on page 72.
4 The Group has restated its 2003 and 2002 US GAAP financial information to give effect to differences between UK and US GAAP concerning foreign exchange gains on cross currency interest rate swaps and the capitalisation of certain costs related to internal use software.
For further explanation see Summary of differences between UK and US generally accepted accounting principles GAAP on page 74.
The impact of the restatement on the US GAAP financial information in 2001 and 2000 was to increase net income by 1million and 3 million respectively and to increase shareholders equity by 6 million and 3 million respectively.
OVERVIEW
Reuters Group incorporates Reuters core financial business and Instinet Group a 62%owned public subsidiary which operates an institutional broker and INET the electronic market place.
At Reuters we specialise in providing indispensable information tailored for professionals in the financial services media and corporate markets.
We also provide news and information direct to the consumer.
We provide the content analytics trading and collaboration tools needed by financial professionals and news in the form of text graphics video and pictures to media organisations across the globe.
Our trusted information drives decisionmaking around the world based on our reputation for speed accuracy and independence.
We provide tools to enable traders to perform fast and accurate analysis of financial data and to manage trading risk.
Our electronic trading services connect financial communities helping them to gain access to the best prices and to trade efficiently and cost effectively.
At 31 December 2004 we had approximately 14500 staff in 91 countries including some 2300 editorial staff in 196 bureaux serving 129 countries making Reuters the largest multimedia news agency.
In addition Instinet Group had approximately 1000 employees in ten countries.
01 THE MARKETS WE SERVE Reuters serves the global financial and media markets.
In 2004 these markets continued to recover after a three year decline with the rate of progress faster in the US than in other regions.
Key performance indicators and market drivers include industry headcount trading volumes regulation and levels of consolidation.
Employment levels at our key customers increased in 2004 after significant declines in 2002 and 2003.
For example in the US the Securities Industry Assocation recorded a 4% increase in industry headcount in 2004.
However headcount recovery remains fragile with more job losses announced in the banking industry in the fourth quarter of 2004.
Employment is not currently predicted to return to the peak levels seen in 2001.
We are making our business less dependent on industry headcount as we align it more closely with growth areas like electronic trading.
Growth in electronic trading is being driven by lower spreads in traditional cash equities markets and a quest for greater efficiency as firms seek to grow their trading platforms to handle an everincreasing number of trades whilst employing fewer people.
On the New York Stock Exchange NYSE programme trading rose from 41% of total trading volume at the beginning of the year to 54% by the end of 2004.
A notable driver in our market place is increased regulation.
Proposed
Regulation NMS in the United States and the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive MiFiD in Europe are likely to change the way many instruments are traded.
Worldwide markets are undergoing greater levels of regulatory scrutiny and we are positioned to benefit with our increased focus on our risk business and enterprise data products as our customers spend more on compliance.
Concentration of trading liquidity and increased regulation are in turn driving the trend towards consolidation.
We see a polarising market where big customers are getting bigger but at the same time smaller specialised boutiques are also thriving.
This applies both to banks and brokers on the sell side and to investment management firms on the buy side.
Our challenge is to supply the right products at the right price for each of these categories of customer.
02 STRATEGY Reuters goal is to be the information company our customers value most by offering indispensable content innovative trading services and great customer service.
There are three stages to achieve this goal First complete and realise the benefits of Fast Forward our business transformation programme  Fix it Second complete the migration of our customers to our latest products expand into areas of our market closely related to our current business and make our business more resilient  Strengthen it Third reposition our business over the longer term to take advantage of the structural changes and new opportunities in the global markets  Grow it.
Fix it through Fast Forward The Fast Forward programme aims to transform Reuters into a more competitive simpler more customer servicedriven and more efficient organisation.
We have now completed twothirds of the Fast Forward programme and have made real progress in each of these areas.
Our drive to become more competitive delivered a successful defence of our foreign exchange information and trading franchise where the number of user positions grew in 2004 for the first time in seven years despite increased competition.
To simplify the way we do business we have made major changes to our product line and cut the number of products being actively sold by twothirds on the way to our target of 50 desktop financial information products.
We also continued to clear out our portfolio and have now divested over 80 holdings.
The most significant of these in 2004 was the sale of the majority of our stake in TIBCO Software Inc.
TSI.
To make Reuters more efficient we exceeded our cost savings targets.
At the end of 2004 we had cumulative savings of 234 million towards our goal of 440 million by the end of 2006.
We conduct an annual survey of 12000 customers to measure their satisfaction with our products and service.
Customer satisfaction continued to increase in 2004 following the trend from 2003 with users of the latest versions of our products ranking us more highly than users of our older products.
However a power disruption at our UK Docklands data centre in October caused a setback in the fourth quarter and we immediately took corrective action to improve data centre resilience.
Strengthen it  expand into related business areas and improve service resilience We will continue to invest in 2005 to make service resilience a competitive advantage by providing worldclass service continuity and backup.
Customers are investing in building greater resilience in their own systems and are encouraged to see Reuters undertake similar initiatives.
We are continuing to work with our customers to complete the migration from legacy products such as the 2000 and 3000 series to our latest products.
In November we announced the development of new transactions services for fixed income and equities which build on our successful foreign exchange trading franchise and position us to benefit from the rapid growth in electronic trading.
On 21 February 2005 we launched Reuters Trading for Fixed Income with tradeable prices from six banks.
Being at the centre of our customers trading activities will not only make us more competitive but also allow us to benefit from growth in trading volumes.
Building on the content and expertise we gained through our acquisition of Multex in 2003 we have strengthened our product offer for the buy side and we are increasing our penetration of investment management firms.
Our pending acquisition of Moneyline Telerate Telerate would strengthen our fixed income content and end user community.
For more details see the following page.
We are also strengthening our Enterprise Information Products and Risk Management software offerings to capitalise on increases in compliance spend.
Grow it  capitalise on structural changes in global markets The third element of our strategy involves making inroads into growth areas in the financial markets transforming our media business from a largely wholesale model to include directtoconsumer initiatives and exploring opportunities in other markets.
China we believe is poised for significant financial markets growth.
Reuters has operated in China for almost 150 years and in 2004 we sought to build on our established position so that we can participate in future growth.
We reached an agreement with the China Foreign Exchange Trading System CFETS the operator of Chinas interbank foreign exchange system to provide an internetbased foreign exchange trading service.
We also tapped the growing market for risk management services selling systems to five banks COMPANY INFORMATION 06 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 and signing an agreement to open a new financial risk research laboratory with the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Widespread use of the internet is changing the way in which individuals access information.
With our trusted global news and information brand we are well positioned to build our consumer media offer.
We have cut back distribution of our highlyrespected financial news to other websites in order to draw more visitors directly to our own sites.
In 2004 this has contributed to a doubling in the average number of unique visitors per month to 12 million and reinforced the value of our content.
We are taking advantage of the rapid adoption of new media technologies to deliver our content.
In 2004 we launched a business information service on Vodafones UK mobile phone service and an interactive TV news channel in the US on Microsofts new Windows XP Media Center offering packaged business market and breaking world news in streaming video format.
Pending acquisition of Telerate On 20 December 2004 we entered into agreements to acquire substantially all of the business of Telerate as well as a subsidiary of QUICK Corp.
Quick that serves as the exclusive distributor of Telerate products in Japan.
Based in New York Telerate is a global provider of benchmark content for the capital markets primarily focused on money markets fixed income foreign exchange and overthecounter derivatives and providing services to more than 3500 customers with more than 30000 user accesses in 85 countries and territories around the world.
With the acquisition of Telerate we would extend our presence among core financial customers including fixed income buy side firms and regional dealers.
The acquisition is expected to provide further impetus to our goal to be the bestinclass provider of financial content electronic transactions and distribution to market participants and to strengthen our recentlyannounced effort to add trading capabilities to Reuters desktops especially in the fixed income markets where the substantial Telerate client base would benefit our growing trading community.
We are uniquely placed to achieve cost synergies from the acquisition because Telerates information distribution infrastructure already operates on our systems.
Both transactions are anticipated to complete in mid2005 subject to regulatory approvals for the Telerate acquisition and other customary conditions.
For more information see pages 20 and 89.
03 OUR MARKETS DRIVE OUR ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE At Reuters we operate our business through our four Customer Segments which are closely aligned with the user communities they serve.
Sales and Trading focuses on salespeople and traders who deal in the foreign exchange fixed income equities commodities and energy and related markets.
Research and Asset Management focuses on supporting portfolio managers wealth managers brokers investment bankers and research analysts who make complex financial decisions outside the core sales and trading environment.
Enterprise targets the complete business enterprise as distinct from the enduser.
Media focuses on the needs of the worlds newspapers television and cable networks radio stations websites and consumers.
It is also working to create a new avenue of growth in directtoconsumer servicessite family of websites.
Customer Segment businesses also include the management of recoveries which arise when Reuters recharges costs primarily exchange fees and communication costs to customers.
The revenues received from customers almost exactly match the exchange fees and communications costs incurred within the Channel.
During 2005 the Segments will evolve into business divisions with full profit and loss responsibility.
The software development teams who build and support our products and infrastructure are being integrated with the business divisions to bring developers closer to customers and improve our responsiveness to consumer needs.
Within Development product development teams develop build and maintain our products and delivery platforms driven by customer requirements.
The infrastructure development team provides Reuters with its shared infrastructure design to provide scale efficiencies and compliance with standards and the Chief Technology Office drives standards and technical coherence in our technical architecture and brings innovation into the business through technology leadership.
Geographic Sales and Service Channel We serve our customers through a global Sales and Service Channel split into geographic regions the Americas Asia and Europe Middle East and Africa.
In addition our Focus Group Accounts team serves our largest customers with truly global relationship management.
Locally members of our sales and service teams work with customers to build relationships and to identify the correct products to meet customer needs.
Through regular training visits our customer training staff work with endusers to ensure they get full value from our products.
We also offer a help desk service and proactive telephone support out of three regional support hubs one based in each time zone.
The Channel supplies feedback to the Customer Segments on how products are performing and how they could be enhanced to meet future customer needs.
During 2005 the Operations group which manages our data centres central systems and distribution networks will be integrated into the Sales and Service Channel to bring our customer service and support activities under a single unified management team.
We believe this and other initiatives will improve the service we offer to customers across the world.
Revenues for the three years to 31 December 2004 are analysed by segment on pages 1819 of the Operating and Financial Review and by geography and by segment on pages 4445 in note 1 on the consolidated profit and loss account.
Communications networks We distribute our products using multiple communications networks.
During
2004 we continued to migrate our main products on to global IPbased networks principally provided by Radianz Limited Radianz in order to deliver greater resilience capability and flexibility achieved through the use of industry standards.
We have major technical centres in the Asian European and American time zones supported by many smaller local data centres.
The data centres are linked by communications services provided principally by Radianz and SAVVIS Communications Corporation Savvis using a range of communications technologies.
Communications between data centres and subscribers are provided by Radianz in 20 countries and by Reuters directly or by third parties elsewhere.
Radianz was formed in 2000 to develop a secure extranet network for use by the financial services industry as a joint venture between Reuters and the Equant Group BV Equant.
Radianz connects all categories of market participants brokers institutions exchanges custodians and clearing and settlement houses.
For further information regarding Radianz and our relationship with Radianz see Related party transactions and material contracts Radianz on page 87.
In November 2004 we purchased Equants stake in Radianz with a view to selling Radianz to BT Group PLC BT.
See
Pending transactions  Proposed disposal of Radianz on page 10.
The services agreements with Radianz and with Savvis are important to our ability to deliver products and services to customers.
Although we take reasonable steps with Radianz and Savvis to ensure continuity of service any failure or interruption of such systems could have a significant effect on our business.
See Risk Factors on pages 2325.
Summaries of these network services agreements are given on pages 87 and 89.
04 PRODUCTS Millions of consumers see and hear news from Reuters in the worlds media and over 300000 financial professionals across the globe each day receive market data indepth news quotes statistics and analytics on financial and commodities markets from Reuters.
We are the largest financial information provider in the world.
We collect financial information from an array of sources such as exchanges overthecounter markets research services and other contributors such as energy and fixed income data providers as well as from our own news research and data operations.
Our data is available through various delivery platforms such as workstations datafeeds internet and wireless solutions.
COMPANY INFORMATION continued We offer systems to help our customers manage trade processing financial content and internal business processes more effectively throughout their organisations.
Our customers have access to a trading community of around 18000 foreign exchange and money market traders globally and can use Reuters large equities order routing network to gain electronic access to a variety of brokers.
Product families We group our products into families each of which serves the needs of a distinct set of customers.
Financial desktop products Reuters Xtra family  targeted at the most sophisticated endusers within sales trading and portfolio management.
It includes crossasset class cross geography information advanced integrated analytics and trading capabilities.
Reuters Trader family  targeted at sales staff and traders who do not need the sophistication and full integration capability offered by the Reuters Xtra family of products including those who focus on domestic and regional financial instruments.
In 2004 we launched new browserbased Reuters Trader products and we are working with our customers to migrate them from older products such as the 2000 and 3000 series.
Reuters Knowledge family  targeted at the research and advisory business including investment bankers and analysts portfolio managers and others focused on company and industryspecific research.
Reuters Knowledge offers an integrated package of public and proprietary fundamental information about companies along with basic access to markets information news and other content.
Reuters Wealth Manager family  targeted at private client advisors and retail brokers who require products that can be integrated closely with their inhouse systems.
The Reuters Wealth Manager family includes portfolio management tools and information on a wide range of managed funds.
In 2004 our Lipper subsidiary strengthened its offering by acquiring Fitzrovia International PLC which analyses mutual fund fees and expenses.
Enterprise products Datafeeds  broadranging indepth data in machinereadable format  from highvolume exchange data to deep company estimates and fundamental data  which companies use to power missioncritical systems like programme trading and portfolio management.
Market Data Systems  provides the enterprise with a range of applications tools and infrastructure components to manage financial content in realtime across the customer trading environment with a high degree of scalability and resilience.
Enterprise Information Products  feeds of reference data often used for compliance purposes including endofday and intraday instrument prices corporate actions price histories and terms and conditions.
Risk Management  provides the enterprise with a range of products to help manage order flow make trade decisions and control risk.
Media products These products target our traditional publishing and broadcasting customers newspapers and magazines news and information websites and TV channels with comprehensive accurate and immediate broadcast news video and photographic coverage.
Our consumer products target business professionals individual investors and world citizens with fast accurate news and financial data enabling them to stay informed about world events manage their financial portfolios and perform better professionally.
Advertising services is a relatively new business offering advertising space in our consumer productssite network of websites.
Factiva our 50% owned joint venture with Dow Jones provides a broad range of global news and a deep historical archive of business information which client organisations can integrate into their business applications and intranet portals.
Around 70% of Factivas revenue is derived from sources outside the financial services sector.
Customers
Customers generally pay for Reuters products and services in one of three ways subscription fees to cover accesses and maintenance fees for software recorded as recurring revenue oneoff software purchases outright revenue and fees based on transaction volumes usage revenue.
In 2004 92% of Reuters revenue was recurring 4% was outright and 4% usage.
Our increasing focus on transactions means that we anticipate a shift in the mix of subscription and usage revenues over time.
The numbers of accesses for Reuters at the end of the last three years are shown below.
During 2004 user accesses increased for the first time in three years after dipping to 314000 in March.
31 December Restated Restatedtel Accesses by product family 000s 000s 000s Reuters Xtra family 108 88 70 Reuters Trader family 100 133 194 Reuters Knowledge and Wealth Manager families 120 117 124 Total 328tel and 2003 user accesses have been restated to reflect the exclusion of mobile and other lowcost accesses.
05 RESOURCES Our business is built on three key resources our brand our people and our content.
Our ability to realise the potential of these assets determines the extent to which we can achieve our strategic goals.
Brand
The starting point for growth is the Reuters brand and the relationship it has with our stakeholders.
Financial and media professionals make critical decisions every day with confidence because they trust the accuracy of the information that they get from Reuters.
Millions of consumers see and hear news information and pictures attributed to Reuters in the worlds media as we report on important events unfolding around the world.
Reuters news and information is trusted for its objectivity and authenticity because the Reuters Trust Principles safeguard the integrity of everything that we do.
Financial institutions also rely upon Reuters to feed their financial applications directly with market data so that they can keep pace with the significant growth of programme trading electronic pricing and risk management.
These traditional brand strengths provide the springboard for growth within core markets as well as new sectors and new geographies.
People increasingly access information through a variety of new media channels.
There is a growing distrust in the accuracy of some sectors of the media and an increasing scepticism in the independence of investment research.
With our reputation as a trusted source we have the opportunity to build and develop the Reuters brand for individual people as well as businesses.
We will focus particularly on growing in financial markets such as China and India where the media opportunity will be significant.
In all of these developments we will be giving the Reuters brand more impact making it more inspirational and using it more consistently.
This will ensure that the brand is playing its full part in the future vision of the Reuters business.
People
Our people are critical to the success of our business notwithstanding the reductions we have made over the last several years to our headcount and we are committed to retaining and developing the talent we need.
To do this effectively we have remuneration organisation and people development systems and processes to ensure that we have the right people in the right jobs equipped with the necessary skills.
We place a significant emphasis on leadership and in keeping with the Reuters Trust Principles we have extensive fair employment practices in place.
If we are to achieve the business transformation we have undertaken with Fast Forward every part of the organisation must be aligned with our strategy.
Our objectivesetting process for employees is fundamental to this alignment.
The CEOs mission and goals form the starting point of this process flowing through the members of our Group Management Committee and then translating into an appropriate set of objectives for each business unit and each employee.
08 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 We have created learning and development programmes to raise our employees levels of product and market knowledge and ensure that they have access to the latest developments in their areas of specialism.
We have a process to review talent organisational capability and succession planning for key positions.
We also have a longestablished relationship with the University of Michigan for the development and delivery of leadership development programmes.
We regularly undertake employee surveys to evaluate morale and to identify any employee issues that need to be addressed.
These surveys measure opinion in a number of key areas including leadership customer orientation performance culture and career development.
Despite the challenges of Fast Forward the survey showed an improvement in overall employee engagement in 2004.
The results are communicated to employees.
We place a strong emphasis on communicating with our employees and won a Communicators in Business award for excellence in employee communications during 2004.
We want to ensure that everyone in Reuters has a fair opportunity to contribute to our business and in 2004 we established a Global Diversity Advisory Council chaired by the CEO to advise on diversity issues and to help drive related initiatives.
For additional information concerning our people see Employees on page 26.
Content
Content brings together all of Reuters news data and other information.
The role of our editorial group is to cover and edit the news to the highest standards of accuracy and timeliness.
Our journalists and photographers file over two and a half million news items a year to customers in the form of text pictures TV video and graphics and we publish news in 18 languages.
Our
Our coverage includes data from over 300 exchanges more than 1.2 million bonds 250000 foreign exchange and money market instruments and awardwinning commodities and energy content.
This is further complemented by data from over 4000 contributors.
In addition our fundamentals and estimates data is recognised as a leading source of high quality financial information covering over 35000 companies worldwide.
In 2004 we opened a new content facility in Bangalore India where over 500 highlyskilled data staff have already taken on the task of managing some of our content and are developing our new investments in data.
The investment in our Bangalore data management operation is achieving operational efficiencies in line with our Fast Forward objectives.
Additional activities will be migrating to Bangalore in 2005 as we build on our initial success and continue our investment in new content to meet our customers needs.
06 INSTINET GROUP Our subsidiary Instinet Group is the largest global electronic agency securities broker and has been providing investors with electronic trading solutions and execution services for more than 30 years.
Instinet Group operates two major businesses Instinet the institutional broker and INET the electronic market place.
Instinet Group completed an initial public offering in May 2001 and its common stock is listed on the NASDAQ Stock Market symbol INGP.
As a result of the initial public offering exercise of stock options and acquisitions in which Instinet Group shares were used as consideration the largest of which was the purchase of Island ECN Island in 2002 our shareholding of Instinet Group is approximately 62%.
Instinet is a global electronic agency securities broker that provides sophisticated electronic trading solutions and execution services to enable buyers and sellers worldwide to trade securities directly and anonymously with each other.
Instinet also gives customers the opportunity to use its sales trading expertise and sophisticated technology tools to interact with global securities markets improve their trading and investment performance and lower their overall trading costs.
Through Instinets electronic platforms customers can access other US trading venues including NASDAQ and NYSE and almost 30 securities markets throughout the world including stock exchanges in Frankfurt Hong Kong London Paris Sydney Tokyo Toronto and Zrich.
Instinets customers primarily consist of institutional investors such as mutual funds pension funds insurance companies and hedge funds.
NET is an electronic communications network ECN that provides execution and routing services to US brokerdealer customers and enables buyers and sellers to trade securities directly and anonymously with each other.
INET represents the consolidation of the order flow of the former Instinet ECN and former Island ECN providing its US brokerdealer customers one of the largest liquidity pools in NASDAQlisted securities.
In November 2004 we announced that we would consider opportunities to extract value from our holding in Instinet Group.
Reuters and Instinet Group are considering strategic alternatives including a possible sale merger or other business combination or corporate transaction.
There can be no assurance that any transaction will be effected at all for any particular value or in any specific time period.
See Risk Factors  Reuters Group may not be able to realise the anticipated benefits of existing or future acquisitions or disposals on page 24.
07 COMPETITORS We face significant competition in all the market sectors and geographical areas in which we operate.
We actively monitor the competitive landscape in order to be able to respond to market developments.
Bloomberg Thomson Financial a division of The Thomson Corporation Telerate Quick Telekurs IDC Dow Jones and Factset plus a number of smaller local and regional competitors offer information products for the financial markets.
Several exchanges compete with our datafeed business by providing lowlatency real time feeds of their data direct to banks and financial institutions.
Our Lipper funds information business competes with Morningstar the Micropal unit of Standard and Poors a division of the McGrawHill Companies Value Line and The Thomson Corporations CDA Weisenberger.
Our foreign exchange spot dealing services compete with voice brokers and with the Electronic Broking Service and Bloomberg which have formed an alliance in this area.
Competitors in the supply of risk products and market data systems or related components include Algorithmics Murex Summit Systems Sungard Data Systems IBM TSI GL TRADE and a large number of smaller firms.
Our main competitors in the supply of news to the media are Associated Press Agence France Presse Dow Jones and Bloomberg News.
Instinet Group competes with the following among others market makers and other traditional brokerdealers acting as agent or principal traditional and electronic trading methods in use on US and international exchanges including NYSE specialists and the electronic matching systems of international exchanges the trading platform for the NASDAQ market.
08 GOVERNMENT REGULATION We are regulated by several bodies in the various jurisdictions in which we operate The UK Financial Services Authority FSA under the Financial Services and Markets Acts 2000 regulates Reuters Limited our principal operating company as a service company.
Reuters Transaction Services Limited RTSL through which Dealing 3000 Spot Forwards FX Options Matching for Interest Rates and our new suite of next generation transaction products such as Reuters Trading for Fixed Income are operated is subject to regulation by the FSA equivalent to that applied to broking participants in the London market.
In addition from 1 April 2004 RTSL has been classified by the FSA as an Alternative Trading System ATS.
RTSL provides services throughout the European Economic Area EEA in accordance with the provisions of the EU Investment Services Directive.
RTSLs operations in Singapore and Hong Kong are approved and subject to oversight by the Monetary Authority of Singapore and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority respectively.
In 2004 RTSL was granted an Australian Market Licence by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
Reuters Global Routing Services Limited RGRS UK is the Groups other authorised firm in the UK.
It is responsible for an order routing and indications of interest network.
Under the passporting provisions of the ISD RGRS UK may provide its services across the EEA.
The RGRS UK order routing network is also offered in the US through Reuters Global Routing Services US LLC RGRS US where it is subject to regulation by the SEC and the National Association of Securities Dealers Inc.
NASD.
Under the passporting provisions of the EU Investment Services Directive RGRS UK may provide its services across the EEA and in addition introduce UK and EU clients directly to our subsidiary Bridge Trading Company Bridge Trading in the US.
For information regarding the pending sale of Bridge Trading to Instinet Group see Pending Transactions below.
In order to comply with antimoney laundering regulations and to reduce the opportunity for Reuters trading products to be used as a conduit for money laundering operations all regulated firms have put in place appropriate know your customer systems and controls.
As registered brokerdealers members of selfregulatory organisations in the US and other countries in which they operate and in the case of the Instinet ATSs and the INET ATS as operators of electronic communications networks andor alternative trading systems in the US Instinet Group Bridge Trading and RGRS US are subject to regulation under the US securities laws and their equivalents in other countries including but not limited to net capital requirements and to possible increased levels of regulation in the future.
In December 2001 Island ECN submitted to the SEC an application in draft form for registration as a national securities exchange.
INET submitted a new draft application to the SEC for registration as a national securities exchange in May 2004 and continues to work with the SEC towards the filing of a formal application.
See Related party transactions and material contracts  Instinet Group  Corporate Agreement on page 89 and Risk Factors  Changes in the regulatory environment could have an adverse effect on Instinet Groups business on page 24.
09 PENDING TRANSACTIONS For information about the pending acquisition of Telerate see page 7.
Proposed disposal of Radianz Initially Radianz was a joint venture with Equant in which Reuters owned 51% of the voting shares and Equant owned 49%.
However through shareholders agreements Reuters shared effective control with Equant and therefore did not consolidate Radianz as a subsidiary for accounting purposes.
On 16 November 2004 Reuters purchased Equants entire stake in Radianz for 60 million US110 million in cash together with the release of future funding obligations and as a result all joint venture arrangements came to an end.
Reuters also announced that exclusive discussions were taking place with BT to secure a longterm agreement for the provision of network services involving the sale of Radianz to BT.
Both the commercial arrangements and the sale are subject to due diligence regulatory approvals and the negotiation of definitive agreements.
These transactions are expected to complete during the first half of 2005.
For more information see Related party transactions and material contracts  Radianz on page 87.
Pending disposal of Bridge Trading On 28 February 2005 Reuters entered into an agreement to sell Bridge Trading its soft dollar institutional broker to Instinet Group.
Reuters acquired Bridge Trading in 2001 as part of its acquisition of certain businesses and assets of Bridge Information Systems Bridge.
This sale combines the Reuters Groups equity brokerage business into one unit and is consistent with the Fast Forward strategy of divesting noncore assets.
The transaction is expected to complete by the end of April 2005 subject to approval from the NASD and other customary conditions.
For more information see Related party transactions and material contracts  Instinet Group  sale of Bridge Trading on page 88.
10 INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL REPORTING STANDARDS IFRS Reuters Group will be required to comply with IFRS with effect from 1 January 2005.
An evaluation of the impact on the financial statements of Reuters Group and on its financial processes and systems has been made.
A programme of work is underway to enable the preparation of financial statements which comply with IFRS for the year ended 31 December 2004 as well as from 1 January 2005 onwards.
For more information see pages 2223.
COMPANY INFORMATION continued 10 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004
OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 REVIEW OF YEAR END RESULTS Under US law all statements other than statements of historical fact included in this review are or may be deemed to be forwardlooking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Certain important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those discussed in such forward looking statements are described under Section 9 Risk Factors on pages 2325 as well as elsewhere in this review.
All written and oral forwardlooking statements made on or after the date of this report and attributable to Reuters are expressly qualified in their entirety by such factors.
01 KEY FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE MEASURES Reuters Group measures its performance by reference to revenue and profit operating margin earnings per share EPS and cash flow.
To supplement these UK GAAP measures Reuters undertakes further analysis to break them out into their component parts which results in the creation of certain nonGAAP measures.
The rationale for this analysis is outlined below and reconciliations of the nonGAAP measures used to UK GAAP are included within the review of results.
These measures are used by management to assess the performance of the business and should be seen as complementary to rather than replacements for reported statutory results.
Underlying results Periodonperiod change in Reuters is measured both in overall terms i. actual reported results under UK GAAP and in underlying terms.
Underlying change is calculated by excluding the impact of currency fluctuations and the results of acquisitions and disposals.
The impact of currency fluctuations is excluded from underlying results to enable periodonperiod comparison of the operating results of Reuters on a likeforlike basis.
Variations in currency exchange rates impact the results because Reuters generates revenues and incurs costs in currencies other than its reporting currency.
Yearonyear currency exchange rate movements will influence the reported numbers to a greater or lesser extent and therefore they are discussed separately from the underlying results to make clear their impact on the overall growth or decline in operations.
Underlying results are calculated by restating the prior periods results using the current periods exchange rates.
This also reflects the variables over which management has control as business units do not manage currency exposure and business unit operating performance is managed against targets set on a constant currency basis.
Currency exposure is described in Section 6 Treasury Policies Financing and Foreign Exchange on pages 2122.
The impact of acquisitions and disposals is also excluded from underlying results to enable periodonperiod comparison of the operating results of Reuters on a likeforlike basis.
Underlying results are calculated by excluding the results of entities acquired or disposed of during either the current or prior period from the results of each period under review.
Underlying results reflect the operating results of the ongoing elements of each business unit and measure the performance of management against variables over which they have control without the yearonyear impact of a step change in revenue and costs that can result from acquisition or disposal activity.
Underlying figures also allow investors to compare the reported Reuters results with the forwardlooking guidance issued by Reuters to the investor community.
Because Reuters is not able to forecast currency movements or the exact timing and impact of acquisition and disposal activity it communicates its revenue guidance to investors on an underlying basis.
Therefore providing the underlying results in addition to the actual reported results assists investors in making their own assessment of Reuters performance against the guidance given by management.
Exclusion of restructuring charges Reuters results are reviewed before and after the impact of Reuters business transformation plan which includes the Fast Forward programme.
Under the Fast Forward programme Reuters is incurring restructuring costs relating primarily to headcount reduction and rationalisation of the companys property portfolio.
Fast Forward is a threeyear programme implemented to accelerate and expand on Reuters fiveyear business transformation plan which was launched in 2001 the programme is scheduled to complete in 2005 as originally envisaged.
The Fast Forward programme is centrally managed and its performance against targets is evaluated separately from the normal daytoday business of Reuters.
As the restructuring charges are incurred as part of centrally managed programmes of activity they do not form part of Reuters ongoing business.
Restructuring charges are therefore excluded from certain profit and margin measures so as to provide a more detailed analysis and understanding of the ongoing business.
Restructuring charges are considered exceptional under UK GAAP and are separately identified in note 2 on the consolidated profit and loss account but because the charges are being incurred over more than two years they are considered recurring.
However because of their timelimited and defined nature Reuters believes presenting certain profit measures both including and excluding such charges gives investors a more detailed insight into the performance of management and the business.
In addition Reuters management uses both measures to assess the performance of management and the business.
Exclusion of amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments and disposals For certain cost profit margin and earnings per share measures Reuters analyses its results both before and after the impact of restructuring amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments and disposals.
The rationale for isolating restructuring charges is explained above.
Reuters also isolates the impact of income and charges in respect of its investments.
These charges relate to goodwill and other intangibles amortisation and impairments of subsidiaries associates and joint ventures and amounts written off investments.
Income and charges from investments relate to pretax profits and losses on disposal of subsidiaries associates joint ventures and investments.
The nonGAAP EPS measure also eliminates the earnings impact of nonrecurring tax charges and credits related to impairments reorganisations and disposals.
Such charges and income arise from corporate acquisition and disposal activity rather than from the ongoing operations of the business units.
These are analysed and reviewed separately from ongoing operations as this is consistent with the manner in which Reuters sets internal targets evaluates its business units and issues guidance to the investor community.
Acquisition and disposal activity does not form part of the operations controlled by business unit management and decisions around such activity are usually determined centrally.
Presenting earnings before amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments and disposals and the above nonrecurring tax items also helps investors measure performance in relation to the Groups dividend policy.
In
2001 Reuters Group defined the longterm goal of its dividend policy to be a dividend cover of at least two times based on Reuters earnings before amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments and disposals.
Free cash flow Reuters free cash flow is used as a performance measure and to assess the extent of the Groups dividend cover from a cash perspective.
Free cash flow is intended to measure all Reuters cash movements other than those which are both discretionary in nature and unrelated to ongoing operating activities such as purchases of shares by the Employee Share Option Trusts ESOTs loans to associates and dividends paid by the Group.
Whilst Reuters believes that free cash flow is an important performance measure in respect of its cash flows it is not used in isolation but rather in conjunction with other cash flow measures as presented in the financial statements.
02 FINANCIAL AND BUSINESS OVERVIEW Reuters Group revenue decline slowed significantly during 2004 Reuters Group revenue in 2004 was 2885 million falling 11% compared to 2003 driven in large part by US dollar depreciation and continued difficult trading conditions.
Reuters revenue was 2361 million down 11% of which 5 percentage points were due to the impact of currency primarily US dollar weakness.
Underlying revenue decline was 5% in 2004.
Instinet Group revenue was 530 million 8% lower than 2003 but slightly higher if adjusted to reflect the negative impact of the weaker US dollar on revenue.
Reuters Group operating profit increased by 51% Reuters Group operating profit in 2004 was 197 million compared to 130 million in 2003 representing a margin of 6.8% compared with 4.0% in 2003.
In Reuters 234 million of cumulative Fast Forward savings helped to deliver an operating profit before amortisation of goodwill and intangibles impairments and restructuring of 357 million with a margin of 15.1%.
Reuters took a restructuring charge of 120 million in 2004 which along with other nontrading costs reduced operating profit to 168 million at a margin of 7.1%.
Instinet Group operating costs continued to fall at a faster rate than revenue driven by a 17% reduction in headcount.
As a result operating profit was 29 million compared to an operating loss of 48 million in 2003.
Reuters Group profit before taxation increased by 381 million Reuters Group profit before taxation was 437 million in 2004 compared to 56 million in 2003.
Reuters profit before taxation increased by 279 million driven mainly by profits on disposals which included the majority of Reuters stake in TSI as well as its holdings in GL TRADE Riskmetrics TowerGroup Yankee Group Research Inc.
Yankee and ORT SAS Group ORT.
Instinet Group profit before taxation was 56 million in 2004 compared to a loss of 46 million in 2003 mainly driven by a return to operating profit and profits on disposal of its stakes in Euronext the London Stock Exchange and Archipelago.
Reuters Group earnings per share EPS increased Reuters Group EPS in 2004 was 25.1 pence compared to 3.6 pence in 2003.
Reuters EPS in 2004 was 23.5 pence compared to 5.5 pence in 2003.
Instinet Group EPS was 1.6 pence in 2004 compared to a loss of 1.9 pence in 2003.
Reuters Group dividend per share maintained at 10 pence A final dividend of 6.15 pence has been proposed which when added to the interim dividend of 3.85 pence amounts to 10 pence per share consistent with both 2003 and 2002.
Reuters Group net debt became net funds Reuters Group net funds increased significantly in 2004 to 326 million compared to net debt of 77 million in 2003.
Reuters net debt reduced significantly to 169 million from 610 million in 2003 mainly driven by net disposal proceeds.
Instinet Group net funds decreased from 533 million in 2003 to 495 million in 2004.
For information concerning the market environment during 2004 see Company information  The markets we serve on page 6.
OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW
12 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 REVENUE  m Group Reuters OPERATING PROFIT MARGIN  % 3.9% 6.6% 7.1% 4.0% 6.7% 6.8% Group Reuters EARNINGS PER SHARE  Pence Group Reuters NET DEBTFUNDS  m Group Reuters PROFIT BEFORE TAXATION  m Group Reuters Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 RECONCILIATION OF NONGAAP OPERATING PROFIT AND MARGIN MEASURES Year to 31 December
Restated
1tel m % m % m % Reuters Group operating profitlossmargin 197 6.8% 130 4.0% 142 3.9% Exclude Instinet Group operating profitlossmargin 29 5.4% 48 8.2% 339 55.6% Reuters operating profitmargin 168 7.1% 178 6.7% 197 6.6%
Restructuring charges 120 5.1% 134 5.0% 112 3.7% Amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles 55 2.3% 89 3.3% 86 2.9% Impairment of goodwill and other intangibles 14 0.6% 7 0.3% Reuters operating profitmargin before amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments and restructuring 357 15.1% 408 15.3% 395 13.2% RECONCILIATION OF NONGAAP PROFIT BEFORE TAXATION Year to 31 December
Restated
1tel m m m Reuters Group profitloss before taxation 437 56 344
Amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles
Disposals
Reuters Group profit before taxation amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments and disposals 275 194 91 Reuters Group profitloss before taxation 437 56 344 Exclude Instinet Group profitloss before taxation 56 46 370 Reuters profit before taxation
Amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles
Disposals
Reuters profit before taxation amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments and disposals 232 212 196 RECONCILIATION OF EPS Year to 31 December
Restated
1tel pence pence pence Reuters Group EPS 25.1 3.6 18.3
Amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles 4.5 7.7 8.5 Impairments 1.3 2.3 20.7 Disposals 17.4 0.1 2.0 Adjustment to tax charge for nonrecurring tax effects of impairments reorganisations and disposals 0.6 1.4 0.7 Adjustment to minority interest for effect of amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments and disposals 0.2 0.7 6.7 Reuters Group EPS before amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments disposals and nonrecurring tax effects of impairments reorganisations and disposals 14.3 11.4 6.9 Reuters Group EPS 25.1 3.6 18.3 Exclude Instinet Group EPS 1.6 1.9 16.5 Reuters EPS 23.5 5.5 1.8
Amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles 4.0 6.8 6.9 Impairments 1.3 1.3 3.1 Disposals 15.9 0.2 2.1 Adjustment to tax charge for nonrecurring tax effects of impairments reorganisations and disposals 0.1 1.3 0.6 Reuters EPS before amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments disposals and nonrecurring tax effects of impairments reorganisations and disposals 13.0 12.1 10.9
1 Restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 and the reclassification of transactionrelated regulatory fees following recently issued SEC guidance.
14 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004
03 FINANCIAL REVIEW
Year to 31 December
Restated
1tel Summary of results m m
Reuters
2361 2664 2992 Instinet Group
Reuters Group revenue 2885 3235 3593 Operating costs
2193 2486 2795 Instinet Group
Reuters Group operating costs 2688 3105 3735 Operating profitloss
Instinet Group Reuters Group operating profitloss 197 130 142 Affiliatesinvestment income Net interest payable 4 29 20 Amortisationimpairment of affiliate intangibles and investments Profitloss on disposals Profitloss before taxation
Instinet Group Reuters Group profitloss before taxation Taxation 73 22 23 Profitloss after taxation Reuters 329 77 26 Instinet Group 35 43 341 Reuters Group profitloss after taxation 364 34 367 EPS 25.1p 3.6p 18.3p
1 Restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 and the reclassification of transactionrelated regulatory fees following recently issued SEC guidance see Accounting Basis on page 72.
2004 RESULTS COMPARED WITH 2003 Reuters Group
Reuters Group revenue in 2004 was 2885 million falling 11% compared to 2003 driven largely by US dollar depreciation which had an adverse impact on both Reuters and Instinet Group revenue.
Operating costs As a consequence of declining revenues over the past three years actions have been taken at both Reuters and Instinet Group to reduce the operating cost base.
Cost savings were primarily driven by greater cost discipline across all functions including a reduction in staff numbers of 7% at Reuters and 17% at Instinet Group.
2004 Reuters Group restructuring costs reduced by 50 million to 128 million.
In addition impairment charges and goodwill amortisation dropped from 121 million to 76 million due to the decision to dispose of certain noncore subsidiaries in 2004 and impairments taken in 2003.
As a result Reuters Group operating costs were 2688 million in 2004 a reduction of 13% compared to 2003.
Operating profit and margin Reuters Group operating profit in 2004 was 197 million an increase of 51% compared to 2003.
This improvement was primarily driven by a return to operating profit by Instinet Group where an operating loss of 48 million in 2003 was turned into an operating profit of 29 million in 2004.
Reuters Group operating margin was 6.8% in 2004 compared to 4.0% in 2003.
The improvement was primarily driven by a reduction in other nontrading operating costs.
Nonoperating incomecosts Reuters Group share of affiliates losses of 28 million in 2003 was turned into a profit of 6 million in 2004.
This reflected the Reuters Group portfolio rationalisation programme and the improvement in performance at Radianz.
Lower restructuring and impairment charges within the affiliates compared to 2003 were also significant drivers.
Reuters Group net interest charge reduced from 29 million in 2003 to 4 million in 2004 due to the movement from net debt in 2003 to net funds in 2004.
This was primarily driven by the portfolio rationalisation and reduced capital expenditure.
Amortisationimpairment of affiliates intangibles and investments have decreased from 19 million in 2003 to 5 million in 2004.
Charges in 2004 included a 3 million impairment charge relating to Radianz.
Reuters Group profits on disposals were 243 million in 2004 compared to 2 million in 2003.
The disposals included the majority of Reuters stake in TSI as well as its holdings in GL TRADE Riskmetrics TowerGroup Yankee and ORT.
Instinet Group disposed of its stakes in Euronext the London Stock Exchange and Archipelago.
Profit before taxation Reuters Group reported a profit before taxation of 437 million in 2004 compared to 56 million in 2003 comprising a 381 million profit in Reuters and a 56 million profit in Instinet Group.
The improvement was primarily driven by a return to operating profit in Instinet Group and profits on disposals generated by the portfolio rationalisation programme in Reuters.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Taxation charge Reuters Group taxation charge for 2004 was 73 million up from 22 million in 2003 reflecting the higher level of profit before taxation at Reuters and Instinet Groups return to profitability.
The rate of increase in taxation was lower than the growth in profitability due to the lower level of taxation payable on asset disposals 9 million charge.
A reconciliation of the actual taxation charge to the taxation charge expected by applying the standard 30% UK rate of corporation tax to the reported profits is provided in note 4 on the consolidated profit and loss account.
EPS
Reuters Group recorded basic earnings per share of 25.1 pence in 2004 as compared to 3.6 pence per share in 2003.
This follows the higher level of Group profit after taxation of 364 million 2003 34 million.
Reuters
Revenue
Year to 31 Decembertel m m m Revenue 2361 2664 2992 Reconciliation of UK GAAP Impact of percentage change to Underlying Impact of acquisitions Actual underlying 2004 over 2003 change currency and disposals change Revenue 5% 5% 1% 11% Reuters revenue was 2361 million a decrease of 11% compared to the previous year.
On an underlying basis the decline was 5% compared to 12% in 2003.
Exchange rate movements accounted for 4.7 of the 6.3 percentage point difference between actual and underlying declines in 2004.
Operating costs Year to 31 December
Restated
1tel m m m Trading costs 2004 2256 2597 Restructuring costs 120 134 Amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles of subsidiaries 55 89 86 Impairment of subsidiaries 14 7 Operating costs 2193 2486 2795
1 Restated following adoption of UITF17 and UITF38.
See Accounting Basis on page 72 Reconciliation of UK GAAP Impact of percentage change to Underlying Impact of acquisitions Actual underlying 2004 over 2003 change currency and disposals change Operating costs 5% 5% 2% 12% Reuters operating costs were 2193 million in 2004 a decrease of 12% from 2003 or 5% on an underlying basis.
Costs reduced as Reuters delivered a further 159 million of Fast Forward savings in 2004.
Currency movements particularly the weak US dollar contributed 113 million of the decline.
Operating costs excluding restructuring charges amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles and goodwill impairment reduced by 11%.
Amortisation charges of 55 million in 2004 were lower than in 2003 principally due to the disposals of TowerGroup Yankee and ORT.
There was a 14 million charge related to Bridge Trading for the impairment of subsidiaries in 2004 2003 7 million.
Operating profit and margintel Restated Restated m m m Operating profit 168 178 Operating margin 7.1% 6.7% 6.6% Reuters operating profit of 168 million was down 5% against 2003.
Cost efficiencies and lower restructuring and impairment charges mitigated the impact of reduced revenues at the operating profit level.
As a result Reuters operating margin was 7.1% in 2004 compared to 6.7% in 2003.
Profit before taxation Year to 31 December Restated Restatedtel m m m Affiliatesinvestment income 5 28 61 Net interest payable 10 34 Amortisationimpairment of affiliate intangibles and investments 5 17 54 Profitloss on disposals 223 3 30 Profit before taxation 381 102 26 Reuters share of income from affiliates and investments was 5 million in 2004.
This was a 33 million improvement on the 28 million operating loss reported in 2003.
The most important contributor to this turnaround was Radianz where losses fell from 27 million in 2003 to 6 million in 2004.
Other factors were a profit of 4 million from Factiva 2003 4 million a profit of 3 million from TSI 2003 10 million loss and a profit of 2 million from GL TRADE 2003 5 million profit which was sold during the year.
Other associates contributed a profit of 2 million in aggregate 2003 nil.
Reuters total amortisation and impairment of affiliate intangibles and investments was 5 million.
The reduction from prior years largely reflects the disposal of companies from Reuters portfolio.
Profit on disposals at Reuters totalled 223 million.
As part of the Fast Forward programme the portfolio of companies continues to be scaled back.
During 2004 Reuters sold its holdings in a number of companies including TowerGroup Yankee ORT GL TRADE and Riskmetrics and significantly reduced its stake in TSI.
Reuters net interest expense was 10 million in 2004.
The reduction from prior years primarily relates to lower net debt as a result of proceeds from the rationalisation of the portfolio of companies.
In 2004 Reuters profit before taxation was 381 million up from 102 million in 2003.
This growth was primarily driven by a 220 million increase in profits from asset disposals a 33 million improvement in affiliate and investment income lower net interest charges 24 million and reductions in amortisation and impairment charges 12 million.
EPS
Reuters recorded basic earnings per share of 23.5 pence in 2004 compared to 5.5 pence in 2003.
This follows the higher level of Reuters profit after taxation of 329 million 2003 77 million.
Instinet Group Revenue operating costs operating result and margin Year to 31 December Restated Restatedtel m m m Revenue 530 578 610 Trading costs 486 557 624 Restructuring costs 8 44 96 Amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles of subsidiaries 7 12 21 Impairment of subsidiaries  13 208 Operating costs 501 626 949 Operating profitloss 29 48 339 Operating margin 5.4% 8.2% 55.6%
1 Restated following the reclassification of transactionrelated regulatory fees following recently issued SEC guidance See Accounting Basis on page 72.
OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW
16 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Reuters Group Reuters Group had net funds of 326 million as at 31 December 2004 2003 net debt of 77 million consisting of net funds in Instinet Group of 495 million a significant portion of which is required to be held for regulatory capital andor business purposes and net debt in Reuters of 169 million.
Reuters Group net cash inflow from operating activities was 253 million compared to 429 million in 2003.
This difference was mainly due to working capital movements arising from a decrease in creditors due to a reduction in operating costs at Reuters of 12% a reduction in provisions and movements in counterparty debtors and creditors in Instinet Group.
Additionally Reuters experienced an increase in debtors of 18 million relating to an interim funding payment in connection with the pending acquisition of Telerate see Related party transactions and material contracts  Other material contracts  Telerate acquisition agreement on page 89.
Reuters
Reuters net debt position as at 31 December 2004 was 169 million compared to 610 million as at 31 December 2003.
The movement of 441 million was primarily due to net cash proceeds from disposals of 434 million with the largest contributor being the sale of a majority of the holding in TSI.
The net debt position was also improved by reduced capital expenditure due to a reduction in subscriber equipment spend and the phasing of some major project expenditure cash inflows from property disposals in connection with the relocation of Reuters London operations to Canary Wharf cash inflows from property sale and leaseback transactions in the US lower interest payments due to the reduction in net debt and reduced taxation payments.
These cash flows offset the reduction in net cash inflow from operating activities and cash payments for acquisitions of 78 million with the largest contributor being the purchase of the remaining 49% of Radianz.
Instinet Group Instinet Groups net funds position reduced by 38 million from 533 million as at 31 December 2003 to 495 million as at 31 December 2004.
This movement was driven by net cash outflows from operating activities increased capital expenditure and increased taxation payments offset by proceeds from the disposal of fixed asset investments.
Reuters free cash flow Reuters generated free cash flow of 211 million in 2004 2003 197 million providing funds of 1.5 times the dividend of 140 million.
The interim funding payment represents payments made to Telerate in respect of the planned acquisition see Telerate Acquisition Agreement on page 89.
A reconciliation of net cash inflow from operating activities to free cash flow is shown below Year to 31 December 2004 Instinet Reuters Reuters Group reconciliation of net cash inflow Reuters Group Group from operating activities to free cash flow m m Net cash inflowoutflow from operating activities 287 34 253 Dividends received from joint ventures and associates Returns on investment and servicing of finance Taxation paid Capital expenditure and financial investments 41 22 19 Interim funding payment 18 18 Free cash flow 211 8 203 Year to 31 December 2003 Net cash inflow from operating activities Dividends received from associates Returns on investment and servicing of finance Taxation paid Capital expenditure and financial investments 107 3 110 Free cash flow Instinet Groups revenue was 530 million in 2004 8% lower than 2003 reflecting improved trading performance offset by the negative impact of a weaker US dollar.
Revenue rose in the fourth quarter of 2004 both at Instinet the institutional broker and at INET the electronic market place reflecting higher equity market volumes.
Operating costs continued to fall driven by a 17% reduction in headcount to around 1000 people at year end.
In 2004 restructuring charges totalled 8 million down from 44 million in the prior year.
Amortisation and impairment of subsidiaries goodwill was 7 million compared to 25 million in 2003.
The higher 2003 charge primarily reflected impairment charges taken against Island ECN technology assets.
Instinet Groups 2004 operating profit was 29 million compared to a loss of 48 million in 2003.
This reflects strong cost control ensuring that efficiency gains exceeded the decline in revenues.
The operating margin at Instinet Group was 5.4% in 2004 and represents an improvement over 2003.
Profitloss before taxation Year to 31 December Restated Restatedtel m m m Affiliatesinvestment income 1  1 Net interest receivable 6 5 6 Amortisationimpairment of affiliate intangibles and investments  2 38 Profitloss on disposals 20 1 2 Profitloss before taxation 56 46 370 Instinet Group reported 1 million of income from affiliates and investments 2003 nil.
This relates to dividends received from the London Stock Exchange.
Net interest income was 6 million in 2004 compared to income of 5 million in 2003 due to higher US dollar interest rates in the second half of 2004.
Instinet Group reported no amortisation or impairment of affiliate intangibles and investments in 2004 2003 2 million.
The 2003 results contained impairment charges relating to Tradeware and Instinet Group Exchange both of which were written down in 2003 to nil carrying value.
Instinet Group reported 20 million of profit on disposals in 2004 compared to a 1 million loss in 2003.
The 2004 sales are of stakes in Euronext the London Stock Exchange and Archipelago.
Instinet Groups profit before taxation was 56 million in 2004 compared to a loss of 46 million in 2003.
This movement is largely due to improvements in operating profit combined with higher profit from disposals.
2004 CASH FLOW Summarised Reuters Group cash flow Year to 31 December 2004 2003 m m Net cash inflow from operating activities 253 429 Dividends received from joint ventures and associates 4 3 Returns on investments and servicing of finance 10 28 Taxation paid 43 33 Capital expenditure and financial investment 19 110 Acquisitions and disposals 362 106 Equity dividends paid 140 140 Proceeds from the issue of shares 6 Other movements Movement in net fundsdebt 403 11 Opening net debt 77 66 Closing net fundsdebt 326 77
1 Other movements relates to net debtfunds arising on acquisitiondisposals noncash movements and translation differences see the Reconciliation of net cash flow to movement in net fundsdebt on page 50.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 2003 RESULTS COMPARED WITH 2002 Reuters Group
Reuters Group revenue declined by 10% in 2003 to 3235 million.
Operating costs Reuters Group operating costs in 2003 were 3105 million a reduction of 17% over 2002.
This was the result of actions taken at both Reuters and Instinet Group in 2003 to reduce the operating cost base.
Impairment and goodwill amortisation also fell from 315 million in 2002 to 121 million in 2003.
Operating profit and margin Reuters Group operating loss of 142 million in 2002 was converted to a 130 million profit in 2003.
Reuters Group operating margin was 4.0% in 2003.
Profit before taxation Reuters Group share of affiliates losses decreased from 62 million in 2002 to 28 million in 2003.
The main driver of this was a 31 million improvement in TSI due to stronger cost control minimal restructuring charges compared to 2002 and a 2 million gain on investments compared to a 4 million loss in 2002.
The other key affiliates Radianz and Factiva contributed a broadly similar performance in 2003 as in 2002.
The net interest charge increased from 20 million in 2002 to 29 million in 2003.
This was partly due to the Multex acquisition and also to a 4 million reduction in the interest receivable by affiliates due to the falling value of US dollar interest earnings.
Included in the interest charge was a writeoff of frontend fees of 4 million attached to Reuters syndicated loan facility.
Impairment charges and net disposal losses decreased from 109 million in 2002 to 10 million in 2003.
Losses in 2003 included a 17 million provision in respect of the disposal of two Londonbased properties as part of the Fast Forward programme.
In 2002 there were 81 million of charges taken to reflect a reduction in the carrying value of various investments held by the Group and net losses on disposal of 28 million.
The losses included a 19 million loss on the deemed disposal of a portion of the Groups investment in Instinet Group following the Island acquisition.
Reuters Group reported a profit before taxation of 56 million in 2003 compared to a loss of 344 million in 2002.
The 2003 profit was made up of a 102 million profit in Reuters partly offset by a 46 million loss in Instinet
Excluding amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments and disposals Reuters Group profit before taxation was 194 million up from 91 million in 2002.
Taxation charge The taxation charge for 2003 was 22 million 1 million lower than 2002 when a charge arose due to the nondeductible nature of amortisation charges and certain write downs as well as from a dividend paid by Instinet Group.
EPS
Reuters Group recorded basic earnings per share of 3.6 pence as compared to a 18.3 pence loss per share in 2002.
The 2003 EPS reflected the Reuters Groups return to a net profit.
The loss in 2002 primarily reflected the 317 million noncash impairment charges in that year.
Reuters Group EPS before amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairment of goodwill disposals and nonrecurring tax effects of impairments reorganisations and disposals was 11.4 pence 2002 6.9 pence.
The improvement in EPS was largely due to cost savings outstripping revenue decline.
Cash Flow Reuters Group had net debt of 77 million as at 31 December 2003 an increase of 11 million from 2002.
This consisted of net funds in Instinet Group of 533 million 2002 518 million and net debt in Reuters of 610 million 2002 584 million.
Reuters Group net cash inflow from operating activities was 429 million in 2003 compared to 355 million in 2002.
The improvement in Reuters Group net cash inflow was due to a 117 million increase in Instinet Groups net cash inflow due to movements in net counterparty debtors and creditors.
Reuters net cash inflow of 401 million was 43 million lower than in 2002 mainly due to lower revenues.
Reuters
Revenue
Reuters revenue was down 11% to 2664 million in 2003 reflecting weak trading conditions in global financial markets.
Operating costs Reuters operating costs were 2486 million in 2003 a reduction of 309 million 11% from 2002.
This decrease was driven by savings from Fast Forward and earlier transformation programmes.
Operating profit and margin Reuters operating profit decreased by 19 million in 2003 to 178 million largely driven by an increase in restructuring charges.
Excluding amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments and restructuring charges Reuters generated an operating profit of 408 million 2002 395 million with the 3% increase reflecting strong cost control across all business units.
Reuters operating margin was 6.7% in 2003 on an actual basis 2002 6.6% and increased from 13.2% to 15.3% before amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments and restructuring.
Instinet Group
Instinet Group revenue was down 5% to 578 million largely reflecting the adverse impact of the weaker US dollar on Instinet Group revenues.
Operating loss Instinet Groups operating loss decreased from 339 million in 2002 to 48 million in 2003 mainly due to onceoff goodwill amortisation and impairment charges of 229 million in 2002.
04 OPERATING REVIEW
Reuters
Revenue
Year to 31 Decembertel Revenue by type m m m Recurring 2164 2456 2707 Outright 89 105 163 Total Reuters 2361 2664 2992 Reconciliation of Impact of UK GAAP percentage change Underlying Impact of acquisitions Actual to underlying 2004 over 2003 change currency and disposals change Recurring 5% 5% 2% 12% Usage 11% 11% 5% 5% Outright 10% 5%  15% Total Reuters 5% 5% 1% 11% Reuters classifies revenue into three distinct types  recurring outright and usage.
Recurring revenue which makes up approximately 92% of Reuters 2004 revenues refers to the sale of subscription products and includes maintenance fees from solutions sales.
Recurring revenue declined by 11.9% on an actual basis to 2164 million and by 5.4% on an underlying basis reflecting a gradually improving market environment.
This compares with a decline in the previous year of 9.3% on an actual basis and 10.2% on an underlying basis.
Outright revenue comprising approximately 4% of Reuters 2004 revenues is principally derived from the sale of software and hardware solutions.
Outright
89 million as we exited bespoke solutions sales as part of Fast Forward and market conditions continued to be difficult.
Usage revenue approximately 4% of Reuters 2004 revenues is principally derived from Dealing Matching and Bridge Trading products where revenue is generated based on trading volumes.
In 2004 usage revenue grew by 5% on an actual basis and 11% on an underlying basis to 108 million.
OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW
18 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 customers.
Around 16000 of the 19000 additional positions of Reuters 3000 Xtra installed in 2004 were upgrades of existing accesses with the balance made up by new business.
There were around 18000 Dealing user accesses at the end of the year.
Access numbers grew by more than 100 during the year despite competitive pressure from the EBSBloomberg alliance.
This reflected the success of the vigorous sales campaign to defend this revenue stream.
ARPA for the Reuters Xtra product family declined by 13% yearonyear on an actual basis or 9% on an underlying basis.
The factors driving this were an increased proportion of Reuters 3000 Xtra accesses including some upgrades offered on a temporary basis to mitigate the delay in Reuters Trader more customers moving into higher discount bands as their installed base increased and the impact of the weaker US dollar on revenues generated from some larger customers whose 3000 Xtra accesses are priced in US dollars.
Revenue from the Reuters Trader product family which comprises Reuters Trader 20003000 series products and regional products fell by 177 million to 416 million a decline of 26% on an underlying basis.
This was caused primarily by the migration of users of legacy products to 3000 Xtra and to a lesser extent by cancellations and by competitive losses.
Recurring revenue from legacy 20003000 series products totalled 212 million falling 42% on an actual basis.
Reuters Trader family accesses declined by 24% during the period. activities.
The rollout of the new Reuters Trader product in Europe was slower than expected due to postlaunch product issues and further work is underway to optimise overall product performance.
In total there were 4300 Reuters Trader accesses installed by the end of 2004.
ARPA for the Reuters Trader family declined by 4% yearonyear on an actual basis or 2% on an underlying basis.
Usage revenue in Sales and Trading was down 3% on an actual basis but showed growth on an underlying basis compared to 2003.
Volatility in the foreign exchange markets and an extension of the product to support trading in derivatives drove 4% growth in Dealing Matching revenues compared to 2003.
Research and Asset Management Revenue from Research and Asset Management accounts for 10% of Reuters revenues.
In 2004 revenue fell by 55 million to 235 million.
This reflected the impact of the disposals of ORT TowerGroup and Yankee which caused actual revenues to decline by 19%.
On an underlying basis the segments revenue increased by 2%.
Within Research and Asset Management revenue is derived from the Reuters Knowledge and Reuters Wealth Manager product families.
The Research and Asset Management segment also generated 73 million in revenue from the Reuters Xtra and Reuters Trader product families.
The Reuters Knowledge product family comprises Reuters Knowledge for Investment Management Reuters Knowledge for Corporates and Reuters
Disposals drove an actual decline of 39% in Knowledge family revenue to 65 million but a strong product line and a global sales campaign among investment management firms drove excellent underlying growth of 56%.
The Reuters Wealth Manager product family includes Reuters Wealth Manager Reuters Plus and Lipper.
Revenue fell by 6 million to 97 million but increased by 2% on an underlying basis.
The actual decline was driven mainly by the effect of the weaker US dollar on Reuters Plus revenue.
Reuters
Plus revenue increased by 11% on an underlying basis and Lipper revenue by 9% on an underlying basis.
8400 positions of Reuters Knowledge were installed at the end of 2004.
Within the Reuters Wealth Manager family access growth was level.
Good growth in Reuters Plus accesses was offset by a decline in Reuters Market Monitor RMM accesses.
Reuters Wealth Manager launched in September 2004 provides a migration path for RMM accesses and achieved around 4400 sold accesses at the end of the year.
ARPA across the Reuters Knowledge and Reuters Wealth Manager families remained the same in 2004 on an actual basis but increased 8% on an underlying basis driven by the successful rollout of higherpriced Reuters Knowledge products.
Enterprise
Revenue from the Enterprise segment which accounts for 20% of Reuters revenues fell by 79 million to 481 million a decline of 14% on an actual Trends in user accesses and average revenue per access ARPA User accesses declined by approximately 10000 over the year as a whole.
However they have increased since a low point at the end of Q1 increasing by 14000 since March 2004.
User accesses were restated to reflect the exclusion of mobile and other lowcost accesses.
ARPA decreased 1% on an actual basis but increased 2% on an underlying basis over 2003 reflecting a higher proportion of premium products primarily due to upgrades and the removal of accesses at the lower end of the price range.
Revenue by customer segment Year to 31 December Restated Restatedtel m m m Sales and Trading 1180 1300 1461 Research and Asset Management 235 290 283 Enterprise 481 560 666 Recoveries 321 361 427 Total Reuters 2361 2664 2992 Prior year comparatives have been restated to reflect the organisational structure in place during 2004.
Reconciliation of UK GAAP Impact of percentage change to Underlying Impact of acquisitions Actual underlying 2004 over 2003 change currency and disposals change Reuters Xtra 12% 5%  7% Reuters Trader 25% 4%  29% Sales and Trading 4% 5%  9% Reuters Xtra 9% 7%  2% Reuters Trader 43% 2%  45% Knowledge 56% 4% 91% 39% Wealth Manager 2% 7%  5% Research and Asset Management 2% 6% 15% 19% Datafeeds 15% 4%  19% Market Data Systems 10% 3%  13% Risk 2% 4%  6% EIP 57% 14%  43% Other 15% 6% 6% 27% Enterprise 9% 4% 1% 14% Media 2% 5% 1% 6% Recoveries 7% 4%  11% Total Reuters revenue 5% 5% 1% 11% In 2004 Reuters redefined its Customer Segments and organised its products into product families.
For details see pages 78 in Company information.
Revenue from the Xtra product family is divided between Sales and Trading 93% and Research and Asset Management  7%.
For details see Segmental analysis note on pages 4445.
The performance of the Xtra product family is discussed under Sales and Trading.
Sales and Trading Revenue from Sales and Trading which accounts for 50% of Reuters revenues was 1180 million a decline of 9% on an actual basis and 4% on an underlying basis.
Within Sales and Trading revenues are derived from the Reuters Xtra and Reuters Trader product families.
Revenue from the Reuters Xtra product family which comprises 3000 Xtra Dealing Reuters Station Reuters Electronic Trading and Securities Transactions increased by 51 million to 837 million.
Total revenue from Reuters 3000 Xtra was 494 million up 18% on an actual basis.
Dealing revenues of 238 million which include both subscription and matching revenues decreased by 8% on an actual basis.
The installed base of 3000 Xtra grew steadily through 2004 and reached 88000 at the end of the year a 27% yearonyear increase.
This reflected increased traction from the enterprisewide deals signed with some of our largest Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 basis and 9% on an underlying basis.
Within Enterprise revenues are derived from four product lines offering customers fully integrated business solutions.
Risk Management and Enterprise Information Products both have good potential for growth and account for 24% of total Enterprise revenues.
Datafeeds and Market Data Systems are more established businesses with strategically vital capabilities that sit at the heart of Reuters new transactions offer.
Enterprise Information Products generated revenue of 34 million and grew by 43% on an actual basis and 57% on an underlying basis in 2004 driven by a solid product offering and renewed market focus on data usage compliance.
Risk Management acquired 30 new customers during 2004 and continued to show good potential despite a 6% actual decline or a 2% underlying decline in revenues this year.
Datafeed revenues showed an annual decline of 19% on an actual basis and 15% on an underlying basis while Market Data Systems declined 13% on an actual basis and 10% on an underlying basis.
These declines were driven by Reuters withdrawal from its consulting business as part of Fast Forward major customers consolidating systems into larger centres and an aggressive campaign by Reuters to migrate small and medium sized customers to newer desktopbased offerings.
Nevertheless Reuters continues to be uniquely placed to supply sophisticated enterprise solutions to customers with technologyintensive businesses.
Media
Revenue from Media which accounts for 6% of Reuters revenues declined by 9 million to 144 million an actual decline of 6% and an underlying decline of 2%.
Within Media revenues are derived from the Text Visuals Consumer and Advertising Services product lines.
The main driver of the decline in Media revenue was Reuters decision to restrict access to premium news distributed through internet content aggregators and to retain it exclusively for distribution through Reuters own consumer websites. compared to 2 million in 2003.
Recoveries
Recurring revenue from recoveries including exchange fees and last mile communications costs totalled 321 million a decline of 11% on an actual basis and 7% on an underlying basis.
Operating costs Year to 31 December
Restated
1tel m m m Customer Segments 166 250 278 Channels 822 940 1093 Operations and Technology 630 674 728 Content 262 278 295 Corporate servicesother 124 114 203 Trading costs 2004 2256 2597 Restructuring costs 120 134 112 Amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles of subsidiaries 55 89 86 Impairment of subsidiaries 14 7 Operating costs 2193 2486 2795
1 Restated to reflect the new management structure and following adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see Accounting Basis on page 72.
Reconciliation of UK GAAP Impact of percentage change to Underlying Impact of acquisitions Actual underlying 2004 over 2003 change currency and disposals change Customer Segments 14% 4% 15% 33% Channels 8% 4%  12% Operations and Technology  7%  7% Content 1% 6% 1% 6% Corporate servicesother 15% 5% 2% 8% Trading costs 4% 5% 2% 11% Operating costs were 2193 million in 2004 compared to 2486 million in 2003.
The principal drivers of the reduction in operating costs of 293 million were the Fast Forward transformation programme and the impact of currency movements.
Employee costs fell by a net 10% with reductions in headcount through Fast Forward initiatives and divestments partly offset by more employees being hired into customerfacing roles and increased numbers of content production and product development staff in lowercost locations.
Property costs reduced by 25 million or 13% on an actual basis as consolidation of office space continued.
Communications costs declined by 46 million or 13% on an actual basis as a result of the weakened US dollar and Fast Forward initiatives.
Research and development expenditure totalled 128 million in 2004 compared with 136 million in 2003 and 154 million in 2002.
The decline in Reuters research and development costs largely reflects the impact of efficiency and cost reduction measures across the development organisation and has been driven partly by moving development resources into lowercost locations.
In 2004 notable areas of spend included electronic trading systems and enhancements to products within the Xtra Family and Risk.
Customer Segments Customer Segments expenditure totalled 166 million and accounted for 8% of trading costs in 2004.
This reduced by 84 million over 2003 33% on an actual basis and 14% on an underlying basis.
The reduction was primarily driven by divestment of subsidiaries and net headcount reductions.
Channel
Channel costs totalled 822 million and accounted for 41% of 2004 trading costs a reduction of 118 million from 2003 12% on an actual basis and 8% on an underlying basis.
Close to half of Channel costs consist of recoveries and employeerelated costs.
The majority of underlying cost savings in 2004 came from staff cost reductions.
Property rationalisation also contributed to savings.
Increased investment in client training and customer support activities was outweighed by streamlining and efficiency gains.
Operations and Technology Operations and Technology costs totalled 630 million accounting for 31% of 2004 trading costs a reduction of 44 million versus the prior year.
Costs fell 7% on an actual basis but remained flat on an underlying basis.
This compared with an actual reduction in 2003 of 7%.
The underlying savings were achieved mainly in product development principally from headcount reduction and through relocating resources to more costefficient locations and continuing to close down certain development facilities.
Content
Content costs comprising Data and Editorial totalled 262 million in 2004 representing 13% of trading costs a decrease of 16 million from the prior year or 6% on an actual basis and 1% on an underlying basis compared with a reduction of 6% on an actual basis in 2003.
Productivity improvements and efficiencies in third party data expenditure were partly offset by investment in coverage of the years major news events such as the US Elections and the Olympics.
Corporate servicesother Costs from Corporate services which comprises corporate head office functions and internal services and other costs totalled 124 million and accounted for 7% of trading costs in 2004.
An increase of 10 million from the prior year or 8% on an actual basis and 15% on an underlying basis was driven mainly by a reduction in currency gains relative to 2003.
Restructuring
The Fast Forward programme resulted in a restructuring charge of 120 million in 2004 within operating profit.
This compared with Fast Forward restructuring charges of 134 million net of a 10 million release of legacy programme provisions in 2003 and to previous business transformation plan charges of 112 million in 2002.
In 2004 Fast Forward delivered a further 159 million in cost savings leading to cumulative savings from the programme of 234 million.
900 employees were made redundant during the course of 2004 most of whom have already left the company with the rest expected to leave in 2005.
OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW
20 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 commissions the decrease of NASDAQ market making and diminished investment banking fee revenues which have compelled them to spend more time looking for additional profitgenerating opportunities.
This has led traditional brokerage firms to increase their focus on offering algorithmic trading program trading and direct market access to institutional customers.
These firms now directly compete with Instinet in price and technology to provide these services to customers.
As a result customers have become more demanding and cost conscious.
Instinet pricing for US equities measured in cents per share declined 2.6% in 2004 and 10.1% in 2003 and pricing for nonUS equities measured as a percentage of the total consideration of the trade declined 5.4% in 2004 and 1.7% in 2003.
Going forward Instinet expects institutional pricing to continue to decline amid strong competition for customer business.
Instinet Group continues to monitor future price competition and evaluate its pricing structures as part of its ongoing efforts to allow its businesses to remain competitive.
The Reuters Group is unable to anticipate whether the changes in trading volumes and pricing are indicative of future trends although management expectation is that the intense competition may continue and if it or the other adverse factors continue or intensify Instinet Groups revenues could be adversely affected.
05 EXPECTED FUTURE PERFORMANCE
Reuters expects underlying recurring revenues for the first quarter of 2005 to decline by around 1.5% compared to the same period in 2004.
With net sales off to a good start early in 2005 the company expects further gradual improvement in the decline in recurring revenues in the second quarter.
Reuters will continue to reduce its operating expenditure in 2005 with over 100 million of cost savings expected to be delivered under the Fast Forward transformation programme this year.
This will bring the cumulative total cost savings to approximately 340 million by the end of 2005 on track to realise the full 440 million of promised savings by the end of 2006.
The Fast Forward restructuring charge for 2005 is expected to be around 80 million.
This figure is higher than originally expected because the Fast Forward restructuring charge now includes certain onceoff expenditure associated with completing the move of Reuters London operations to Canary Wharf.
In 2005 Reuters expects an increase in capital expenditure to reflect approximately 30 million of fitout costs for the companys new London headquarters in Canary Wharf and an additional 30 to 40 million to build data centre capacity and improve service resilience.
Instinet Group Instinet remains committed to bringing down its fixed costs throughout the year.
Its cost reduction plan for 2005 includes reducing its spending on technology consolidating office space and reducing discretionary expenses which collectively are expected to reduce annualised costs excluding staff costs by approximately 26 million by the end of the fourth quarter of 2005 when compared to the third quarter of 2004.
Pending acquisition of Telerate On 20 December 2004 Reuters entered into agreements to acquire substantially all of the business of Telerate as well as a subsidiary of Quick that serves as the exclusive distributor of Telerate products in Japan.
The Telerate purchase price will be US100 million 52 million subject to adjustment for working capital and an increase by an amount currently estimated to be US28 million 15 million to the extent certain actions Telerate may independently take prior to closing result in corresponding reduction of Reuters anticipated postclosing restructuring costs plus Reuters 14% stake in Savvis which is currently convertible into approximately 76 million shares of Savvis common stock.
The purchase price for the Quick subsidiary will be JPY1.1 billion 5 million in cash subject to certain adjustments and Reuters current 4.85% holding in Quick.
Telerates 2003 revenue was US292 million 152 million.
For 2004 unaudited and based on information from Telerate management Telerates revenue was US274 million 143 million with an operating loss of US42 million 22 million before depreciation and amortisation.
Reuters expects to spend around 40 to 45 million including approximately 15 million as part of the purchase price described above to integrate Telerate fully.
The result is that the acquisition is expected to be dilutive to Reuters EPS during the integration period.
Upon completion of integration which is expected to take around 18 months the acquisition is expected to Instinet Group A key driver of Instinet Groups business is average daily trading volume in the US securities markets which increased in 2004 after moderate annual decreases over the previous five years.
From 2000 through to early 2003 these markets experienced significant volatility and declines in volume associated with the weaker economic climate a reduction in corporate transactions and a generally more difficult business environment.
Overall trading volume increased in 2004 over 2003 levels primarily due to the continuing economic recovery an increase in the level of corporate transactions and increased investor confidence.
Instinet
Groups business is also affected though to a lesser extent by changes in trading volumes in nonUS markets which experienced considerable volatility and significant declines in volume from 2000 through to 2003 followed by recent increases in stock prices.
Overall nonUS markets grew in 2004 compared to 2003 with very strong yearonyear gains in Asian markets.
A significant portion of securities traded in Instinet Groups business are NASDAQlisted securities.
Average daily trading volume in NASDAQlisted stocks was down 3.7% for the full year 2003 compared to 2002 but increased 6.4% in 2004 and has continued to increase in the first two months of 2005 compared to average 2004 levels.
Average daily trading volume in US exchangelisted stocks has grown steadily over the past five years although the growth has slowed since 2001.
For 2004 average daily volume of US exchangelisted stocks increased 9.0% over 2003 levels.
Overall market share for INET the electronic market place increased slightly to 13.4% of total US market share volume for 2004 from 13.3% in 2003 while the actual number of shares matched in INETs marketplace increased by 9.2% to 131 billion shares in 2004 compared to 120 billion shares in 2003.
In 2002 including the acquisition of Island at the end of the third quarter INETs overall market share was 8.4% or 76 billion shares of total US market share volume.
Overall market share for Instinet the institutional broker decreased to 2.7% or 26 billion shares of total US equity trading volume for 2004 compared to 2.8% or 25 billion shares in 2003 and 2.5% or 23 billion shares in 2002.
The volatility in market share reflects the intense competitive environment within the brokerage business which has resulted in price reductions since 2001.
In September 2001 INET reduced average prices by 11% with a new pricing schedule for US brokerdealer customers.
In March 2002 INET began offering brokerdealer rebates.
In October 2003 it reduced pricing for routing orders in NASDAQlisted stocks to other trading venues through its automated smart orderrouting system by 37% and introduced tiered pricing offering lower prices to customers based on volume levels.
In October 2004 INET introduced a new pricing schedule for transactions in US exchangelisted stocks.
In January 2005 INET announced that it would share up to 50% of its market data revenue for certain American Stock Exchange transactions.
Instinet also operates in a highly competitive environment.
Traditional brokerages have also been severely impacted by tighter spreads smaller INSTINET GROUP QUARTERLY US MARKET SHARE VOLUME % NASDAQ TOTAL US EXCHANGE LISTED
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 NASDAQLISTED AND EXCHANGELISTED AVERAGE DAILY TRADING VOLUME SHARES IN BILLIONS xchangelisted NASDAQlisted Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 become accretive to Reuters EPS before amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles impairments disposals and nonrecurring tax effects of impairments reorganisations and disposals and to Reuters operating margins before amortisation of goodwill and intangibles impairments and restructuring charges.
Both the EPS and margin calculations are based on UK GAAP per Reuters current reporting.
Starting in 2005 Reuters will be reporting under the new IFRS standards which are not expected to significantly affect the amount of EPS accretion or the impact of margin from the acquisition but may affect Reuters core EPS calculation.
The transactions are expected to complete around mid2005 subject to regulatory approvals for the Telerate acquisition and other customary conditions.
For more information see pages 7 and 89.
06 TREASURY POLICIES FINANCING AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE Reuters Group treasury function is a cost rather than profit centre.
As such all transactions which are undertaken are designed to mitigate risk within the business or to secure committed funding.
At no time are speculative transactions undertaken nor transactions without an underlying commercial rationale.
The key objectives of the treasury function are to ensure sufficient liquidity exists to meet funding needs and to manage the interest rate and currency risks arising from Reuters Groups operations and its sources of finance.
All treasury activity takes place within a formal control framework under policies approved by the Board.
A separate treasury function exists within Instinet Group.
FINANCING
Reuters finances its operations by a mixture of cash flows from operations shortterm borrowings from banks and commercial paper markets backed up as required by committed bank facilities and finance from capital markets.
Reuters manages its net debt position and interest costs to support its continued access to the full range of debt capital markets.
Reuters expects to be able to finance its current business plans including the Telerate acquisition in connection with which Reuters expects to receive approximately US22 million see Related party transactions and material contracts  other material contracts  Telerate transitional services agreement on page 90 from ongoing operations and its external facilities.
Net cash flows are generally either applied to reduce debt or placed in short term investments with financial institutions holding strong credit ratings within preagreed limits set by the Board.
As at 31 December 2004 the Group held cash and shortterm investment balances of 836 million of which 503 million was held by Instinet Group.
Reuters borrows in various currencies at both fixed and floating rates and uses derivative contracts to create the desired currency and interest rate basis.
The conversion of net investments in overseas subsidiaries into the Groups reporting currency of sterling creates translation exposure.
To help mitigate this effect to the extent that the Group has core debt it will be held in currencies approximately proportionate to the currency profile of the Groups net assets including its net investment in Instinet Group.
In broad terms using the average net funds position a 1% increase in global interest rates would have reduced profit before tax in the year by approximately 2 million 2003 2 million 2002 1 million excluding the impact of hedging.
Syndicated credit facility In April 2003 Reuters entered into a committed syndicated credit facility for 1.0 billion.
520 million of the facility either expired or was voluntarily cancelled in 2004.
At 31 December 2004 Reuters had 480 million available under the facility.
The facility was undrawn during 2004.
The commitment expires and final repayment is due in April 2008.
The facility is generally on customary terms and conditions.
Drawings under the facility may be made in sterling euros or other currencies agreed at the time and bear interest at LIBOR plus a margin variable according to the long term credit rating of Reuters Group.
The facility crossdefaults upon default by Reuters in payment or acceleration of any other borrowings in excess of 20 million.
The facility contains two financial covenants that Reuters operating profit before interest tax and amortisation subject to certain adjustments should be greater than 2.75 times net finance charges and that Reuters net borrowings should not be greater than 3.50 times Reuters operating profit before depreciation and amortisation subject to certain adjustments.
As at 31 December 2004 Reuters complied with these covenants.
Bilateral loan facilities At the same time as the syndicated credit facility was arranged committed bilateral facilities of 90 million were also put in place on similar terms.
During
2004 66 million of the facilities either expired or were voluntarily cancelled.
At 31 December 2004 Reuters had 24 million available.
The facility was undrawn during 2004.
Euro Commercial Paper Programme A 1.5 billion Euro Commercial Paper Programme is available in respect of which Reuters had outstanding obligations of 70 million at 31 December 2004 repaid in January 2005.
The minimum outstanding during 2004 was nil and the maximum was 70 million.
The programme is generally on customary terms and conditions including a condition that the company should not be in default on any other debt or similar obligation.
The programme has no final maturity date and there is no requirement to update the programme documentation.
Debt is issued at market rates agreed between the issuer and the dealer.
The programme documentation contains no financial covenants.
Euro Medium Term Note Programme Reuters also has available a 1 billion Euro Medium Term Note Programme.
At 31 December 2004 Reuters had outstanding obligations of 387 million under the programme repayable at various dates up to November 2010 including a 500 million public bond issued in November 2003 and maturing in November 2010.
The minimum outstanding during 2004 was 387 million and the maximum was 727 million.
The programme is generally on customary terms and conditions.
The programme has no final maturity date but the offering circular containing financial information is updated each year to allow issuance to continue.
Debt is issued at market rates agreed between the issuer and the dealer.
The programme documentation contains no financial covenants and notes in issue have no crossdefault provision.
Shortterm uncommitted facilities In addition Reuters has shortterm uncommitted bank borrowing facilities denominated in various currencies the sterling equivalent of which was approximately 155 million.
Drawings under these lines were 45 million at 31 December 2004.
Instinet Group has access to the equivalent of US189 million shortterm uncommitted bank facilities of which US15 million were drawn at 31 December 2004.
Contractual financial obligations The following table summarises Reuters Groups principal contractual financial obligations at 31 December 2004 certain of which are described in the consolidated financial statements and notes.
Reuters Group expects to be able to fund such obligations from ongoing operations and its external facilities.
Payments due by period Less than 13 45 After 5 Contractual obligations Total 1 year years years years at 31 December 2004 m m m m m Shortterm debt 181 181 Longterm debt 329  24  305 Operating leases 756 9telPurchase obligations Total contractual obligations 155tel690 Significant purchase obligations entered into during the year include commitments in respect of outsourcing arrangements communication networks and contracts in connection with the move of Reuters headquarters to Canary Wharf.
OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW
22 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 FOREIGN EXCHANGE Almost 90% of Group revenue is denominated in nonsterling currencies.
The Group also has significant costs denominated in foreign currencies with a different mix from revenue.
Group profits are therefore exposed to currency fluctuations.
The approximate proportions of operating profit excluding goodwill amortisation and currency gains received in each key currency group were as follows Year to 31 Decembertel Adjusted Group operating profit by currency % %% US dollar 8 5 71 Japanese yen 28 32 53 Sterling 103 133 283 Other 30 35 105 Sterling costs exceeded sterling revenue due to the level of restructuring costs and UKbased marketing development operational and central services costs.
In broad terms using the 2004 mix of profits the impact of an additional unilateral 1% strengthening of sterling would have been a reduction of approximately 5 million in operating profits before hedging 2003 4 million 2002 7 million.
Exchange rate movements in 2004 had an 8 million net impact on operating profit.
Operating Operating
Revenue cost profit Currency impact m m m Impact of Weaker dollar 159 157 2 Weaker euro 8 4 4 Other currencies 12 8 4 Exchange rate movements 179 169 10 Change in currency mix 1 3 2 Total currency movements 180 172 8 No unremitted profits are hedged with foreign exchange contracts as Reuters judges it inappropriate to hedge noncash flow translation exposure with cash based instruments.
Forward foreign exchange contracts currency options and foreign exchange swaps are used to manage where appropriate the effects of transaction exposure and certain intercompany transactions which impact Group profits.
Transaction exposure occurs when as a result of trading activities an entity receives cash in a currency different from its functional currency.
07 MANAGEMENT OF RISKS
Reuters Groups Board has adopted a process for identifying evaluating and managing significant risks faced by Reuters Group.
The process is described in Risk Management Internal Controls and Disclosure Controls and Procedures on page 41.
08 ACCOUNTING POLICIES US GAAP AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL REPORTING STANDARDS Group accounting policies conform with UK GAAP .
In accordance with the requirements of Financial Reporting Standard 18 FRS18 these policies and any applicable estimation techniques have been reviewed by the directors who have confirmed them to be the most appropriate for the preparation of the 2004 financial statements.
Critical accounting policies In preparing these financial statements management has made its best estimates and judgements of certain amounts included in the financial statements.
The most significant judgemental areas in 2004 related to The impairment of fixed assets current asset investments and goodwill Under UK accounting standards impairment is measured by comparing the carrying value of an asset with the higher of its net realisable value and value in use.
These comparisons sometimes require subjective judgements and estimates to be made by management with regard to projected future cash flows of incomegenerating units or the amounts that could be obtained from the sale of investments.
As a result some current asset investments and goodwill have been written down to net realisable value.
Accounting for longterm incentive plans LTIP The costs of shares acquired to cover LTIP awards are charged in the profit and loss account over the period to which the performance criteria relate.
Adjustments are made during the three to fiveyear vesting period of each plan to reflect changes in the possibility of performance criteria being met.
These adjustments are to some extent subjective as performance is based on Reuters Groups Total Shareholder Return TSR relative to the TSR of the other companies in the FTSE 100 at the start of the measurement period.
As a result of Reuters Groups low TSR ranking for the relevant periods it has now been assumed that the 2001 and 2002 LTIP schemes are unlikely to deliver any value to the participants and that the 2003 LTIP scheme is likely to only vest partially.
For additional information concerning the LTIP see Equity incentive plans  LTIP on page 33.
Provisions
The 2004 restructuring charges cover primarily leasehold properties and severances.
A number of leasehold properties have been identified as being surplus to requirements.
Although efforts are being made to sublet this vacant space management recognises that this may not be possible immediately given the current economic climate.
Estimates have been made to cover the cost of vacant possession together with any shortfall arising from subleased rental income being lower than lease costs being borne by the Group.
A judgement has also been made in respect of the discount factor based on a riskfree rate that is applied to the rent shortfalls.
For severance provisions we book amounts where employees have a valid expectation or have already been told of their redundancy.
Other provisions are held where the recoverability of amounts is uncertain where the actual outcome may differ from the resulting estimates.
Allowances for doubtful accounts For all trade debtors Reuters management makes a judgement regarding the ability of customers to pay and accordingly establishes an allowance for estimated losses arising from nonpayment.
In evaluating this allowance customer credit worthiness current economic conditions and previous experience are taken into account.
If actual collections differ from estimates this will affect future profit.
Deferred taxation Under UK and US accounting standards in assessing which deferred tax assets to record on the balance sheet management has made subjective judgements over projected future profitability of certain legal entities.
Assets held for sale As permitted by the Companies Act and UK GAAP  where an acquisition has been made exclusively with a view to subsequent resale and has not previously been consolidated in the Groups accounts it has been treated as a current asset investment.
Where it is not managements intention to retain a longterm interest in a fixed asset investment the investment has been reclassified as a current asset.
US GAAP A reconciliation of net income under UK and US GAAP is set out on page 78.
A discussion of the relevant US accounting policies which differ materially from UK GAAP is given on pages 7477 in the Summary of differences between UK and US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Details of recent US GAAP accounting pronouncements are given on page 80.
Offbalance sheet arrangements The Group does not have any offbalance sheet arrangements as defined by the SEC that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Groups financial position or results of operations material to investors.
International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS Reuters Group along with all companies listed on an EU Stock Exchange will be required to prepare its consolidated financial statements in accordance with IFRS in respect of accounting periods commencing on or after 1 January 2005.
The firsttime adoption rules of IFRS require the comparative financial information presented in the first set of IFRS financial statements to be prepared on a consistent basis.
This will require Reuters Group to restate its 2004 financial statements and present a series of reconciliations to the previous reported UK GAAP numbers.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Reuters will provide indicative external guidance on the anticipated impact that IFRS is expected to have on Reuters 2004 performance excluding Instinet Group who are yet to quantify fully the impact of IFRS.
The material presented will be available on Reuters website from 10 March 2005.
This indicative guidance was prepared on the basis of current IFRS standards and interpretations issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB.
These standards are subject to ongoing amendment by the IASB and subsequent endorsement by the European Commission and are therefore subject to change.
There may also be new standards that Reuters may wish to adopt early.
As a result the numbers reported in Reuters Groups 2005 Annual Report and Form 20F may vary from those included in the guidance provided.
Our indicative unaudited guidance highlights the following key impacts of IFRS on Reuters 2004 UK GAAP financial statements i no impact on revenue ii an increase of approximately 4 million on 2004 pretax profit iii consolidation of Radianz from 16 November 2004 but treated as a discontinued operation iv no impact on cash flow other than from consolidation of Radianz and v an increase of close to 100 million in net assets assuming an adoption date of 1 January 2004 which is subject to approval by the SEC.
However the impact of IFRS on 2005 reported results could be materially different from 2004 due to a number of factors including the following IAS32 and 39 which relate to the recognition of financial instruments is applicable from 1 January 2005 with no retrospective application.
As a result Reuters will be recognising movements in the fair value of financial assets liabilities and embedded derivatives in 2005 for the first time.
IFRS 2 relating to sharebased payments provides that only costs associated with options granted after 7 November 2002 and not vested by 1 January 2005 need to be recognised under IFRS.
Consequently the full annual impact of this standard will not be seen until 2006.
The level of impairment of goodwill which may vary significantly from year to year as it is no longer amortised but subject to annual impairment testing.
The greater emphasis being placed on recording assets and liabilities at fair value under IFRS which could lead to increased volatility in the income statement.
Other material issues may become apparent during the transition process and therefore the above list should not be regarded as definitive.
Reuters does not expect the change to IFRS to alter the specific future guidance for Reuters as set out on page 20 under Expected future performance  Reuters.
09 RISK FACTORS Forwardlooking statements This document contains certain forwardlooking statements within the meaning of the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 with respect to Reuters Groups financial condition results of operations and business and managements strategy plans and objectives.
In particular all statements that express forecasts expectations and projections with respect to certain matters including trends in results of operations margins growth rates overall financial market trends product releases the impact of interest rates or exchange rates anticipated cost savings and synergies and the completion of strategic transactions or restructuring programmes are all forwardlooking statements.
These statements involve risk and uncertainty because they relate to events and depend on circumstances that may occur in the future.
There are a number of factors that could cause actual results and developments to differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forwardlooking statements.
These factors include but are not limited to the Risk Factors discussed below.
Any forwardlooking statements made by Reuters Group or on its behalf speak only as of the date they are made.
Reuters Group does not undertake to update any forwardlooking statements.
Reuters may not be able to realise the anticipated benefits of its Fast Forward transformation plan.
The Fast Forward plan includes investing in new information streamlining the way information is delivered offering a simpler and segmented product line rationalising the noncore elements of the business reshaping the cost base and reinvigorating the company culture.
There can be no assurance of achievement of these objectives or of the exact timing or extent to which the anticipated benefits of the Fast Forward programme will be realised.
Unfavourable conditions in financial markets may have a significant adverse effect on the Groups business.
Reuters Groups business is dependent upon the health of the financial markets and the participants in those markets.
Reuters Groups foreign exchange Dealing products are dependent on the level of activity in the foreign exchange market.
Similarly the businesses of Bridge Trading and Instinet Group are dependent upon the level of activity in the equity markets.
While market conditions improved in 2004 the economic downturn which began in 2001 continued to negatively impact Reuters Groups results.
If these conditions were to worsen or in the event of significant trading market disruptions or suspensions there could be further adverse effects on Reuters Groups business.
In addition Reuters Groups business could be adversely affected by further consolidations among clients and competitors.
Currency fluctuations and interest rate fluctuations may have a significant impact on the Groups reported revenue and earnings.
Reuters Group reports results in pounds sterling but receives revenue and incurs expenses in more than 70 currencies and is thereby exposed to the impact of fluctuations in currency rates.
Currency movements resulted in a small negative impact on Reuters Group operating profit in 2004. results in future periods.
To the extent that these currency exposures are not hedged exchange rate movements may cause fluctuations in Reuters Groups consolidated financial statements.
In addition an increase in interest rates from current levels could adversely affect the Groups results in future periods.
Reuters Group may experience difficulties or delays in developing or responding to new customer demands or launching new products.
Reuters Groups business environment is characterised by rapid technological change changing and increasingly sophisticated customer demands and evolving industry standards.
If Reuters Group is unable to anticipate and respond to the demand for new services products and technologies on a timely and costeffective basis and to respond and adapt to technological advancements and changing standards its business may be adversely affected.
In addition Reuters Group may delay or halt the launch of new products and services its existing products and services may cease to be attractive to customers and new products and services that Reuters Group may develop and introduce may not achieve market acceptance.
In the event any of the foregoing occurs Reuters Groups financial results could be adversely affected.
Reuters Group is dependent on third parties for the provision of certain network and other services.
Reuters Group has outsourced the daytoday operation of most of its networks to Radianz which also provides network services to companies in addition to Reuters Group.
Although Reuters currently owns all the voting shares of Radianz it intends to transfer ownership of Radianz to BT and conclude a longterm network services agreement currently being negotiated with BT.
Accordingly Reuters ability to affect the performance of Radianz may be limited and its business could be adversely affected as a result.
In connection with the 2001 acquisition of certain businesses and assets of Bridge Reuters entered into a network services agreement with Savvis which was the primary provider of network services to Bridge.
Reuters currently holds approximately 14% of Savvis voting share capital which it has agreed to transfer as partial consideration for Telerate.
In addition Savvis has a network services agreement with Telerate which Reuters would acquire in its pending acquisition of Telerate.
Savvis has a majority controlling shareholder and Reuters has very limited if any ability to affect the performance of Savvis.
Failure or inability of any third party that provides significant services to Reuters Group such as Radianz or Savvis to perform its obligations could adversely affect Reuters Groups financial results.
The Groups business may be adversely affected if its networks or systems experience any significant failures or interruptions or cannot accommodate increased traffic.
Reuters Groups business is dependent on the ability to rapidly handle substantial quantities of data and transactions on its computerbased networks and systems and those of Radianz Savvis and others.
Any significant failure or interruption of such systems including terrorist activities could have a material adverse effect on its business and results of its operations.
The continuing
OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW
24 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 increase in the update rates of market data may impact product and network performance from time to time.
Factors that have significantly increased the market data update rates include the emergence of proprietary data feeds from other markets high market volatility decimalisation reductions in trade sizes resulting in more transactions new derivative instruments increased automaticallygenerated algorithmic and program trading market fragmentation resulting in an increased number of trading venues and multiple listings of options and other securities.
While Reuters Group has implemented a number of capacity management initiatives there can be no assurance that Reuters Group and its network providers will be able to accommodate accelerated growth of peak traffic volumes or avoid other failures or interruptions.
Reuters Group is exposed to a decline in the valuation of companies in which it has invested.
Reuters Group has entered into joint ventures with and made strategic investments in a number of companies and also has significant interests in companies and joint ventures such as Instinet Group and Factiva.
The value of a number of these companies fluctuated widely from 2002 through to 2004 in part as a result of external market factors.
The value of Reuters interests in these companies is dependent on among other things the performance of these companies generally whether such performance meets investors expectations and external market and economic conditions.
Reuters Group has limited ability to influence the management or performance of these companies.
Significant competition in the financial information and trading industries could adversely affect Reuters Groups business.
Reuters Group faces significant competition in the financial information industry.
The availability of public internet technology reduces barriers to entry and increases the availability of commoditised data in less expensive forms and loss of control over intellectual property.
Instinet Group and Bridge Trading face competition from securities brokers trading venues and other financial service providers including many that are wellcapitalised and substantially larger than Instinet Group or Bridge Trading as the case may be and have substantially greater financial technical marketing and other resources.
If Reuters Group is unable to cope effectively with increased competitive pressure arising from the above or any other factors its financial results could be adversely affected.
Changes in the regulatory environment could have an adverse effect on Reuters business.
The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 authorises brokers to provide research as well as trade executions to their clients in return for brokerage commissions.
The payment of brokerage commissions to brokers who also provide proprietary or independent research is sometimes referred to as soft dollars.
The SEC has been reviewing the operation and regulation of mutual funds and as part of that review may propose rules addressing the scope of information and other services that may be considered research for this purpose.
The UK FSA is also reviewing the regulatory requirements addressing the provision to institutional investors of brokerage and other services including research and information services.
The FSA has issued a policy statement on the definition of research expressing its belief that raw data and market information generally do not constitute research.
The FSA is expected later this year to propose rule changes to implement this policy.
The SEC and the US Congress are considering changes to the structure of US securities markets.
On 15 December 2004 the SEC published for public comment an amended version of proposed Regulation NMS.
Among other things the proposed regulation would address access to and relations between trading centres and update the requirements for consolidating distributing and displaying market information.
The SECs efforts in this area could result in additional regulation of or reduced operational flexibility for the provision of US market information by Reuters.
Financial services regulators in the United States and other jurisdictions continue to review business continuity and disaster recovery requirements for the institutions they regulate.
To the extent that Reuters provides such institutions with services in areas subject to such requirements Reuters services may have to meet such requirements.
At this time Reuters Group is unable to predict the impact on its business or results of operations of any potential or proposed regulatory changes.
Changes in regulatory environment could have an adverse effect on Instinet Groups business.
As a result of their compliance with the requirements of Regulation ATS none of Instinet Groups ATSs is currently required to register as a US national securities exchange.
In May 2004 INET submitted a draft application to the SEC for registration as a national securities exchange and continues to discuss with the SEC issues related to the filing of a formal application for exchange registration.
If INET or any of Instinet Groups subsidiaries were to register voluntarily as a national securities exchange or if the SEC were to require INET to do so Instinet Group could become subject to substantial additional regulation which might reduce its operational flexibility in ways that could have a material adverse effect on its business.
Among other consequences Instinet Group might be required to comply with fair representation or ownership requirements.
These and other requirements could adversely affect its operations and could also result in material limitations or restrictions on Reuters equity interest in Instinet Group or Reuters ability to exercise its voting and other governance rights with respect to Instinet Group.
Instinet Groups ATSs are also subject to Regulation ATS and certain other rules which require ATSs meeting certain trading volume criteria to provide quotation data to an SRO and to provide other brokerdealers execution access to such quotes.
Compliance with Regulation ATS could have an adverse effect on Instinet Groups business financial condition and operating results.
In July 2002 the SEC also took action that resulted in the suspension of market data revenue sharing programmes in which INET then known as Island ECN participated and led to INETs suspension of its own programme.
These programmes were subsequently reinstated but only for US exchangelisted securities.
Regulation
NMS proposes changes to the NMS Plan formulas governing the allocation of market data revenue among SROs and thus the revenues available for SRO revenuesharing programmes.
The SEC has also indicated that it could allow the reinstatement of such programmes in NASDAQlisted stocks in the future if its proposed allocation formulas were adopted.
In January 2005 INET began sharing with subscribers a portion of the market data revenues it receives from SROs in American Stock Exchangelisted securities.
Instinet Group is unable to determine whether the adoption of the proposed formulas would adversely impact the value of INETs market data for purposes of determining an SROs share of market data revenue and thus affect the revenues INET would be eligible to receive through SRO revenue sharing programmes.
Instinet Group has been from time to time and is currently involved in discussions and proceedings with the SEC and some if its customers regarding the application of these and other SEC rules which may have a material adverse effect on Instinet Groups pricing policies and business operations.
Future SEC rule makings or interpretations relating to equities securities markets and market conditions could adversely affect Instinet Groups business financial condition and operating results.
The NASD regulates the activities of Instinet Groups US brokerdealer subsidiaries and its NASDAQ subsidiary competes with Instinet
The NASD either directly or through subsidiaries is able to propose and often obtain SEC approval of rule changes that the Group believes can be to NASDAQs competitive benefit as a securities marketplace and to Instinets competitive disadvantage.
Reuters Group is unable to predict at this time the impact of any proposed or potential changes to the regulatory environment in which Instinet Group and its affiliates operate which may include additional changes to the NASDAQ marketplace considered by the NASD or the adoption by authorities in other jurisdictions of new methods for regulating electronic overthecounter trading.
Reuters Group may be exposed to adverse governmental action in countries where Reuters conducts reporting activities.
As the worlds largest news and information company Reuters Group may suffer discriminatory tariffs or other forms of adverse government intervention due to the nature of its editorial and other reporting activities.
Reuters Group may not be able to realise the anticipated benefits of existing or future acquisitions and disposals.
To achieve its strategic objectives Reuters Group has acquired invested in andor disposed of and in the future may seek to acquire invest in andor dispose of various companies and businesses.
No assurance can be given that Reuters Group will realise when anticipated or at all the benefits it expects as a result of any acquisition investment or disposal.
Achieving the benefits of acquisitions and investments will depend on many factors including the successful and timely integration and in some cases the consolidation of products technology operations and administrative functions of companies Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 that have previously operated separately.
Considering the highly technical and complex nature of Reuters Groups products and services these integration efforts may be difficult and timeconsuming.
In particular the ability of Reuters to complete the Telerate acquisition and realise the anticipated benefits is subject to the risks that necessary regulatory approvals are not obtained risks related to the integration of the companies operations and products following completion including achieving expected synergies and general risks associated with the companies businesses.
Achieving benefits of disposals will likewise depend on many factors including realisation of appropriate value successful separation of the businesses and operations and management of related costs and achievement of any benefits sought in connection with the transaction.
The ability of Reuters to complete the sale of Radianz to BT and realise the anticipated benefits is subject to the risks that the parties agree to a satisfactory price and other terms that the conditions to such transactions will not be satisfied and that BTs acquisition and operation of Radianz results in the anticipated benefits and efficiencies to
There can be no assurance that Reuters will successfully sell all or any part of its stake in Radianz or that it will receive any particular price for it.
Reuters Group may identify issues with controls over financial reporting as a result of the implementation project to achieve compliance with Sarbanes Oxley Act section 404.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F for the year ended 31 December 2006 will be required to comply with section 404 of the US SarbanesOxley Act of 2002.
This requires that companies evaluate and report on their systems of internal control over financial reporting.
In addition Reuters Groups independent auditors must report on managements evaluation of those controls.
Reuters Group began working on necessary activities in 2003 and is in the process of documenting and testing its systems of internal controls over financial reporting to provide the basis for its certification.
During this process Reuters Group may identify deficiencies in its system of internal controls over financial reporting that may require remediation.
At this stage due to the ongoing evaluation and testing of Reuters Groups internal controls there can be no assurance that any such deficiencies identified may not be significant deficiencies or material weaknesses that would be required to be reported.
Reuters Group complies with other elements of the Act that are already in force.
Reuters Groups financial reporting will be impacted by compliance with International Financial Reporting Standards effective 1 January 2005 or other changes mandated by regulatory authorities.
Reuters Group along with all companies listed on an EU Stock Exchange will be required to report its consolidated financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting standards IFRS in respect of accounting periods commencing on or after 1 January 2005.
The firsttime adoption rules of IFRS require the comparative financial information presented in the first set of IFRS financial statements to be prepared on a consistent basis.
This will require us to restate our 2004 financial statemtents and present a series of reconciliations to the previously reported UK GAAP numbers.
For US GAAP reporting the US SEC has yet to determine whether we are required to present comparatives for the year ended 31 December 2002.
Other material issues may become apparent during the conversion process.
For additional information see Section 8  Accounting Policies US GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards.
DIRECTORS REPORT 26 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 The directors submit their annual report and audited financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2004.
01 ACTIVITIES Reuters Groups business is described on page 6.
A detailed review of activities during 2004 and likely future developments is given on pages 610.
Details of our research and development activity and expenditure is given on page 19.
02 SHARE CAPITAL AND DIVIDENDS Details of the changes in the authorised and calledup share capital are set out in notes 26 and 27 on pages 6667.
Details of significant shareholdings are given on page 81.
An interim dividend of 3.85 pence per ordinary share was paid on 1 September 2004.
The directors recommend a final dividend of 6.15 pence per ordinary share giving a total of 10.0 pence per ordinary share for the year 2003 10.0 pence.
Subject to shareholders approval at the annual general meeting AGM to be held on 21 April 2005 the final dividend will be paid on 28 April 2005 to members on the register at the close of business on 11 March 2005.
03 EMPLOYEES The total number of employees at 31 December 2004 was Reuters 14465 Instinet Group 1010 31 December 2003 Reuters 15521 Instinet Group 1223.
Details of average number of employees by segment are given on page 49.
Reuters policy is that selection of employees including for recruitment training development and promotion should be determined solely on their skills abilities and other requirements which are relevant to the job and in accordance with the laws in the country concerned.
Reuters equal opportunities policy is designed to ensure that disabled people are given the same consideration as others and enjoy the same training development and prospects as other employees.
In the UK as well as being a member of the Employers Forum for Disability Reuters has made use of the services of both AbilityNet which supplies technology for disabled users and Employment Opportunities a UK charity helping people with disabilities find and retain work.
Reuters has successfully retained staff who have become disabled as well as integrated those who are disabled when they join the company.
This has been possible by using innovative technological solutions and redesign of the way that jobs are handled enabling individuals to contribute actively to business needs.
Reuters makes extensive use of its intranet as a communication tool to provide employees with the information they need to understand and achieve the companys business objectives.
Meetings are regularly held between management employees union representatives and less formal groups of employees so that the views of employees can be taken into account in making decisions which may affect their interests.
Reuters European Employee Forum operates as a panEuropean works council.
The CEO or other executive directors meet with the Forum regularly.
Reuters regularly undertakes employee surveys to evaluate morale and to identify any employee issues that need to be addressed.
The results are communicated to employees.
The Board values the courage and professionalism shown by employees operating in zones of conflict.
Reuters keeps under review the adequacy of its policies training and procedures for employees generally and for those working in dangerous places in particular.
Reuters has reaffirmed the standing instructions to its employees to avoid risks wherever possible and for hostile environment training protective equipment and post traumatic stress disorder training programmes to be provided to all employees who may need them.
04 CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS In 2004 Reuters continued to support community initiatives and charitable causes mainly through the work of the Reuters Foundation charitable trust.
A report on the activities of the Foundation and Reuters wider corporate social responsibility programme can be found in the Reuters Annual Review 2004 on pages 1619 or at www. bout. itecsr.
Reuters donated cash totalling 2.4 million during 2004 2003 2.5 million.
Reuters 2004 donations included a contribution of 500000 to assist tsunami relief efforts.
In addition to these cash contributions employees are encouraged to give their time and skills to a variety of causes and Reuters provides equipment and information services free of charge.
It is Reuters Groups policy not to make political contributions and none was made in 2004.
05 CREDITOR PAYMENT TERMS It is Reuters normal procedure to agree terms of transactions including payment terms with suppliers in advance.
Payment terms vary reflecting local practice throughout the world.
In the UK Reuters has signed up to the Better Payment Practice Code.
Reuters policy is to make payments on time provided suppliers perform in accordance with the agreed terms.
Group trade creditors at 31 December 2004 were equivalent to 19 days purchases during the year 2003 18 days.
06 AUTHORITY FOR COMPANY TO PURCHASE OWN SHARES At the AGM held on 22 April 2004 shareholders renewed the companys authority under section 166 of the Companies Act 1985 to make purchases of up to 143254000 ordinary shares at a price of not more than 5% above their average middle market quotation in the London Stock Exchange Daily Official List for the five business days prior to the date of purchase.
The company did not repurchase any of its own shares during 2004.
07 POST BALANCE SHEET EVENTS Details of post balance sheet events are given on page 70.
08 DIRECTORS The names and biographical details of current directors are given on pages 2728.
The following Board changes occurred during 2004 22 April 2004 Ken Olisa joined the Board as a nonexecutive director.
Sir John Craven stepped down from the Board and Dick Olver took on his role as senior independent nonexecutive director.
6 July 2004 Penny Hughes and Lawton Fitt were appointed as nonexecutive directors and Roberto Mendoza retired from the Board after six years of service.
1 October 2004 Niall FitzGerald succeeded Sir Christopher Hogg as Chairman of the Board.
16 December 2004 Ken Olisa was appointed to the Audit Committee and Ian Strachan joined the Remuneration Committee.
7 February 2005 Ian Strachan stood down from the Audit Committee.
Details of directors interests in the companys shares the remuneration of the nonexecutive directors and information on the service contracts and remuneration of the executive directors are set out on pages 3240.
A non executive director is not required to hold ordinary shares in order to qualify as a director.
09 AUDITORS The auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have indicated their willingness to continue in office and a resolution that they be reappointed will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting.
By order of the Board Rosemary Martin General Counsel and Company Secretary 7 March 2005 DIRECTORS AND SENIOR MANAGERS Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 27
Niall FitzGerald KBE Chairman Chairman of the Nominations Committee.
He is President of the Advertising Association a Member of the World Economic Forums Foundation Board CoChairman of The TransAtlantic Business Dialogue Chairman of The Conference Board Inc.
Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts Manufactures and Commerce and the Association of Corporate Treasurers and a nonexecutive director of the Nelson Mandela Legacy Trust UK.
Former chairman and chief executive officer of Unilever PLC 19962004.
Former nonexecutive director of Merck Ericsson Bank of Ireland and Prudential PLC.
Age 59.
Thomas Tom Glocer CEO.
Former CEO of Reuters Information  and president and senior company officer Reuters America 19982000.
Appointed
CEO Reuters Latin America in 1997 after serving in Reuters legal department from 1993.
Formerly practised law in New York Paris and Tokyo with Davis Polk and Wardwell.
Nonexecutive director of Instinet.
Member of the Corporate Council of the Whitney Museum The Madison Council of the Library of Congress the Leadership Champions Group Education of Business in the Community The Advisory Board of the Judge Institute of Cambridge University and of the International Advisory Panel of the Monetary Authority of Singapore.
Age 45.
David Grigson CFO.
Joined Reuters in August 2000 from Emap PLC where he was group finance director and chairman of Emap Digital.
He is a qualified chartered accountant and a member of the FSA Practitioners Panel.
Formerly held senior finance roles in the UK and US at Saatchi and Saatchi PLC 19841989.
Held a number of financial positions at Esso UK from 1980 to 1984.
Also a nonexecutive director of Instinet.
Age 50.
Devin Wenig Executive director and President of Business Divisions.
Former president Investment Banking and Brokerage Services 20012003.
Joined
Reuters in 1993 as corporate counsel Reuters America and held a number of senior management positions before being appointed President Investment Banking and Brokerage Services in January 2001.
Also a nonexecutive director of Instinet and Nastech Pharmaceutical Company.
Age 38.
Lawton Fitt Nonexecutive director member of the Audit Committee.
Secretary Chief Executive of the Royal Academy of Arts.
Nonexecutive director of CIENA Corporation and Citizen Communications.
Previously a partner and managing director in Goldman Sachs and Co.
Trustee of several notforprofit organisations including contemporary arts centres in New York and Berlin.
Age 51.
Penelope Penny Hughes Nonexecutive director member of the Remuneration
Director of The GAP Inc.
Vodafone PLC Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken Trinity Mirror PLC Molton Brown Limited and a Member of the Advisory Board of Bridgepoint Capital.
Former president Coca Cola Great Britain and Ireland.
Former director of Bodyshop International PLC 1994 2000 Enodis PLC 19962001 SC Johnson 20022004 and webangel 20002003.
Age 45.
Edward Ed Kozel Nonexecutive director member of the Remuneration
Managing Director of Integrated Finance Limited a financial advisory firm based in New York and director of Open Range Ventures LLC.
Also a director of Yahoo Symbol Technology and Red Hat Inc.
Formerly a nonexecutive director of Cisco Systems Inc.
20002001 where he worked from 19892000 in a number of roles including chief technology officer and senior vice president for business development.
Also a former nonexecutive of TSI 20002001 and Narus Inc.
19992003.
Prior to 1989 he worked with SRI International in California.
Age 49.
Kenneth Ken Olisa Nonexecutive director member of the Audit Committee.
Chairman and CEO since February 2000 of Interregnum plc which he founded in 1992.
Nonexecutive director of Adaptive Inc BioWisdom Open Text Corporation and Yospace Technologies Ltd.
Ken is a Liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Information Technologists a Freeman of the City of London Chairman of homelessness charity Thames Reach Bondway a Governor of the Peabody Trust.
Former Senior Vice President and General Manager of Wang Europe Africa and the Middle East 19811992 and his career began at IBM 19741981.
Metapraxis and former Postal Services Commissioner.
Age 53.
Richard Dick Olver Nonexecutive director Chairman of the Audit Committee member of the Nominations Committee and Senior Independent Director.
Chairman of BAe Systems PLC since July 2004.
He worked for BP PLC and was deputy group chief executive 20032004 and CEO of BP Exploration and Production Division 19982002.
A Member of the Institute of Civil Engineers.
A Governor of New Hall School.
Age 58.
Charles Sinclair Nonexecutive director Chairman of the Remuneration Committee and member of the Nominations Committee.
Group Chief Executive of Daily Mail and General Trust PLC since 1988.
Joined Associated Newspapers in 1975 and held a number of roles prior to its merger into the Daily Mail Group in 1988.
Nonexecutive director of Euromoney Institutional Investor SVG Capital PLC and Medialaser.
Former nonexecutive director of Schroders PLC 19992004.
Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants.
Age 56.
The directors and senior managers of Reuters Group at 7 March 2005 are Name Position Position held since
Niall FitzGerald KBE Chairman Director 2004 2003 Thomas Glocer CEO Director 2001 2000 David Grigson CFO Director 2000 Devin Wenig President of Business Divisions Director 2003 Lawton Fitt Director Penelope Hughes Director Edward Kozel Director Kenneth Olisa Director Richard Olver Director Charles Sinclair Director Ian Strachan Director Senior Managers Christopher Hagman Global Head of Channels 2003 Alexander Hungate Global Head of Marketing 2001 Geert Linnebank EditorinChief 2000 Rosemary Martin General Counsel and Company Secretary 2003 1999 Michael Sayers Global Head of Operations and Technology 2003 Susan TaylorMartin Global Head of Strategy 2004 Christian Verougstraete Global Head of Human Resources 2003 Simon Walker Global Head of Corporate Affairs 2003
1 Nonexecutive director 28 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Ian Strachan Nonexecutive director member of the Remuneration Committee.
Chairman of Instinet since 1 January 2003.
Nonexecutive director of Transocean Inc.
Johnson Matthey PLC Xstrata PLC and Rolls Royce Group
Former nonexecutive director of Harsco Corporation deputy chairman of Invensys PLC 19992000 and chief executive officer of BTR PLC 19961999.
Former deputy chief executive officer 19911995 and chief financial officer 19871991 of Rio Tinto PLC.
Also a former nonexecutive director of Commercial Union PLC 19911995.
Age 61.
Sir John Craven Roberto Mendoza and Sir Christopher Hogg retired from the Board on 22 April 2004 6 July 2004 and 30 September 2004 respectively.
Sir John Craven Nonexecutive chairman of Lonmin PLC since 1997.
Non executive chairman of Fleming Family and Partners.
Former member of the Board of Managing Directors of Deutsche Bank AG and former executive chairman of Morgan Grenfell Group PLC 19891997.
Former nonexecutive director of Gleacher and Co LLC 20002003 Rothmans International BV 1998 2000 Ducati SpA 19992000 and Socit Gnrale de Surveillance SA.
He is a Member of the Canadian and Ontario Institute of Chartered Accountants.
Age 64.
Roberto Mendoza Chairman of Egg PLC and nonexecutive director of Prudential PLC Vitro SA The BOC Group PLC and Integrated Finance Limited.
Former nonexecutive director of The BOC Group PLC 20022004 vice chairman and director of JP Morgan and Co Inc.
19902000 and managing director of Goldman Sachs and Co .
Joined JP Morgan in 1967 with successive assignments in London and New York.
Age 59.
Sir Christopher Hogg Chairman until 30 September 2004.
Nonexecutive director of Air Liquide SA.
Former nonexecutive chairman of GlaxoSmithKline PLC 20022004 nonexecutive director since 1993 and of the Royal National Theatre 19952004.
Former member of the International Council of JP Morgan 19882003.
Former chairman of Courtaulds PLC 19801996 chief executive 19791991 and of Allied Domecq PLC 19962002.
Former nonexecutive director of the Bank of England 19921996.
Age 68.
Senior managers Christopher Hagman Global Head of Channels.
Christopher joined Reuters in 1987 based in Sweden and has held various senior sales and general business management positions in Sweden Netherlands and the UK before being appointed to his current post in April 2001.
Age 46.
Alexander Hungate Global Head of Marketing.
In 1993 Alex joined Reuters in London as a business development executive.
From 1996 to 1998 he was executive vice president of Reuters Marketing before being appointed chief operating officer Reuters America in 1999 and chief executive officer Reuters America in 2000.
Alex is also a Trustee of the Reuters Foundation.
Before joining Reuters Alex worked at Booz Allen and Hamilton as a strategy consultant.
Nonexecutive director of British America Business Inc.
Age 38.
Geert Linnebank EditorinChief.
Geert became EditorinChief in 2000 having held various editorial roles.
Before he joined Reuters in 1983 he was a correspondent EC and Belgium for APDow Jones  Brussels.
Age 48.
Rosemary Martin General Counsel and Company Secretary.
Rosemary joined Reuters in 1997 as Deputy Company Secretary and became Company Secretary in 1999.
Appointed General Counsel in 2003.
Rosemary has been the director of Reuters Foundation since 2000.
Former partner at Mayer Brown Rowe and Maw for nine years.
Member of Financial Services Authority Listing Authority Advisory Committee and a member of the Financial Review Councils Turnbull Review Group.
Age 44.
Michael Sayers Global Head of Operations and Technology.
Michael joined Reuters in 1977 and has held a number of positions in both information technology and product management including Chief Technology Officer from 1998 until 2003.
In 2003 he was appointed Global Head of Operations and Technology.
He will be leaving the company during 2005.
Age 51.
Susan TaylorMartin Global Head of Strategy.
Susan joined Reuters in 1993 in business development.
She has held management positions in UK marketing global product management and corporate strategy.
Susan was appointed to her current role on 1 January 2004.
Before joining Reuters Susan worked in corporate finance for Smith Barney Harris Upham and Co.
Age 41.
Christian Chris Verougstraete Global Head of Human Resources.
Chris joined Reuters in 2003.
He has executive responsibility for human resources strategy and operations throughout Reuters.
Prior to joining Reuters Chris was executive vice president for Human Resources at S.
Interbrew.
Age 54.
Simon Walker Global Head of Corporate Affairs.
Simon joined Reuters in 2003.
Prior to joining Reuters Simon was Communications Secretary at Buckingham Palace and director of communications at British Airways PLC.
Age 51.
Graham Albutt Former president  Business Programmes.
Graham joined Reuters in London in 1987.
Held various posts in central and operational business functions.
Nonexecutive director of Datamonitor PLC.
Graham stepped down from the General Management Committee at the end of 2004 and left the company on 28 February 2005.
Age 51.
DIRECTORS AND SENIOR MANAGERS continued CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 01 STATEMENT ON CORPORATE GOVERNANCE COMPLIANCE Corporate governance  the system by which the company is directed and controlled  is an important subject for Reuters Group.
The strength of the companys corporate values its reputation and its ability to deliver its business objectives depends amongst other things on the effectiveness of its corporate governance system.
External influences on the Groups approach to corporate governance are the laws to which it is subject the rules which apply as a company listed on the London Stock Exchange and on NASDAQ in the US the regulations applied by financial services regulators around the world and the guidance given by investors and others interested in governance best practice.
Reuters monitors and responds to these particularly in the UK and USA which are where most of the companys shareholders are located continuously improving the companys internal governance systems as part of its business transformation.
Since 1 January 2004 the company has complied with the Combined Code on Corporate Governance published in July 2003 save that as described below in 2004 the company modified its approach to performance evaluation of the Board to take account of the fact that a new Chairman and three new nonexecutive Directors were appointed during the year code principle A6 and no individual member of the Audit Committee has been identified by the Board as having recent and relevant financial experiencecode principle C3.1.
However in common with all the nonexecutive directors the members of the Audit Committee are all experienced and influential individuals having the skills described in their biographies in Directors see pages 27 and 28 and the Board considers that collectively the members have the attributes required to discharge properly the Committees responsibilities.
The company also complies with all SEC and with the exception of two waivers and one notification described below NASDAQ governance requirements.
The company has received waivers from NASDAQ from two provisions of its governance rules in both cases on the basis that compliance with the rules would be contrary to standard UK business practice.
For approximately fifteen years the company has operated under a waiver of NASDAQs requirement that all shareholder meetings require a quorum of at least onethird of outstanding voting shares instead the companys Articles provide as is typical for English public companies that a quorum shall consist of any two shareholders.
The company has also received a waiver from NASDAQs provisions requiring shareholder approval of employee sharebased incentive schemes.
The company does seek and has received shareholder approval of its employee sharebased incentive schemes to the extent required by UK regulation including the UKLA Listing Rules.
In addition during 2004 the company notified NASDAQ that for a brief period from April to July 2004 it did not have three Audit Committee members as required by NASDAQ.
One of the Audit Committee seats became vacant when Sir John Craven retired at the AGM in April 2004.
The vacancy was filled when Lawton Fitt joined the Audit Committee in July 2004.
During the interval the Audit Committee which then comprised Dick Olver and Ian Strachan met once on routine matters.
02 REUTERS TRUST PRINCIPLES The companys internal system of governance begins with the Reuters Trust Principles see Information for shareholders  Memorandum and articles of association  the Reuters Trust principles and The Founders Share Company on pages 8283 which are designed to protect Reuters integrity and independence and represent the core values at the heart of Reuters business.
They are set out in the companys constitutional documents and in the Code of Conduct which applies to every Reuters employee.
The Trust Principles are a fundamental part of our brand.
The directors are required by the articles to have due regard to the Trust Principles insofar as they are capable of being observed in accordance with their other duties as directors.
Thus the Trust Principles are integral to the Boards approach to the Groups business.
03 THE BOARD Board composition and directors independence Niall FitzGerald chairs the companys Board.
He met the independence criteria set out in the Combined Code when he was appointed.
His significant commitments other than Reuters are being a member of the World Economic Forums Foundation Board Cochairman of the TransAtlantic Business Dialogue and Chairman of The Conference Board.
In addition on 22 November 2004 he was appointed Chairman of the Nelson Mandela Legacy Trust UK.
Reuters Groups CEO is Tom Glocer its CFO is David Grigson and its third executive director is Devin Wenig President of Business Divisions.
There are seven nonexecutive directors on the Board including Dick Olver who is the senior independent nonexecutive director.
He is available to shareholders if they have concerns.
No shareholder contacted him or his predecessor Sir John Craven during 2004.
The quality of the individual directors the balance of the Boards composition and the dynamics of the Board as a group ensure both the Boards effectiveness and the inability of an individual or small group to dominate the Boards decision making.
The Board has determined that each of the nonexecutive directors is independent in character and judgement by reason of his or her personal qualities and that each of the nonexecutive directors is independent as that term is defined in NASDAQ and SEC governance requirements.
Each executive director receives a service contract on appointment see the Remuneration Report for further information and each nonexecutive director receives a letter setting out the terms of the appointment and specifying that the appointment is for a term of six years subject to review after three years.
Dick Olver and Charles Sinclair have continued to hold office beyond the initial six year term by agreement with the Board.
Copies of the service contracts and nonexecutive directors letters of appointment are available to shareholders from the Company Secretary on request.
The articles of association provide that at each AGM any director appointed since the last annual general meeting shall stand for election by the shareholders and one third of the directors shall retire from office by rotation and be eligible for reelection by the shareholders.
To recognise that some shareholders prefer all the directors to stand for reelection each year at the 2005 annual general meeting each of the directors will retire from office and offer himself or herself for reelection.
Role of the Board and its committees The Board is responsible for the success of the company within a framework of controls which enables risk to be assessed and managed.
Its aim is for the group to achieve profitable growth within an acceptable risk profile.
It seeks to achieve this by agreeing the strategic framework and keeping it under vigorous review monitoring the implementation of strategy through the operational plans focusing on longterm sustainable value creation safeguarding the longerterm values of the company including its brand and corporate reputation overseeing the quality of management and how it is maintained at world class levels maintaining a governance framework that facilitates substance and not merely form.
A schedule of matters reserved for the Boards decision identifies those matters that the Board does not delegate.
It includes the approval of corporate objectives strategy and the budget significant transactions and matters relating to share capital.
The Board is assisted by its committees.
Through the Audit Committee it satisfies itself on the integrity of financial information and that the financial operational and compliance controls and systems of risk management are robust.
Through its Remuneration Committee the Board determines appropriate levels of remuneration of executive directors and other senior managers.
The Nominations Committee is the forum through which the Board discharges its role in nominating new directors and succession planning.
These committees are described in more detail on the following page.
30 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 There is a clear division of responsibilities between the running of the Board which is the Chairmans responsibility and the running of the Reuters Groups business which is the CEOs responsibility with the Board having oversight.
The division of responsibilities is set out in a document approved by the Board.
Directors induction training and information On becoming Chairman Niall FitzGerald began a comprehensive induction into Reuters Group building on the knowledge he had previously acquired in his capacity as a nonexecutive director.
Since becoming Chairman he has met with employees customers shareholders and associates of Reuters Group and he has received briefings from the management team on their respective areas of responsibility.
Ken Olisa Lawton Fitt and Penny Hughes are also receiving information and briefings as part of their induction into Reuters.
They have each received a Directors Manual which provides them with information about Reuters and the operation of the Board and its committees.
In addition a series of briefings and site visits is being undertaken to gain insights into the group and to enable the directors to see business operations first hand.
All directors are supplied with Reuters products.
Ongoing training for directors is available as appropriate.
The companys legal advisers and auditors provide briefings to the directors from time to time.
In
2004 briefing topics included the new ethics and compliance guidelines for companies in the US SarbanesOxley Act 2002 which affects the company because its securities are registered with the SEC and the new International Financial Reporting Standards.
In addition guest speakers are occasionally invited to join Board dinners to discuss topics of interest with the directors and opportunities are provided for nonexecutive directors to meet with shareholders customers and others involved in Reuters business.
Monthly financial information is provided to the directors.
Regular and ad hoc reports and presentations are prepared and circulated to the directors in advance of Board meetings together with minutes and papers relating to the Boards committees to ensure the directors are supplied in a timely fashion with the information they need.
They also have access to the Company Secretary who is responsible for advising the Board through the Chairman on all governance matters.
The Company Secretary is appointed by and can only be removed by the Board.
The directors may take independent professional advice at the companys expense although no such advice was sought during 2004.
Frequency of meetings The Board met six times in 2004 and in addition held a strategy review meeting in June.
The directors attended all the Board meetings in 2004 save that by prior arrangement Niall FitzGerald was absent from the February meeting and Roberto Mendoza Charles Sinclair and Ed Kozel were each absent from one meeting.
Board effectiveness Usually each year the Chairman meets at least once with the nonexecutive directors without the executive directors present.
No such meeting was held in 2004 because of the change in the chairmanship of the Board but such meetings are being held in 2005.
Also usually the senior independent nonexecutive director conducts a chairmanship review meeting at which the Chairmans remuneration and performance are reviewed.
However no such meeting was held in 2004 since it was not considered that it would serve any useful purpose in view of Sir Christopher Hoggs retirement as Chairman in October and replacement by Niall FitzGerald.
The review will be reintroduced for 2005.
Each year the Chairman and the nonexecutive directors review the CEOs performance and the CEO reviews the performance of the other executive directors as part of the companywide employee performance review process.
In view of the Board alterations in 2004 namely the change in Chairman the retirement of three nonexecutive directors and the appointment of three new nonexecutive directors rather than having a retrospective effectiveness review for 2004 the Board concentrated on considering and determining how it should function going forward.
It plans an indepth review of its effectiveness during 2005 using an external professional facilitator.
The facilitated review in 2005 will also cover the effectiveness of the Boards committees.
The Audit Committee did not conduct an effectiveness review for 2004 since it will be covered by the indepth review being undertaken in 2005.
However the Remuneration Committee did undertake an evaluation of its performance during 2004.
A questionnaire was circulated to the Committee members and the collated responses were discussed by the Committee and reported to the Board.
Account will be taken of the results in the way the Committee is managed henceforth.
Board Committees The Board delegates specific responsibilities to certain committees.
Each Committee has its own terms of reference set by the Board.
These are available on request from the Company Secretary or at www. bout. itecsrcorporategovernance.
The Audit Committee The Audit Committee reviews and as appropriate actively engages in the processes for financial reporting internal control risk assessment audit and compliance assurance the independence of the companys internal and external auditors and the effectiveness of the companys system of accounting its internal financial controls and the internal and external audit functions.
Members of the committee during 2004 were Dick Olver Chairman Lawton Fitt and Ken Olisa since their appointments to the committee on 6 July 2004 and 16 December 2004 respectively and Sir John Craven and Ian Strachan until their retirements from the committee on 21 April 2004 and 8 February 2005 respectively.
Each member of the committee is considered by the Board to be independent including under the SEC and NASDAQ definitions.
The Audit Committee does not include a member who is a financial expert as defined in the SarbanesOxley Act of 2002 and related SEC rules because the Board considers that none of the members clearly meets all the criteria set out in the relevant definitions nor has the Board identified a member of the committee as having recent and relevant financial experience.
However the Board considers that collectively the members have the requisite skills and attributes to enable the committee properly to discharge its responsibilities.
The Company Secretary is secretary to the committee.
The Audit Committees remit which is set out in its terms of reference includes responsibility for the oversight responsibilities described in the above paragraphs and for reviewing compliance with laws regulations the companys code of conduct and policies approving related party transactions to the extent required under NASDAQ rules monitoring the integrity of the companys financial statements and any announcements relating to the companys financial performance and reviewing significant financial reporting judgements contained in them monitoring and reviewing the effectiveness of the companys internal audit function making recommendations to the Board for it to put to the shareholders for their approval regarding the appointment reappointment and removal of the external auditor and approving the remuneration and terms of engagement of the external auditor reviewing and monitoring the external auditors independence and the effectiveness of the audit process and developing and implementing policy on the engagement of the external auditor to supply nonaudit services and overseeing the receipt review and treatment of complaints received regarding accounting internal accounting controls auditing and compliance matters whether through the companys whistleblower confidential helpline or otherwise.
The committee met four times in 2004 with the CEO the CFO other officers and the auditors attending as required.
The auditors have unrestricted access to the Audit Committee and in accordance with usual practice met twice during the year privately with the committee as did the Head of Audit.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE continued Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 The Chairman of the Audit Committee meets with the Head of Audit and with the external auditors before each Audit Committee meeting.
All members of the Audit Committee attended every committee meeting during the year.
The committee reports its activities and makes recommendations to the Board.
During 2004 the committee discharged the responsibilities described above.
Its activities included formally reviewing the draft annual report and interim statement respectively and associated announcements focusing on the main areas of judgement and critical accounting policies reviewing the findings of the external auditors and the report of the Head of Audit on internal audit activities reviewing the effectiveness of internal control systems the risk management process and the compliance programme including the whistleblower programme paying particular attention to the work being undertaken in connection with section 404 of the SarbanesOxley Act receiving the report of the CEO and the CFO on the processes followed prior to certification being given by them in accordance with SarbanesOxley Act reviewing the external audit strategy and the external auditors report to the committee in respect of the annual report and interim statement keeping under review the proportion of nonaudit fees to audit fees paid to the auditors and giving preapproval to nonaudit work undertaken by the auditors reviewing the effectiveness of the auditors and undertaking a competitive audit tender process which resulted in a recommendation being made to the Board to propose to shareholders that PricewaterhouseCoopers be retained as the companys auditors and reviewing a report on the companys corporate social responsibility activities.
The committee adopted a code of conduct for the companys CEO and senior financial officers in 2003 in addition to the companys general code of conduct.
No amendments to or waivers in respect of either code were made during 2004.
A copy of the codes is available on request from the Company Secretary and can be viewed at www. bout.
The committee monitors adherence to the companys Auditor Independence policy which it prohibits Group entities from engaging the auditors in activities prohibited by the SEC.
The policy permits the auditors to be engaged for other services provided the engagement is specifically approved in advance by the committee or meets the detailed criteria of specific preapproved activities and is notified to the committee.
However any services where the expected level of fees is greater than 150000 or the expected term is longer than one year must be approved in advance by the committee.
The exception to this is Instinet Group which uses the same auditors as Reuters and as a US publicly traded company is separately subject to the auditor independence requirements and has an audit committee which oversees the use by Instinet of the independent auditors under its own policy.
For details regarding fees paid to the Groups auditors see note 2 on the consolidated profit and loss account on page 47.
The committee may engage at the companys expense independent counsel and other advisers as it deems necessary to carry out its duties.
None was engaged during the year.
The Remuneration Committee has oversight of executive remuneration policy.
Information concerning the Remuneration Committee is set out in the Remuneration Report on page 32.
The Nominations Committee makes recommendations to the Board about future appointments of nonexecutive directors the Chairman and the CEO and considers recommendations from the CEO to the Board about the future appointment of executive directors.
The committee gives due consideration to the Combined Codes provisions relating to directors when making appointments to the Board.
The terms of reference for the committee are available from the Company Secretary on request and can be viewed at www. bout.
In 2004 the composition of the committee was Sir Christopher Hogg until his retirement in October Dick Olver Niall FitzGerald and Charles Sinclair since his appointment to the committee in September 2004.
The committee is chaired by Niall FitzGerald.
The Board has determined that these directors are independent according to the NASDAQ and SEC definitions.
The terms of reference require the committee to meet at least twice a year and it did so in 2004.
A director may not attend or be involved in any decision concerning him or his successor.
The committee has appointed an external adviser to assist it in its work in identifying potential candidates for nonexecutive directorships.
During 2004 the Nominations Committee recommended to the Board the appointments of Penny Hughes Lawton Fitt and Ken Olisa.
It also recommended the changes that were made to the Boards committees membership during 2004 and the appointment of Dick Olver as senior independent nonexecutive director on Sir John Cravens retirement from the Board.
04 EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES The Group Management Committee GMC which is chaired by the CEO implements strategy and manages the Group.
It comprises the three executive directors and the senior managers listed on page 27.
It met twentytwo times in 2004.
A Disclosure Committee chaired by the CEO was set up in 2002.
Its members comprise the CEO the CFO the Global Head of Corporate Affairs the General Counsel and Company Secretary the Head of Audit the Head of Global Finance the Head of External Reporting the Area General Counsel for the Americas and the Head of Investor Relations.
The Committee meets formally five times a year to review the Groups trading statements and financial results and to consider the adequacy of the Groups disclosure controls and procedures.
A subcommittee meets on an ad hoc basis to address disclosure matters arising between reporting periods.
05 RELATIONS WITH SHAREHOLDERS The executive directors meet regularly with institutional shareholders and analysts.
Nonexecutive directors are offered the opportunity to attend meetings with major shareholders and from time to time some attend the presentations of the annual results to analysts.
When Niall FitzGerald became chairman he met with investors who expressed general satisfaction with the direction performance and governance of the business.
An investor relations department is dedicated to facilitating communications between the company and its shareholders.
It provides a regular report on investor relations as part of the routine Board report materials.
In 2004 the companys brokers carried out a survey of investors views and the results of this survey were communicated to the Board.
The companys AGM is used as an opportunity to communicate with private investors.
The chairmen of each of the Board committees are available to answer questions at the AGM and all directors are expected to attend the
At the AGM the level of proxies lodged on each resolution and the balance for and against the resolution and the number of votes withheld are announced after the resolution has been voted on.
At the 2005 AGM we will be introducing voting by proxy to replace voting by a show of hands as we consider proxy voting gives a better representation of shareholders views.
The results of voting at the AGM in 2005 will be available at www. bout.
06 DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES INTERNAL CONTROLS AND FINANCIAL REPORTING The directors responsibilities and information on internal controls and financial reporting can be found on page 41.
32 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 This report sets out the Reuters Group executive remuneration policy structure and details of the remuneration received by directors and senior managers in respect of the year ended 31 December 2004.
Shareholders will be invited to approve this report at the AGM on 21 April 2005.
01 CONSIDERATION OF REMUNERATION MATTERS The Board has overall responsibility for determining the framework of executive remuneration and its cost and is required to take account of any recommendations made by the Remuneration Committee.
Through formal terms of reference the Board has delegated to the Remuneration Committee oversight of the specific remuneration packages for the executive directors and consideration of executive remuneration issues generally including the use of equity incentive plans in particular.
The Remuneration Committee consists solely of nonexecutive directors.
All members of the Remuneration Committee have been determined by the Board to be independent as defined by NASDAQ.
Its current members are Charles Sinclair Chairman Ed Kozel Penny Hughes from 6 July 2004 and Ian Strachan from 16 December 2004.
Roberto Mendoza ceased to be a member of the Remuneration Committee on 6 July 2004.
The Company Secretary is secretary to the Remuneration Committee.
The Remuneration Committee met four times in 2004.
All members were present at each meeting.
The CEO and the Chairman normally attend meetings of the Remuneration
Neither is present at any discussion concerning his own remuneration.
During 2004 the Remuneration Committee was advised internally by the Global Head of Human Resources and the Global Head of Performance and Reward.
The terms of reference permit the Remuneration Committee to obtain its own external advice on any matter at the companys expense.
These executives take external advice and information from many sources in preparing proposals for the Remuneration Committee and received information from Towers Perrin Mercer HR Consulting Watson Wyatt and Kepler Associates in relation to remuneration decisions made during 2004.
In addition to ensure compliance with relevant laws and regulations executives were provided with advice from Deloitte and Touche LLP Linklaters and Shearman and Sterling LLP in respect of the two new share plans introduced in 2004 the Annual Bonus Profit Sharing Plan and the Restricted Share Plan.
02 DIRECTORS The Remuneration Committee aims to ensure that remuneration and incentive arrangements are marketcompetitive consistent with best practice and support the interests of shareholders.
In practical terms this means that the reward structure for directors should attract motivate and retain highcalibre individuals capable of successful leadership.
To achieve this in a global business environment Reuters executive remuneration must reflect the competitive practices of its principal competitors and the other multinational businesses with which it competes for talent.
The Remuneration Committee believes that marketdetermined executive compensation with a heavy emphasis on the variable remuneration elements is the best way to ensure that Reuters has the high performing executives necessary to achieve its immediate and longerterm strategic objectives.
The Remuneration Committee has established a structure that ensures that the quantum of remuneration received by executives is commensurate with returns to shareholders.
Total executive remuneration is calibrated to deliver midmarket rewards at formally targeted levels of personal and corporate performance.
Variable reward components provide an opportunity for much higher levels of remuneration where this is supported by abovetarget performance whether on an individual level or in relation to shortterm and longerterm business priorities.
The annual cash bonus plan supports operational objectives over the financial year while the longterm incentive plan will reward superior performance relative to competitors over the medium term and share options complement growth objectives.
Reuters continues to ensure that an increasing proportion of executive reward is variable and wholly dependent upon performance.
As such the structure of the individual packages currently in place includes a significant proportion of variable reward that is performance related with basic pay representing well under a third of the target earnings potential.
In 2004 excluding pension entitlements the targeted composition of each executive directors remuneration was as follows Fixed Variable
Base pay Bonus incentives Total % % % % Tom Glocer 17% 26% 57% 100% David Grigson 29% 29% 42% 100% Devin Wenig 29% 29% 42% 100% Executive directors are required to build and maintain a personal equity stake in the company.
The personal shareholding policy requires each executive director to accumulate a personal holding worth twice his basic salary within five years.
03 NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Details of nonexecutive director appointments are contained on page 26.
Nonexecutive directors have letters of engagement rather than service contracts and are not eligible to participate in executive share plans.
Charles Sinclair was invited to join the Board in October 1993 Dick Olver in September 1997 Ed Kozel in February 2000 Ian Strachan in April 2000 Niall FitzGerald in January 2003 Ken Olisa in April 2004 and Penny Hughes and Lawton Fitt in July 2004.
Sir John Craven who had been a nonexecutive director since February 1997 resigned from the Board on 22 April 2004 and Roberto Mendoza who had been a nonexecutive director since February 1998 resigned on 6 July 2004.
No letter of engagement contains any provision for compensation in the event of termination outside of the periods referred to above.
The Chairmans remuneration is determined by the Board who in reaching future decisions on appropriate fee levels will continue to have regard to the remuneration arrangements of chairmen of other UK listed companies of a similar size and complexity.
Sir Christopher Hogg was Chairman from 1985 until 30 September 2004 when he also retired from the Board.
His annual fee was 290000.
In addition he received a pension entitlement as detailed on page 37.
On 1 October 2004 Niall FitzGerald succeeded Sir Christopher Hogg as Chairman.
Niall FitzGerald receives an annual fee of 500000.
This fee is fixed until 1 October 2007.
The company does not provide a pension contribution to Niall FitzGerald.
Our shareholders determine the remuneration paid to the nonexecutive directors.
From 1 January 2004 this is set at 50000.
The Board determines the fees payable to each nonexecutive director who chairs a Board committee.
For 2004 these were 15000 per annum 10000 per annum and 5000 per annum for chairing the Audit Remuneration and Nominations Committees respectively.
Until his retirement on 30 September 2004 Sir Christopher Hogg was Chairman of the Nominations Committee he waived receipt of any fees.
Niall FitzGerald succeeded Sir Christopher Hogg and he has also waived receipt of any committee chairmanship fees.
Dick Olver who replaced Sir John Craven as senior independent nonexecutive director receives an additional 5000 per annum for this role.
From 2004 nonexecutive directors who are resident outside of Europe are eligible to receive a travel allowance of 5000 for each Board meeting attended in the UK.
04 REMUNERATION STRUCTURE It is Reuters general policy to construct executive remuneration packages as described below.
However in order to safeguard Reuters ability to recruit and retain the best senior executives the Remuneration Committee believes it needs to maintain the freedom to negotiate terms of employment on an individual basis taking account of the circumstances of each case.
Where it is necessary special arrangements will also be made to accommodate the needs of for example international executives who are required to relocate.
Basic salary and benefits In formulating and reviewing pay packages for the executive directors the Remuneration Committee receives comparator group information and assistance from independent remuneration consultants.
In 2004 the Remuneration Committee reviewed the comparator group and reaffirmed its relevance.
Reuters policy is to maintain a salary structure with salary ranges based upon the midmarket of this comparator group of companies.
Individual
In recognition of a reliance on the intellectual capital of its people where appropriate actual salaries are centred around the upper quartile position.
REMUNERATION REPORT
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 The Remuneration Committee takes account of the salary levels of other executives and senior managers.
The executive directors indicated that they did not wish to receive a salary increase in 2004 and this was affirmed by the Remuneration Committee.
Noncash benefits are provided to executive directors and the Chairman in line with normal market practice and detailed on pages 3637.
All executive directors receive a company car or an allowance and private healthcare benefits.
Death and disability benefits are also provided to each executive director.
Niall FitzGerald does not receive any death and disability or other benefits.
Under the terms of Tom Glocers relocation agreement Reuters Group provides accommodation in the UK and pays home leave expenses for him and his family.
Pensions
All executive directors participate in defined contribution arrangements.
Since April 1999 it has been Reuters policy that all new UK employees including executive directors are offered participation in a defined contribution pension plan.
In the case of UK executive directors in lieu of pension provisions above the statutory earnings cap where applicable an additional taxable allowance is granted.
The Remuneration Committee may substitute certain benefits following changes to UK pensions legislation.
However there is no intention to provide any additional compensation as a consequence of such changes.
In the US all employees are offered participation in a defined contribution 401K plan.
In lieu of a contribution on salary above the tax qualified limit an additional contribution is granted to a Supplemental Employee Executive Retirement Plan SERP.
The SERP is unfunded.
Annual performancerelated bonus Contractual bonus arrangements are negotiated individually.
The
Remuneration Committee determines performance targets annually.
Bonus payments are nonpensionable.
In 2004 the executive directors were eligible for an annual cash bonus with a maximum level of 100% of base salary for all but Tom Glocer whose maximum level was 150% of salary.
Bonus targets were set on a sliding scale and included a mix of financial and strategic measures 60% of the bonus potential was based on performance against financial measures 30% of which was dependent on our budgeted operating profit before restructuring amortisation of goodwill and other intangibles and impairments  Target Operating Profit 15% on our budgeted revenue and 15% on a free cash flow target.
The remainder of the bonus potential was divided equally between a target to improve the customer satisfaction survey result and the achievement of the Fast Forward programme transformational targets.
In addition stretch targets were established on the revenue measure and customer satisfaction result where for significant outperformance there was the potential for an additional 17.5% of bonus target.
In February 2005 the Remuneration Committee considered 2004 performance relative to the specified targets and determined that the executive directors had earned bonuses of 99.4% of bonus potential.
Given that 2005 is the final year of the Fast Forward programme the Remuneration Committee has increased the focus on achieving the financial results associated with the Fast Forward programme.
In 2005 the Remuneration Committee will increase the emphasis on financial performance with 80% of the maximum bonus potential being measured against Target Operating Profit budgeted revenue and free cash flow targets with the remainder on customer satisfaction results.
There is the potential to earn additional bonus payments based on significant outperformance against Target Operating Profit and customer satisfaction targets.
The Remuneration Committee retained the profit threshold based on Target Operating Profit below which no bonuses will be paid.
The Remuneration Committee reviewed the shareholding requirements for the executive directors.
Taking this into account together with the changes in the tax treatment of deferred compensation in the US the Remuneration Committee decided that no sharebased deferral will apply to bonus payments.
However Tom Glocer has committed to increase his investment in Reuters shares by an amount at least equivalent in value to the posttax component that would otherwise have been deferred.
Equity incentive plans The executive directors also participate in a discretionary stock option plan DSOP and a longterm incentive plan LTIP designed to reward longerterm performance.
Details of all share incentive awards outstanding for each executive director serving during 2004 are set out on pages 38 and 39.
All executive directors future entitlements are subject to the performance conditions applicable to the relevant plan.
The Remuneration Committee has initiated a review of remuneration arrangements including the structure of equity plans to ensure that these are aligned with the achievement of the objectives to be established in Reuters growth strategy post the Fast Forward programme.
Until completion of this review other than as described below Reuters has no present intention of making any significant change to the executive directors existing entitlements under these plans.
In 2004 the Remuneration Committee introduced an Annual Bonus Profit Sharing Plan and a Restricted Share Plan as discussed below.
LTIP since 1993 Reuters has operated a longterm incentive plan which seeks to encourage and reward longterm growth in shareholder value.
It is Reuters practice to make an annual award of contingent share rights to executive directors and to those senior managers most able to influence corporate performance.
From 2003 awards have been based on the fair market value per share using option pricing methodology.
The fair market value ascribed to each share for LTIP purposes is presently 43.8% of current market value.
The Remuneration Committee considers that relative total shareholder return TSR remains the most appropriate measurement criterion for the LTIP.
Whilst endorsing relative TSR as a measure the Remuneration Committee recognises that we do not fall naturally into any one of the existing FTSE industrial sectors.
Accordingly following a review of the comparator group the Remuneration Committee believes that the FTSE 100 generally rather than one individual sector or a bespoke peer group e. most appropriate peer group for comparison purposes.
Under the terms of his service contract annual equity awards to Tom Glocer will be based on a fair market value calibrated by reference to the average of the midmarket position of a comparator group of FTSE 100 companies with significant international operations excluding the top and bottom five companies measured by market capitalisation and the midmarket position of a US comparator group comprising media companies.
For both comparator groups the data has been provided by Towers Perrin.
LTIP awards will form part of the total equity grant.
Details of the grants for 2004 are set out in the table on page 38.
For 2005 it is anticipated that the fair market value of Tom Glocers LTIP award will be approximately 100% of basic salary.
David Grigson and Devin Wenig will receive awards of equivalent value due to exchange rate fluctuations this represents a fair market value of around 67% and 85% of basic salary for David Grigson and Devin Wenig respectively.
To be consistent with the objectives of the plan and to ensure growth is measured relative to other major UK companies performance is measured over a threeyear period by comparing Reuters TSR with that of other companies comprising the FTSE 100 at the beginning of the period.
The companies are ranked according to their TSR for the measurement period with the company having the highest TSR ranked first.
As a matter of good practice the measurements are verified independently before being presented to the Remuneration Committee for approval.
For 2004 awards Reuters position on the list determines the extent to which plan awards will vest.
Reuters must achieve median TSR performance for a proportion of the award to vest full vesting only occurs for top quartile performance.
At the 2004 AGM and from 2004 the shareholders approved the removal of the retesting provision and accordingly the plan will not permit any extension of the measurement period if the awards do not or only partially vest.
Awards that do not meet at least the median performance condition on completion of the performance period will lapse.
Future awards shall continue to vest in full for top quartile performance with onethird of the initial award vesting for median performance with proportionate vesting for incremental performance between these points.
For awards made prior to 2003 that do not vest or only partially vest after three years the plan permits the measurement period to be extended by up to two years under a retesting provision.
Awards granted in 2000 did not meet the performance condition required for vesting and accordingly these awards lapsed.
34 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 The preset vesting criteria for awards which vested during 2004 or which have not yet vested are shown in the table below together with the actual ranking at 31 December 2004 or on vesting if earlier.
Awards granted prior to 2004 that vest under the plan are not released until at least five years from the date of grant.
Preset vesting criteria Date measurement Rankings for Rankings for Ranking at period commenced 100% vesting zero vesting 31 December 2004 1 January 2000 1 to 26 66 to 100 85 1 January 2001 1 to 25 51 to 100 85 1 January 2002 1 to 25 51 to 100 94 1 January 2003 1 to 25 51 to 100 70 1 January 2004 1 to 25 51 to 100 1 In order to smooth the opening and closing points of measurement the average of the daily closing prices for the immediately preceding twelve months is used as the initial and final share prices when calculating the TSR.
Shares awarded under the plan will continue to be met from existing shares held by Reuters employee share ownership trusts ESOTs.
The costs are charged to the profit and loss account over the vesting periods.
DSOP a global discretionary stock option plan was adopted by the Remuneration Committee in October 2000 and approved by shareholders in April 2001.
It aims to reward growth in earnings and in the share price.
Therefore the options granted to executive directors can only vest if the percentage growth in our basic earnings per share EPS exceeds the percentage growth in the retail price index by more than 9% over the three year performance period.
For awards made prior to 2004 if the target is not met the performance period may be extended by up to two years with an increase of 3% in the hurdle rate of EPS growth for each year added to the performance period.
If the target rate is not met by the end of the fifth year the options will lapse.
These performance conditions were established in 2001 to retain management focus on earnings in a particularly challenging market.
The Remuneration Committee believes that it is appropriate to retain these performance conditions for executive directors until the completion of the remuneration review referred to above.
The review will determine whether it is appropriate to continue to operate the DSOP and if so to determine whether an EPS performance condition is appropriate.
The review will also consider whether it is more appropriate to use alternative equity related arrangements for the executive directors as Reuters looks beyond the Fast Forward programme.
From 2004 the retesting provisions have been removed and accordingly new awards will not permit any extension of the measurement period.
If the awards do not meet the EPS performance condition upon completion of the initial performance period they will lapse.
The performance conditions have been measured for the 2001 and 2002 grants the first grants to executive directors with these performance conditions.
The performance conditions were not met for either grant.
The executive directors are contractually entitled to participate in the DSOP.
Under the terms of his service contract annual equity awards to Tom Glocer are based on a fair market value using the option pricing methodology which currently ascribes to each share a value of 25.4% of the market price. awards are detailed in the table set out on page 39.
For 2005 it is anticipated that the fair market value of Tom Glocers DSOP award will be approximately 200% of basic salary.
David Grigson and Devin Wenig will receive awards of equivalent value.
As the awards are calculated in sterling and Devin Wenigs salary is denominated in US dollars the proportion of his salary actually awarded is impacted by the exchange rate.
At present these awards represent a fair market value of approximately 133% and 170% of basic salary for David Grigson and Devin Wenig respectively.
It is the Remuneration Committees practice to divide participants annual entitlements into two awards normally made following the announcement of preliminary annual and halfyearly results.
With effect from 2004 to reduce the dilutive impact DSOPs have on shareholders interests the number of participants was reduced significantly.
Any participation will normally be confined to executive directors and members of the GMC.
Other employees may be eligible to participate in the Restricted Share Plan see following.
SAYE Plan an allemployee international savings related share option plan is offered in which the executive directors are eligible to participate.
Participants save a fixed monthly amount of up to 250 subject to a maximum established annually for each offer for three years and are then able to use their savings to buy shares at a price set at a 20% discount to the market value at the start of the savings period.
In line with market practice no performance conditions are attached to options granted under this plan.
For the 2004 offer the fixed monthly savings amount was established at a maximum of 100 per month with a three year savings period.
Legacy plans the following four plans are legacy plans under which Tom Glocer and Devin Wenig received awards prior to becoming executive directors.
It is not intended that executive directors should receive any further awards under these plans.
Performance related share plan PRSP this plan operated from 1995 to 2001 and targeted senior executives not participating in the LTIP.
Tom Glocer and Devin Wenig hold awards granted before they became executive directors.
The performance condition is the same as for the LTIP although vested shares can be released three years after grant.
Deferred bonus share plan DBSP restricted share awards were made in 2000 as a special retention bonus to a total of around 100 senior managers excluding the executive directors in office at that time.
As a retention tool and in line with the then market practice they were made conditional only on remaining in employment until the shares vested.
These awards vested in February 2002 and February 2003.
Tom Glocer has previously deferred the vesting of his shares under the plans these are due to vest in April 2005.
The shares awarded under the plan are satisfied by existing shares from ESOTs.
Executive stock option plan ESOP Tom Glocer participated in an executive stock option plan operated in 1993 and 1994 prior to being appointed to the
Options under the plan carry no performance conditions and vested automatically on the third anniversary of grant.
Plan 2000 a oneoff allemployee option grant was made in 1998 in order to support the retention of employees over the millennium period.
In common with such allemployee plans there is no performance condition to be satisfied.
All employees including the executive directors were given the opportunity to apply for an option to acquire 2000 shares at an exercise price of 5.50 per share.
These options became exercisable in September 2001 and will normally expire in September 2005.
A small supplementary grant was made to new employees in March 1999 at an option price of 8.14 and these will normally expire in March 2006.
We may issue new shares to satisfy options granted under this plan.
Annual Bonus Profit Sharing Plan on 18 December 2003 Reuters announced its intention to introduce a new profitsharing plan across the allemployee population.
This plan was introduced to focus employees on reward for profit growth.
Executive directors and members of the GMC did not participate in this plan in 2004.
For 2005 participation in this plan will exclude other senior executives.
For 2004 performance awards will be made equivalent to 2% of the basic salary.
Payments under the plan will typically be made in the form of shares which will normally be subject to a 12 month vesting period.
Restricted Share Plan RSP on 17 April 2004 at the AGM the shareholders approved the introduction in 2004 of the RSP.
Currently restricted shares will not normally be granted for longterm incentive purposes to executive directors or members of the GMC.
It is intended that other than for executive directors and GMC members employees will be eligible to participate in this plan instead of the DSOP.
This plan enables Reuters to provide market competitive remuneration whilst reducing the dilution impact to shareholders.
Other than in 2004 the year of introduction employees would generally not be eligible to participate in the DSOP and the RSP in the same year.
Following the introduction of the Annual Bonus Profit Sharing Plan for 2005 the number of participants in the RSP will be significantly lower than in 2004.
This will reduce the dilutive impact of the RSP.
REMUNERATION REPORT
05 PERFORMANCE GRAPH Reuters TSR for the five years to 31 December 2004 compared with the return achieved by the FTSE 100 index of companies is shown below.
This index is used as the comparator group for the performance conditions attached to the LTIP and PRSP referred to above.
The calculations assume the reinvestment of dividends.
Performance in respect of individual awards is shown on page 34.
06 SUBSIDIARY UNDERTAKING SHARE PLANS A few subsidiary undertakings operate share plans over new or existing shares for their directors and employees.
Of these only the stock option plans operated by the Instinet Group are significant for the Group.
The Instinet 2000 Stock Option Plan permits the grant of options up to a maximum of 44.1 million shares of the common stock outstanding.
Options may be granted to directors and employees of Instinet Group at an exercise price of not less than fair market value at the date of grant.
Options normally vest in instalments over a three or fouryear period and may not exceed a term of ten years.
Approximately 885 employees and directors of Instinet Group participate in the plan.
At 31 December 2004 options were outstanding over approximately 25.8 million Instinet Group shares equivalent to 7.7% of Instinet Groups outstanding common stock.
These options have exercise prices ranging from US3.25 to US18.70 per share with a term of seven years from grant.
As a result of the acquisition by the Instinet Group of Island in 2002 a further 416406 shares under option were outstanding under the Island stock option plan and are now exercisable into Instinet Group common stock as at 31 December 2004.
Exercise prices range from US0.91 to US9.23 on an adjusted basis with a term of ten years from grant.
In 2004 Instinet obtained shareholder approval for a new Performance Share Plan whereupon shares may vest to participants if Instinet achieves certain specified performance objectives over a three year period.
For 2004 grants the performance condition related to the achievement of a target return on equity.
07 SERVICE CONTRACTS It is Reuters policy that new executive directors be offered notice periods of not more than one year.
Reuters recognises however that in the case of appointments from outside the company a longer notice period may initially be necessary reducing to one year subsequently.
The Remuneration Committee ensures that appropriate provisions are in place in the event of the termination of any directors service contract.
Tom Glocer has a service contract with an effective date of 23 July 2001 normally terminable by him on 90 days notice or where due to our fault on 30 days notice.
We may terminate without cause on 30 days notice.
In the event of termination by Tom Glocer due to our fault or by us without cause Tom Glocers compensation will be limited to a maximum of 12 months accrued benefits being annual salary annual bonus and pension contributions.
However in the event of a change in control of the company Tom Glocer would have been entitled to a maximum amount of compensation based on 20 months salary annual bonus and pension contributions if such change of control had occured prior to 1 July 2004.
He will be entitled to 16 months salary annual bonus and pension contributions if such event occurs prior to 1 July 2005 and 12 months salary annual bonus and pension contributions thereafter.
In the event of termination at any time which is not due to the fault of Tom Glocer he retains the benefit of any outstanding share plan awards as if his employment had not ceased.
In addition Tom Glocer and his family retain the life assurance and private healthcare benefits provided by Reuters for one year following termination.
David Grigsons and Devin Wenigs contracts have effective dates of 21 June 2001 and 17 February 2003 respectively and can be terminated on one years notice.
Any termination payment will not exceed an amount equal to the sum of annual salary bonus and 12 months pension contributions paid by Reuters.
On a change of control of the company all the executive directors are entitled to terminate their contracts on one months notice unless the acquiring party has within three months of the change of control agreed to adopt and uphold the Reuters Trust Principles see page 82.
Termination payments of a maximum of 12 months salary annual bonus and 12 months pension contributions are payable to David Grigson and Devin Wenig and to Tom Glocer as previously detailed in such circumstances.
All executive directors have contractual terms that limit the ability of an executive director to work for a defined list of competitor companies for a period of time.
These provisions are in place to protect intellectual property and commercially sensitive information.
08 POLICY ON EXTERNAL APPOINTMENTS Reuters recognises that executive directors may be invited to become non executive directors of other companies or to become involved in charitable or public service organisations.
As the Board believes that this can broaden the knowledge and experience of directors to its benefit it is Reuters policy to approve such appointments provided there is no conflict of interest and the commitment required is not excessive.
Board approval is required and directors are permitted to retain cashonly fees paid for such appointments.
No executive directors retained any fees for external directorships during 2004 except for Devin Wenig who received fees of US19125 which includes an annual fee of US3000 and US16125 in fees for attending board and committee meetings and US3913 in travel expenses in his capacity as director of Nastech Pharmaceutical Company.
INDEX OF REUTERS GROUP PLC TSR PERFORMANCE 2000 tel FTSE REUTERStel Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 36 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 09 DIRECTORS REMUNERATION FORtel
Salary Expense for loss fees Bonus Benefits7allowances of office Total
Chairman
Sir Christopher Hogg Niall FitzGerald KBE Nonexecutive directors Sir John Craven 19     19 45 Lawton Fitt Penny Hughes Ed Kozel Roberto Mendoza 26     26 35 Ken Olisa Dick Olver 69     69 50 Charles Sinclair 60 Ian Strachan Executive directors Tom Glocer 816 1217 289   2322 1898 David Grigson Devin Wenig Total emoluments of directors 2479 1943 378 94  4894 4019 Other senior managers as a group 9 persons 2003 10 persons 2623 1959 255 189  5026 5957 Notes For disclosure purposes all amounts have been rounded up to the nearest thousand.
The following conversion rates were used US1.82 1 and CHF2.28 1.
1 Sir Christopher Hogg retired on 30 September 2004.
He received benefits comprising a company car benefit of 7418 medical benefits of 1470 and tax and national insurance benefits of 26400.
Reuters also made him a gift of his company car with a value of 30000.
2 Niall FitzGerald became Chairman on 1 October 2004.
Prior to that Niall FitzGerald did not personally receive the nonexecutive director payment of 37500 which was made directly to Unilever PLC.
3 Penny Hughes and Lawton Fitt joined as nonexecutive directors on 6 July 2004.
4 The 15000 allowance to Ed Kozel represents travel allowances to attend UK Board meetings.
5 Ken Olisa joined as a nonexecutive director on 22 April 2004.
His nonexecutive director fee was paid directly to Interregnum PLC.
6 Fees paid to Ian Strachan include US 350000 in respect of his position as a nonexecutive director Chairman of Instinet Group and 50000 in respect of his position as Reuters nonexecutive director.
In 2003 he received 20718 restricted stock units from Instinet Group which vested in May 2004.
7 Items included under Benefits are those provided as goods and services received during the year.
8 Items included under Expense allowances are contractual benefits which are paid in cash rather than as goods and services during the year.
9 Noncash benefits received by Tom Glocer included accommodation costs of 228204 travel expenses of 29605 and company car and healthcare benefits totalling 23675 and longterm disability insurance of 6525.
10 David Grigson received healthcare benefits of 1913 and longterm disability insurance of 3200.
Allowances consist of a car allowance of 7420 and a retirement allowance of 59750.
11 Devin Wenigs benefits consist of healthcare and travel benefits of 16149.
Allowances consist of a car allowance of 10549.
Devin Wenigs salary is paid in US dollars and is contractually split between his role as executive director and President of Business Divisions.
12 The total aggregate emoluments for the directors for the period 1 January 2004 to 31 December 2004 which excludes termination payments were 4.9 million.
The total equivalent emoluments for 2003 which included the emoluments of Philip Green who served until 31 July 2003 were 4.4 million excluding termination payments of 0.6 million.
13 Graham Albutt stood down from the GMC on 31 December 2004 and left the company on 28 February 2005.
REMUNERATION REPORT
Directors pensions Tom Glocer David Grigson and Devin Wenig participate in defined contribution pension arrangements.
Tom Glocer participates in Reuters US pension arrangements and is entitled to a pension allowance of 25% of his base salary during 2004 and 25% of his base salary for 2005.
David Grigson is a member of the Reuters Retirement Plan in the UK and receives a contribution in respect of pension benefits equal to 20% of the UK earnings cap.
Both are entitled to a lump sum deathinservice benefit whilst in service of four times basic salary.
Devin Wenig participates in Reuters US pension arrangements and is entitled to a pension allowance of 6% of his base salary.
He is entitled to a lump sum deathinservice benefit of US1 million.
Our contributions and allocations including the cost of life cover in respect of these directors in 2004 were Company contribution Age in respect of period 000 Tom Glocer 45 208 David Grigson 50 24 Devin Wenig 38 21 Details of the pension earned by Sir Christopher Hogg during 2004 and the benefits provided on his retirement are as set out in the following table.
Increase
Increase in accrued Transfer value Transfer value Change in
Accrued contributions pension during the pension at pension pension over the year pension at during during year net of 31 December 31 December 31 December net of directors retirement the year the year inflation contributions Sir Christopher Hogg 68 141  18 18  1878  1878
1 Following Sir Christopher Hoggs retirement on 30 September 2004 and in accordance with the provisions contained in his Pension Deed we elected to pay a lump sum of 2257967 in substitution for the pension benefit due.
The difference between the lump sum and the transfer value of the accrued pension as at 31 December 2003 represents the increase in the value of Sir Christopher Hoggs accrued benefits during 2004.
The amount of the lump sum was calculated by an independent actuary as the net present value of the pension benefit that would otherwise be payable to Sir Christopher Hogg.
There was therefore no remaining obligation in relation to pension benefits at the yearend.
Reuters also paid an amount of 3600 in respect of life cover for Sir Christopher Hogg.
The information shown complies with requirements under both the UK Listing Authority and the Directors Remuneration Report Regulations 2002.
The transfer value at the start of the year has been calculated in accordance with the guidance note GN11 published by the Institute of Actuaries and Faculty of Actuaries.
The total amount of contributions or accruals made in 2004 to provide pension and similar benefits for the directors was 693315 2003 368000 and for the directors and the other senior managers as a group was 1622626 2003 1024000.
These figures include the increase in the value of Sir Christopher Hoggs accrued benefits over the nine months to his retirement and the contribution of 460000 paid into the Reuters Supplementary Pension Scheme in respect of David Ure see the past directors section below for further details.
These aggregate figures also include an accrual of 58000 and 65000 respectively for the investment returns within the US executive pension arrangements.
These investment returns are calculated based on each individuals notional fund choices made by reference to actual investment funds and the actual investment returns achieved on these funds.
38 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004
REMUNERATION REPORT
Directors interests in longterm incentive plans Market value Number at per share Number at 1 January at grant 31 December 2004 Number for awards Number Number Number 2004 Date or later granted made vested exercised lapsed or earlier End of from which Date of date of during during during during during date of qualifying rights are Expiry
Tom Glocer
15 Mar 2000 33518      33518 31 Dec 04 1 Jan 05 31 Dec 06
25 Jun 2001 174451      174451 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 06 31 Dec 07 20 Feb 2002 234974      234974 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 07 31 Dec 08 24 Feb 2003 1731277      1731277 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 08 31 Dec 09 23 Feb 2004  544094 407p    544094 31 Dec 06 1 Jan 07 31 Dec 10 DBSP 24 Mar 2000 75000      75000 15 Feb 02 6 Apr 05 na 30 May 2000 60000      60000 15 Feb 03 6 Apr 05 na Total 2309094   2853314 David Grigson
5 Dec 2000 42579      42579 31 Dec 04 1 Jan 05 31 Dec 06 25 Jun 2001 26294      26294 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 06 31 Dec 07 20 Feb 2002 37205      37205 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 07 31 Dec 08 24 Feb 2003 200000      200000 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 08 31 Dec 09 23 Feb 2004  200000 407p 200000 31 Dec 06 1 Jan 07 31 Dec 10 Total 306078 200000     506078 Devin Wenig
1 Apr 1999 15489      15489 31 Dec 02 1 Jan 03 31 Dec 05 15 Mar 2000 18166      18166 31 Dec 04 1 Jan 05 31 Dec 06 29 Mar 2001 20704      20704 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 06 31 Dec 07
25 Jun 2001 2295      2295 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 06 31 Dec 07 20 Feb 2002 22047      22047 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 06 31 Dec 08 24 Feb 2003 200000      200000 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 08 31 Dec 09 24 Feb 2004  200000 407p    200000 31 Dec 06 1 Jan 07 31 Dec 10 Total 278701 200000     478701 Other senior managers as a group 9 persons 2003 10 persons
15 Sep 1998 27297    27297 31 Dec 00 1 Jan 01 31 Dec 04 1 Apr 1999 20925      20925 31 Dec 01 1 Jan 02 31 Dec 05 15 Mar 2000 88642      88642 31 Dec 04 1 Jan 05 31 Dec 06 29 Mar 2001 64741      64741 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 06 31 Dec 07 LTIP 25 Jun 2001 5279      5279 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 06 31 Dec 07 20 Feb 2002 83372      83372 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 06 31 Dec 08 24 Feb 2003 649863      649863 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 06 31 Dec 09 4 Aug 2003 208333      208333 31 Dec 05 1 Jan 06 31 Dec 09 23 Feb 2004  477812 407p    477812 31 Dec 06 1 Jan 07 31 Dec 10 Total 1148452 477812   27297  1598967
1 See performance conditions attached to these awards as described in section 04 above.
2 No share awards vested during 2004.
3 PRSP awards are available for exercise immediately on vesting.
The qualifying period may be extended by up to two years where vesting does not occur or is only partial after the initial threeyear period.
LTIP awards to executive directors prior to 2004 are subject to a retention period of two years from vesting save that this is reduced to one year where the performance period has been extended to five years.
4 The indicated awards were made prior to the appointment of the relevant individual as an executive director.
5 2005 awards are described on page 33.
6 Graham Albutt left the company on 28 February 2005.
Directors share options Number at Number at 1 January 31 December 2004 Number Number Number Number 2004 Exercise or later granted vested exercised lapsed or earlier Earliest price date of during during during during date of exercise Expiry Plan Date of grant pence appointment period period period period departure date date
Christopher
Hogg SAYE 11 Mar 1999 667 1011  1011  1011  21 May 2004 1 Nov 2004 Total 1011 Tom Glocer
25 Jun tel113 565113 25 Jun 2005 25 Jun 2011 20 Feb tel295 461295 20 Feb 2006 20 Feb 2012 2 Aug tel654 915654 2 Aug 2006 2 Aug 2012 24 Feb 2003 135 1307514 1307514 24 Feb 2006 24 Feb 2013 4 Aug tel594 706594 4 Aug 2006 4 Aug 2013 23 Feb 2004 407  789430    789430 23 Feb 2007 23 Feb 2014 27 Aug 2004 321  1000928    1000928 27 Aug 2007 27 Aug 2014
9 Feb 1994 1and2 US7.28 13716     13716 9 Feb 1997 9 Feb 2005
16 Apr 2003 90 4200     4200 1 Jun 2006 1 Dec 2006 7 Apr 2004 314  1200    1200 1 Jun 2007 1 Dec 2007 Plan 2000 24 Sep 1998 550 2000     2000 24 Sep 2001 4 Sep 2005 Total 39760861791558   5767644 David Grigson
25 Jun 2001 862 92807     92807 25 Jun 2005 25 Jun 2011 20 Feb 2002 528 75757     75757 20 Feb 2006 20 Feb 2012 2 Aug tel375     150375 2 Aug 2006 2 Aug 2012 24 Feb tel000     200000 24 Feb 2006 24 Feb 2013 4 Aug tel000     200000 4 Aug 2006 4 Aug 2013 23 Feb 2004 407  122950    122950 23 Feb 2007 23 Feb 2014 27 Aug 2004 321  155892    155892 27 Aug 2007 27 Aug 2014
11 Apr 2002 448 2216    2216  1 Jun 2007 1 Dec 2007 16 Apr 2003 90 4200     4200 1 Jun 2006 1 Dec 2006 7 Apr 2004 314  1200    1200 1 Jun 2007 1 Dec 2007 Total 725355 280042   2216 1003181 Devin Wenig
27 Dec 2000 1139 6913  1729   6913 27 Dec 2001 27 Dec 2007 25 Jun 2001 862 9135  2284   9135 25 Jun 2002 25 Jun 2011 20 Feb 2002 528 25936  6484   25936 20 Feb 2003 20 Feb 2012 2 Aug 2002 266 200000  50000   200000 2 Aug 2003 2 Aug 2012 24 Feb tel000     200000 24 Feb 2006 20 Feb 2013 4 Aug tel000     200000 4 Aug 2006 4 Aug 2013 23 Feb 2004 407  122950    122950 23 Feb 2007 23 Feb 2014 27 Aug 2004 321  155892    155892 27 Aug 2007 27 Aug 2014
7 Apr 2004 US7.27  1200    1200 1 Jun 2007 1 Dec 2007 Plan 2000 24 Sep 1998 550 2000     2000 24 Sep 2001 24 Sep 2005 Total 643984 28004260497 924026 Other senior managers as a group 9 persons 2003 10 persons
11 Mar 1999 667 1011  1011  1011  1 May 2004 1 Nov 2004 12 Apr tel 814  814  1 Jun 2004 1 Dec 2004 11 Apr 2002 448 6032    4760 1272 1 Jun 2005 1 Dec 2005 16 Apr 2003 90 16800     16800 1 Jun 2006 1 Dec 2006 7 Apr 2004 314  8400    8400 1 Jun 2007 1 Dec 2007
27 Dec 2000 1139 34764  8693   34764 27 Dec 2001 27 Dec 2007 25 Jun 2001 862 5800  1450   5800 25 Jun 2002 25 Jun 2006 25 Jun 2001 862 43500  10874   43500 25 Jun 2002 25 Jun 2011 21 Dec 2001 692 2025  506   2025 21 Dec 2002 21 Dec 2011 20 Feb 2002 528 5697  1424   5697 20 Feb 2003 20 Feb 2007 20 Feb 2002 528 95484  23871   95484 20 Feb 2003 20 Feb 2012 2 Aug tel000  37500   150000 2 Aug 2003 2 Aug 2007 2 Aug tel000  175000   700000 2 Aug 2003 2 Aug 2012 24 Feb tel315  153078 56828  555487 24 Feb 2004 24 Feb 2013 1 Apr tel208  87552   350208 1 Apr 2004 1 Apr 2013 4 Aug tel550  198137 37500  755050 4 Aug 2004 4 Aug 2013 23 Feb 2004 407  429625    429625 23 Feb 2005 23 Feb 2014 27 Aug 2004 321  487676    487676 27 Aug 2005 27 Aug 2014 Plan 2000 24 Sep 1998 550 14000     14000 24 Sep 2001 24 Sep 2005 Total 28315853655788 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 39 40 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 11 PENSION ARRANGEMENTS FOR PAST DIRECTORS David Ure served as a director between June 1989 and July 2000.
He retired from employment on 5 August 2004 and in accordance with the rules of the Reuters Supplementary Pension Scheme was entitled to an early retirement pension of twothirds of final pensionable salary without reduction.
Final pensionable salary under the scheme is defined as the highest basic salary over any twelve months in the five years prior to retirement with the fulltime equivalent of basic salary being used for any periods of parttime employment.
Reuters made a special contribution of 460000 to the Reuters Supplementary Pension Scheme to allow for the funding cost of these early retirement benefits.
Reuters carried out a partial restructuring of its UK approved pension arrangements for senior employees during the year.
As part of this rearrangement the pension liabilities within the Reuters Pension Fund for a number of retired past directors were transferred to the Reuters Supplementary Pension Scheme in November 2004.
There was no change to the benefits payable to the individuals as a result of the transfer.
The past directors involved were Sir Peter Job JeanClaude Marchand John Parcell Robert Rowley David Ure Andr Villeneuve Geoffrey Weetman and Mark Wood.
On behalf of the Board Niall FitzGerald KBE
7 March 2005
REMUNERATION REPORT
Directors share options continued
1 The options indicated are over American Depositary Shares ADSs.
Each ADS represents six ordinary shares is denominated is US dollars and trades on NASDAQ.
For the purposes of this disclosure ADSs have been converted into the equivalent number of ordinary shares and an equivalent option price.
2 The indicated awards were made prior to the appointment of the relevant individual as an executive director.
The DSOP options granted prior to the appointment as an executive director have no performance condition.
3 Options granted under the SAYE Plan Plan 2000 and the ESOP have no performance conditions.
Save as disclosed in note 2 above exercise of each DSOP award is conditional on the performance criteria described in the remuneration policy section 2 and no performance conditions were varied during 2004.
4 At 31 December 2004 the market price of our shares was 377.50 pence per share and US42.95 per ADS.
The highest prices during the year were 429.25 pence per share and US49.15 per ADS and the lowest were 241.25 pence per share and US25.72 per ADS.
5 There were gains of 306526 on the exercise of share options in 2004 2003 nil.
There were hypothetical gains of 940231 made on the vesting of shares at the market value share price on the date of vesting.
6 2005 awards are described on page 34.
7 Graham Albutt left the company on 28 February 2005.
He was awarded a cash sum of 28388 in lieu of a further DSOP grant on 27 August 2004.
10 DIRECTORS INTERESTS IN ORDINARY SHARES The total interests of the current directors and other senior management in issued share capital and in shares underlying options and incentive plans are shown below as at 7 March 2005.
No director or senior manager beneficially owns 1% or more of our issued share capital.
Interests in ordinary shares excluding options and interests in longterm incentive plans disclosed above held at 1 January 2004 and 31 December 2004 are also shown for directors in office at 31 December 2003.
Directors were the beneficial owners of all shares except for 814 shares 35000 shares and 16875 shares held by family members of Sir Christopher Hogg Charles Sinclair and David Grigson respectively and for 52451 shares held by a trust of which Tom Glocer and his family are beneficiaries.
Interests at Interests at Interests at 7 March 2005 1 January 2004 31 December 2004 Longterm Shares Shares Shares Options incentives
Sir Christopher Hogg 63321 63321 na Niall FitzGerald KBE 30000 30000 30000 Tom Glocer 217058 217113 217113 5767644 2819796 David Grigson 48430 48430 48430 1003181 463499 Devin Wenig 78354 78354 78354 924026 460535 Sir John Craven 6846 6846 na Lawton Fitt na Penny Hughes na Ed Kozel 90000 7500 7500 Roberto Mendoza 53000 53000 na Ken Olisa na Dick Olver 10000 10000 10000 Charles Sinclair 35000 35000 35000 Ian Strachan 15500 15500 15500 Other senior managers as a group 9 persons 235721 242102 162124 3220664 As at the date of this report Tom Glocer David Grigson Devin Wenig and Ed Kozel each held 1000 shares and Ian Strachan held 38498 shares in Instinet Group.
The other senior managers as a group held interests in 3000 shares of Instinet Group.
None of the directors has notified the company of an interest in any other shares or other transactions or arrangements which require disclosure.
There have been no movements in the interests of the directors in the share capital of the Group companies since 31 December 2004 save as otherwise disclosed in this report.
Notes
1 Or as at date of retirement.
2 Other senior managers as a group are 8 persons following the departure of Graham Albutt on 28 February 2005.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 01 FINANCIAL REPORTING The directors are required by UK company law to prepare financial statements for each financial year which give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and the Group as at the end of the financial year and of the profit and cash flows of the Group for the period.
Reuters Group is also required to prepare financial statements in accordance with the requirements of the SEC.
Reuters Group has complied with both UK and US disclosure requirements in this report in order to present a true and fair view to all shareholders.
In preparing the financial statements applicable accounting standards have been followed suitable accounting policies have been used and applied consistently and reasonable and prudent judgements and estimates have been made where appropriate.
The directors have reviewed the budget and cash flow forecasts for the Group and the company for the year to 31 December 2005 and outline projections for the subsequent year in the light of the financial position and borrowing facilities at 31 December 2004.
On the basis of this review the directors are satisfied that Reuters Group is a going concern and have continued to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
02 RISK MANAGEMENT INTERNAL CONTROLS AND DISCLOSURE CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES The directors acknowledge their responsibility for the Groups system of internal control and confirm they have reviewed its effectiveness.
In doing so the Board has taken note of the Guidance on Internal Control the Turnbull Guidance contained in the Combined Code.
The Board confirms that it has adopted a process for identifying evaluating and managing significant risks faced by the Group.
This process which accords with the Turnbull guidance has been in place for the full financial year and is ongoing.
The control system includes objective setting risk assessment and monitoring of performance at both strategic and business unit levels though a process known within the company as mission analysis the use of balanced scorecards to track performance against targets relating to the financial business people and customer aspects of the companys business written policies and control procedures monthly financial reporting to the Board and senior management which amongst other things tracks performance against the annual budget and systems to communicate rapidly to appropriate managers incidents requiring immediate attention.
In a group of the size complexity and geographical diversity of Reuters it should be expected that breakdowns in established control procedures might occur.
There are supporting policies and procedures for reporting and management of control breakdowns.
The Board considers that the control system is appropriately designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The concept of reasonable assurance recognises that the cost of a control procedure should not exceed the expected benefits.
Using a common risk management framework throughout Reuters each of the principal business and functional units summarises the risks that could impede the achievement of its objectives.
For each significant risk line managers document an overview of the risk how it is managed and any improvement actions required.
A document called a risk radar is created which sets out the main strategic operational and financial risks that have been identified.
This document is reviewed by the Group Management Committee GMC and the Board.
At the year end before producing the statement on internal control in the annual report and Form 20F the CEO and CFO meet with members of the GMC and others to consider formally the operation and effectiveness of the companys risk management and financial operational and compliance internal control systems.
This review includes consideration of selfassessment reports from line management and covers each of the most significant risks the company faces and how well these are controlled and managed.
The CEO and the CFO report on the results of this review to the Audit Committee and to the
The Disclosure Committee described on page 31 supports the process by reviewing disclosure controls and procedures.
Instinet Group which is listed on NASDAQ has its own systems of risk management and internal controls on which it reports to its shareholders.
Reuters executive directors are members of the Instinet Group board.
The boards of Radianz Limited and Factiva which include Reuters representatives have responsibility for adopting processes for identifying evaluating and managing significant risks in their respective businesses.
Reuters assessment of the main risks relating to its affiliate companies and Instinet Group are reviewed by the CEO and the CFO who also report on the results of these reviews to the Audit Committee and to the Board.
In addition to the selfassessment and management review procedures Reuters monitors its internal financial control system through a programme of internal audits.
Internal auditors independently review the controls in place to manage significant risks and report to the Audit Committee twice a year.
The Audit Committee reviews annually the assurance procedures including compliance controls and reports their findings to the Board.
The Groups external auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have audited the financial statements and have reviewed the work of internal auditors and the internal control systems to the extent they consider necessary to support their audit report.
The Audit Committee has met the internal auditors and PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP to discuss the results of their work.
During 2004 the directors were not aware of any control breakdowns that resulted in a material loss.
At the end of the period Reuters management carried out an evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and operation of the Groups disclosure controls and procedures.
These are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in reports filed under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is recorded summarised and reported within specific time periods.
Based on this evaluation the CEO and the CFO concluded that the design and operation of these disclosure controls and procedures were effective as at 31 December 2004 to a reasonable assurance level within the meaning of the US federal securities laws.
During the year two accounting adjustments were identified by management which related to prior accounting periods and together were considered material.
The 2003 and 2002 UK to US GAAP reconciliations have been restated accordingly.
These adjustments are discussed on page 74 and have the effect of increasing the Groups profits in each of 2002 and 2003 as stated under US GAAP.
No adjustments are required in respect of the Groups primary UK GAAP financial statements and no issues of governance arise as a consequence of making these adjustments.
The CEO and the CFO believe that the need for this restatement constitutes a significant control deficiency but not a material control weakness as such terms are used in the US federal securities laws for the period under review.
This conclusion is based on the fact that control procedures have improved year on year leading to the identification and correction of the issues for the 2004 year end.
No significant changes were made in the Groups internal controls over financial reporting during the period covered by this report that materially affected or are reasonably likely to affect materially the Groups internal control over financial reporting.
Instinet Groups annual report for 2004 will contain an internal control report as required by section 404 of the SarbanesOxley Act.
Please refer to Instinets annual report for its internal control report.
Reuters Groups Annual Report and Form 20F for 2006 is also expected to contain an internal control report so Reuters management and auditors have taken during 2004 and will be taking throughout 2005 and 2006 steps in preparation for the section 404 reporting and attestation requirements that are scheduled to be met in respect of the financial year ending 31 December 2006.
By order of the Board Rosemary Martin General Counsel and Company Secretary 7 March 2005 STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES 42 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 UNITED KINGDOM OPINIONUNITED STATES OPINION UNITED KINGDOM OPINION Independent auditors report to the members of Reuters Group PLC We have audited the financial statements which comprise the consolidated profit and loss account the consolidated balance sheet the consolidated cash flow statement the statement of total recognised gains and losses and the related notes and the balance sheet of Reuters Group PLC which have been prepared under the historical cost convention and the accounting policies set out in the statement of accounting policies.
We have also audited the disclosures required by Part 3 of Schedule 7A to the Companies Act 1985 contained in section 9 of the Remuneration Report the auditable part.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditors The directors responsibilities for preparing the annual report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable United Kingdom law and accounting standards are set out in the statement of directors responsibilities.
The directors are also responsible for preparing the Remuneration Report.
Our responsibility is to audit the financial statements and the auditable part of the Remuneration Report in accordance with relevant legal and regulatory requirements and United Kingdom Auditing Standards issued by the Auditing Practices Board.
This report including the opinion has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Section 235 of the Companies Act 1985 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving this opinion accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
We report to you our opinion as to whether the financial statements give a true and fair view and whether the financial statements and the auditable part of the Remuneration Report have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
We also report to you if in our opinion the directors report is not consistent with the financial statements if the company has not kept proper accounting records if we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or if information specified by law regarding directors remuneration and transactions is not disclosed.
We read the other information contained in the Annual Report and Form 20F and consider the implications for our report if we become aware of any apparent misstatements or material inconsistencies with the financial statements.
The other information comprises only those sections set out in the table of contents including the Chairmans statement the Directors report the report on Corporate governance the unaudited part of the Remuneration Report the statement of the directors responsibilities and the Operating and financial review.
We review whether the corporate governance statement reflects the companys compliance with the nine provisions of the 2003 Combined Code specified for our review by the Listing Rules of the Financial Services Authority and we report if it does not.
We are not required to consider whether the Boards statements on internal control cover all risks and controls or to form an opinion on the effectiveness of the Groups corporate governance procedures or its risk and control procedures.
Basis of audit opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards issued by the Auditing Practices Board.
An audit includes examination on a test basis of evidence relevant to the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements and the auditable part of the Remuneration Report.
It also includes an assessment of the significant estimates and judgements made by the directors in the preparation of the financial statements and of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the companys circumstances consistently applied and adequately disclosed.
We planned and performed our audit so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered necessary in order to provide us with sufficient evidence to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements and the auditable part of the Remuneration Report are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or other irregularity or error.
In forming our opinion we also evaluated the overall adequacy of the presentation of information in the financial statements.
Opinion
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the affairs of the company and the Group at 31 December 2004 and of the profit and cash flows of the Group for the year then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
Those parts of the Remuneration Report required by Part 3 of Schedule 7A to the Companies Act 1985 have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors
7 March 2005 UNITED STATES OPINION Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm In our opinion the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and the related consolidated profit and loss account consolidated cash flow statement and statement of total recognised gains and losses present fairly in all material respects the financial position of the Reuters Group PLC and its subsidiaries at 31 December 2004 2003 and 2002 and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended 31 December 2004 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Groups management our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits of these statements in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.
An audit includes examining on a test basis evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
As discussed in the Accounting policies the Group changed its method of accounting for employee share ownership trusts employee share schemes and transactionrelated regulatory fees in 2004 in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United Kingdom.
The change has been accounted for by restating comparative information at 31 December 2003 and 2002 and for the years then ended.
Accounting principles generally accepted in the United Kingdom vary in certain significant respects from accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Information relating to the nature and effect of such differences is presented in the Summary of differences between UK and US generally accepted accounting principles as restated in the consolidated financial statements.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
7 March 2005 CONSOLIDATED PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT for the year ended 31 December Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Restated Restatedtel Notes m m m
Group and share of joint ventures 2984 3335 3700 less share of joint ventures revenue 99 100 107 Group revenue 1 2885 3235 3593 Operating costs 2 2688 3105 3735 Operating profitloss Share of operating losses of joint ventures 16 2 27 35 Impairment of investments in joint ventures 16  8 6 Share of operating profitslosses of associates 16 6 8 39 Impairment of investment in associate 16  1 Profitloss on disposal of subsidiary undertakings 31 9 3 29 Profit on disposal of joint ventures and associates Share of profit on disposal of a business by a joint venture 16 9 Loss on disposal of tangible fixed assets  17 Profitloss on disposal of other fixed asset investments 31 19 6 2 Income from fixed asset investments 1 Amounts written off investments 16 4 3 75 Net interest payable 3 4 29 20 Profitloss on ordinary activities before taxation 437 56 344 Taxation on profitloss on ordinary activities 4 73 22 23 Profitloss on ordinary activities after taxation 364 34 367 Equity minority interests 13 16 112 Profitloss attributable to ordinary shareholders Dividends 5 140 140 139 Retained profitloss for the period 211 90 394 Basic earningsloss per ordinary share 6 25.1p 3.6p 18.3p Diluted earningsloss per ordinary share 6 24.5p 3.5p 18.3p Consolidated revenue and operating profit derive from continuing operations in all material respects.
The result for the year has been computed on an unmodified historical cost basis.
2003 and 2002 have been restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 and the reclassification of transactionrelated regulatory fees following recently issued SEC guidance see Accounting Basis on page 72.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF TOTAL RECOGNISED GAINS AND LOSSES for the year ended 31 December Restated Restatedtel Notes m m m Profitloss attributable to ordinary shareholders 351 50 255 Unrealised gain on deemed partial disposal of subsidiary undertakings  1 Unrealised gain on deemed partial disposal of associates   12 Unrealised gains on disposal of fixed asset investments   10 Translation differences taken directly to reserves 25 113 95 Taxation on translation differences taken directly to reserves 4 10 Total recognised gains and losses relating to the year 316 63 327 Prior period adjustment see Accounting Basis on page 72 151 Total gains and losses since last annual report 467 2003 and 2002 have been restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see Accounting Basis on page 72.
A detailed statement showing the movement in capital and reserves is set out in note 26.
44 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 01 SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS The tables below show a segmental analysis of revenue costs and results which reflect the way Reuters was managed during 2004 and the management of Instinet Group as a separate business within the Reuters Group.
From 1 January 2004 management changed the structure of its Customer Segments to more closely reflect the communities they serve.
This is explained in more detail on pages 78.
Prior periods have been restated to reflect changes in the management of costs and revenues resulting from the change in segment structure the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 and the reclassification of transactionrelated regulatory fees following recently issued SEC guidance see Accounting Basis on page 72.
Reuters revenue is allocated to Customer Segments by reference to product families which map directly to only one Customer Segment with two exceptions.
Reuters Xtra family and Reuters Trader family revenues are initially fully attributed to the Sales and Trading Customer Segment.
Those revenues earned from Research and Asset Management customers are then reallocated to that Customer Segment based on management judgement and by reference to the activities at particular customer sites.
Recoveries revenues arise when Reuters recharges costs primarily exchange fees and communication costs to customers.
The revenues received from customers almost exactly match the exchange fees and communication costs incurred within Channel costs.
Segmental revenue less direct Customer Segment costs does not purport to represent segmental profitability.
Direct Customer Segment costs include the costs of global Customer Segment management marketing nonintegrated businesses and specific revenue related activities.
The majority of revenue related costs are included within the Channels Operations and Technology Content and Corporate Services.
Restated Restated 2004 % 2003 % 2002 m change m change m
Sales and Trading 1180 9% 1300 11% 1461 Research and Asset Management 235 19% 290 3% 283 Enterprise 481 14% 560 16% 666 Media 144 6% 153 2% 155 Recoveries 321 11% 361 15% 427 Reuters 2361 11% 2664 11% 2992 Instinet Group 530 8% 578 5% 610 2891 11% 3242 11% 3602 Share of joint ventures revenue 99 1% 100 6% 107 IntraGroup revenue 6 22% 7 26% 9 Gross revenue 2984 11% 3335 10% 3700 Less share of joint ventures revenue 99 1% 100 6% 107 Group revenue 2885 11% 3235 10% 3593 Operating costs Sales and Trading 101 6% 107 6% 101 Research and Asset Management 75 49% 148 10% 135 Enterprise 42 44% 74 26% 101 Media 17 2% 17 38% 27 Direct customer segment 235 32% 346 5% 364 Channels 822 12% 940 14% 1093 Operations and Technology 630 7% 674 7% 728 Content 262 6% 278 6% 295 Corporate Services 124 8% 114 43% 203 Reuters 2073 12% 2352 12% 2683 Instinet Group 493 15% 582 32% 853 Restructuring costs 128 28% 178 15% 208 IntraGroup costs 6 22% 7 26% 9 Group operating costs 2688 13% 3105 17% 3735 Operating profit Sales and Trading 1079 9% 1193 12% 1360 Research and Asset Management 160 12% 142 4% 148 Enterprise 439 10% 486 14% 565 Media 127 6% 136 6% 128 Segmental revenue less direct customer segment costs 1805 8% 1957 11% 2201 Channels 501 13% 579 13% 666 Operations and Technology 630 7% 674 7% 728 Content 262 6% 278 6% 295 Corporate Services 124 8% 114 43% 203 Reuters 288 8% 312 1% 309 Instinet Group 37  4 98% 243 Restructuring costs 128 28% 178 15% 208 Group operating profitloss 197 51% 130  142 Operating costs include amortisation and impairment of goodwill and other intangibles.
NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 01 SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS continued Revenue is normally invoiced in the geographical area in which the customer is located.
Revenue earned therefore generally represents revenue both by origin and by destination.
The geographical analysis of performance reflects the revenues earned and operating costs incurred in each area excluding amortisation and impairment of goodwill and other intangibles and net currency gain.
Restated Restated 2004 % 2003 % By geography m change change
Europe Middle East and Africa 1405 9% 1552 9% 1714 The Americas 1075 13% 1242 9% 1372
405 8% 441 13% 507 2885 11% 3235 10% 3593 Operating costs where incurred Europe Middle East and Africa 1349 8% 1470 5% 1555 The Americas 1024 19% 1270 19% 1566
241 5% 253 18% 307 2614 13% 2993 13% 3428
Europe Middle East and Africa 56 32% 82 48% 159 The Americas 51  28 85% 194
164 13% 188 5% 200 271 12% 242 46% 165 Other costs Goodwill and other intangibles
62 38% 101 5% 107
14 29% 20 90% 208 Net currency gain 2 82% 9 24% 8 Operating profitloss 197 51% 130  142 United Kingdom and Ireland revenue was 380 million 2003 428 million 2002 485 million.
With the exception of Instinet Group Reuters products are delivered and sold primarily through a common geographical infrastructure and delivered over a number of communications networks.
The impact of the Multex acquisition in 2003 and the Island acquisition in 2002 are reflected primarily in the Americas.
Restated Restated 2004 % 2003 % By type m change change
2158 12% 2449 9% 2699
638 6% 681 7% 731
89 15% 105 36% 163 Revenue 2885 11% 3235 10% 3593 Recurring revenue is derived from the sale of subscription services including maintenance contracts.
Usage revenue is principally derived from Instinet Group Dealing 20002 Dealing 3000 Spot Matching and Bridge Trading Company.
Outright revenue comprises oneoff sales including information and risk management solutions.
NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT continued 46 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 02 OPERATING COSTS Restated Restated 2004 % 2003 % change change Costs by type Salaries commission and allowances 916 9% 1011 14% 1178 Social security costs 70 3% 73 8% 79 Pension costs see note 23 34 34% 50 21% 65 Staff costs 1020 10% 1134 14% 1322
699 3% 722 11% 811
133 31% 193 15% 227
257 14% 300 13% 343
313 17% 376 10% 420
202 25% 269 14% 312 Cost of sales and other 41 13% 48 25% 64 Goodwill and other intangibles see note 14
62 38% 101 5% 107
14 29% 20 90% 208 Other operating income 51 6% 48 32% 71 Currency hedging activities  net lossgain 100% 11 Foreign exchange differences  net gainloss 2 92% 21 Total costs by type 2688 13% 3105 17% 3735 Prior periods have been restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 and the reclassification of transactionrelated regulatory fees following recently issued SEC guidance see Accounting Basis on page 72.
The directors believe that the nature of Reuters Groups business is such that the format of the analysis of operating costs required by the Companies Act 1985 is not appropriate.
The format has been adopted in a manner consistent with Reuters Groups activities.
Services include equipment hire and boughtin services including consultancy and contractors advertising and publicity professional fees and staffrelated expenses.
Other operating income primarily comprises amounts received from joint ventures in respect of costs incurred by Reuters on their behalf.
Restated Restated 2004 % 2003 % change change Costs by function Production and communications 1519 9% 1661 15% 1947 Selling and marketing 529 9% 580 1% 574 Support services and administration 438 24% 575 18% 699 Goodwill and other intangibles
62 38% 101 5% 107
14 29% 20 90% 208 Restructuring costs 128 28% 178 15% 208 Net currency gain 2 82% 10 25% 8 Total costs by function 2688 13% 3105 17% 3735 Costs include Development expenditure 128 25% 171 15% 200 Operating lease expenditure Hire of equipment 7 14% 8 11% 9 Other principally property 90 16% 107 4% 112 Loss on disposal of tangible fixed assets
29 22% 37 18% 32 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 02 OPERATING COSTS continued Fees payable to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP were as follows 2004 % 2003 % change change Audit services Statutory audit 3.2 7% 3.0 30% 2.3 Audit related services Regulatory reporting 0.2 100% 0.1 50% 0.2 Further assurance services 1.7  1.7 6% 1.6 Tax services Compliance services 0.3 63% 0.8 11% 0.9 Advisory services 2.0 150% 0.8 14% 0.7 Other services Management consultancy Total fees 7.4 16% 6.4 30% 9.1 United Kingdom 2.8 8% 2.6 60% 5.8
4.6 21% 3.8 15% 3.3 The statutory audit fee includes 10000 2003 10000 2002 10000 in respect of the parent company audit.
Also included above are fees paid to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP in respect of nonaudit services in the UK of 1.4 million 2003 0.9 million 2002 4.9 million.
Further assurance services include assistance with SarbanesOxley S404 compliance including the attest work in relation to Instinet Groups 2004 reporting requirements under the Act and conversion to International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as well as due diligence activities related to acquisitions and disposals.
Tax compliance services include assistance with corporation and other tax returns.
Tax advisory services relate to tax planning and employeerelated issues.
Management consultancy fees include amounts earned in 2002 by PwC Consulting which ceased to be part of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP on 1 October 2002.
The directors consider it important that Reuters Group has access to a broad range of external advice including from PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP .
Where appropriate work is put out to competitive tender.
The Audit Committee monitors the relationship with PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP including the level of nonaudit fees.
03 NET INTEREST RECEIVABLEPAYABLEtel m m m Interest receivable Listed investments Unlisted investments Share of joint ventures and associates interest see note 16 Interest receivable 23 18 29 Interest payable Bank loans and overdraft Other borrowings Unwinding of discounts 1 1 Interest payable 27 47 49 Total net interest payable 4 29 20 NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT continued 48 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 04 TAXATION ON PROFIT ON ORDINARY ACTIVITIEStel m m UK corporation tax UK corporation tax on profits of the period 25 68 43 Share of joint ventures and associates tax see note 16 Adjustments in respect of prior periods Double taxation relief Foreign tax Current tax on income for the period Share of joint ventures and associates tax see note 16 Adjustments in respect of prior periods Current tax charge for the period 40 42 102 Deferred taxation see note 24 Taxation on profit on ordinary activities 73 22 23 A reconciliation of the current tax charge on ordinary activities for the period reported in the profit and loss account is set out below.
Restated Restatedtel m m Profitloss before tax Corporation tax on pretax profitloss at UK nominal rate of 30% Nontax deductible amortisation and impairment of goodwill and other intangibles Adjustments in respect of prior years Permanent differences Nontaxable investment impairments and disposals 66 332 Fixed asset related timing differences Nonfixed asset related timing differences Tax losses utilisednot utilised in period 6 56 35 Tax on dividend received on acquisition of Island Other differences Total current tax The other differences are primarily due to overseas profits taxed at rates differing from those in the UK and the geographical mix of profits.
Tax paid in the period on disposals was 9 million 2003 1 million 2002 nil.
No tax is expected to fall due in respect of the proposed disposal of Radianz.
10 million of UK corporation tax in respect of unrealised translation differences arising in 2004 is recognised in the Statement of Total Recognised Gains and Losses 2003 and 2002 nil.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 05 DIVIDENDStel m m Interim paid Final 2004 proposed 86 86 8telPer ordinary share Pence Pence
Interim paid 3.85 3.85 3.85 Final 2004 proposed 06 EARNINGS PER ORDINARY SHARE Basic and diluted earnings per ordinary share are based on the results attributable to ordinary shareholders and on the weighted average number of those shares in issue during the year.
The weighted average number of shares in issue may be reconciled to the number used in the basic and diluted earnings per ordinary share calculations as follows Weighted average number in millionstel Ordinary shares in issue 1434 1432 1432 Nonvested shares held by employee share ownership trusts Basic earnings per share denominator 1400 1396 1395 Issuable under employee share schemes Diluted earnings per share denominator 1434 1414 1395 07 REMUNERATION OF DIRECTORS Section 9 of the Remuneration Report on pages 3640 includes details of directors emoluments pension arrangements longterm incentive plans and stock option plans and forms part of these financial statements.
08 EMPLOYEE INFORMATION The average number of employees during the year was as follows Restated Restated By customer segmenttel Sales and Trading 334 285 143 Research and Asset Management 765 1353 1437 Enterprise 324 343 439 Media 70 93 140 Direct customer segment 1493 2074 2159
5074 5431 5843 Operations and Technology 3509 3563 3633
3546 3399 3348 Corporate Services 1243 1533 1619
14865 16000 16602 Instinet Group 1115 1345 1731
15980 17345 18333 By location Europe Middle East and Africa 7781 8743 8920 The Americas 5378 6065 6874
2821 2537 2539
15980 17345 18333 By function Production and communications 8868 9022 9658 Selling and marketing 4404 4846 5146 Support services and administration 2708 3477 3529
15980 17345 18333 The above include Development staff 2282 2123 2109 The average number of employees during 2004 included 181 temporary staff 2003 211 2002 281.
Staff cost information is included in note 2.
Prior periods have been restated to reflect changes in the management of the business as explained in note 1 on page 44.
50 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20Ftel 2002
Net cash inflow from operating activities telDividends received from joint ventures and associates 4 32 Returns on investments and servicing of finance Interest received Interest paid 30 45 58 Income from fixed asset investments Dividends paid to equity minority interests Net cash outflow from returns on investments and servicing of finance Taxation paid Capital expenditure and financial investment Purchase of tangible fixed assets Sale of tangible fixed assets Purchase of fixed asset investments Sale of fixed asset investments Net cash outflow on capital expenditure and financial investment 19 110 211 Acquisitions and disposals including joint ventures and associates Equity dividends paid 140 140 139 Cash inflowoutflow before management of liquid resources and financing 407 15 136 Management of liquid resources Net increasedecrease in shortterm investments
Proceeds from the issue of shares Net decrease in borrowings Net cash outflow from financing 219 13 156 Increasedecrease in cash 11 24 97tel 2002
Reconciliation of net cash flow to movement in net fundsdebt Increasedecrease in cash Cash outflow from movement in borrowings Cash outflowinflow from movement in liquid resources Change in net fundsdebt resulting from cash flows Net debtfunds arising on acquisitionsdisposals 1 3 1 Noncash movements 5 Translation differences Movement in net fundsdebt Opening net debtfunds Closing net fundsdebt 11 326 77 66 CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT for the year ended 31 December NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 09 NET CASH INFLOW FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES Operating profit is reconciled to net cash inflow from operating activities as follows Restated Restatedtel m m Operating profitloss
Amortisation and impairment of goodwill and other intangibles 76 121 315 Increasedecrease in stocks Decrease in debtors Decrease in creditors Loss on disposal of tangible fixed assets Employee share scheme chargecredit 18 16 1 Other principally translation differences Net cash inflow from operating activities ANALYSIS OF CASH FLOWS FOR HEADINGS NETTED IN THE CASH FLOW STATEMENTtel m m Acquisitions and disposals including joint ventures and associates Cash consideration Subsidiary undertakings see note 31 Joint ventures Loans repaid tofrom joint ventures and associates see note 16 5 3 6 Deferred payments for acquisitions in prior years Less cash disposed net of cash acquired Cash received from disposals including deemed disposals Subsidiary undertakings Joint ventures and associates Instinet deemed disposal 5 Net cash inflowoutflow on acquisitions and disposals Management of liquid resources Increasedecrease in term deposits Sale of certificates of deposit Purchase of listedunlisted securities 2083 3582 4587 Sale of listedunlisted securities 1958 3488 4880 Net cash outflowinflow from movement in shortterm investments
Decrease in shortterm borrowings Decreaseincrease in longterm borrowings Net cash outflow from movement in borrowings 225 13 158 11 ANALYSIS OF NET FUNDS Bankother borrowings
Cash at Total Falling due after bank and cash and Shortterm due within more than in hand Overdrafts overdrafts investments one year one year Total m m m m m m m 31 December 2002 Cash flow Exchange movements Arising on acquisition 31 December 2003 Cash flow Noncash movements Exchange movements Arising on disposalsacquisitions 31 December 2004 83 17 66 753 164 329 326 NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT continued 52 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 12 DERIVATIVES AND OTHER FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Discussion of the Groups objectives and policies for the management of financial instruments and associated risks together with information relating to hedging activities is included under Treasury policies financing and foreign exchange in the Operating and Financial Review on pages 2122.
A substantial portion of Reuters Group revenue is receivable in foreign currencies with terms of payment up to three months in advance.
As such Reuters Group is subject to currency exposure from committed revenue and additionally to interest rate risk from borrowing and the investment of cash balances.
Reuters
Group seeks to limit these risks by entering into a mix of derivative financial instruments.
If the derivative financial instruments were considered separately from the underlying future revenue and interest Reuters Group would be subject to market risk on these financial instruments from fluctuations in currency and interest rates.
Reuters Group only enters into such derivative financial instruments to hedge or reduce the underlying exposure described above.
There is therefore no net market risk on such derivative financial instruments and only a credit risk from the potential nonperformance by counterparties.
The amount of this credit risk is generally restricted to any hedging gain and not the principal amount hedged.
Derivative instruments held at 31 December weretel Gross Gross Gross contract Carrying Fair contract Carrying Fair contract Carrying Fair amounts value value amounts value value amounts value value m m Foreign exchange forward contracts Contracts in profit Contracts in loss Foreign currency options Contracts in profit Contracts in loss Currency and interest rate swaps Contracts in profit Contracts in loss
The fair values of foreign currency and interest rate management instruments are estimated on the basis of market quotes discounted to current value using marketquoted interest rates.
The following table provides an analysis by currency of derivative contracts held for currency hedging purposes as at 31 December.
Comparatives have been restated to reflect the inclusion of Swiss franc in the analysis.
Restated Restatedtel Swaps Forwards Options Swaps Forwards Options Swaps Forwards Options % % % % % % % % %
Japanese yen Swiss franc 19 15  13 3 US dollar
Total
Foreign exchange forward contracts mature at dates up to February 2005 currency swaps and interest rate swaps both mature at various dates through to November 2010.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 12 DERIVATIVES AND OTHER FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS continued The results of currency and interest rate hedging activities for the three years to December 2004 are as summarised below Year to 31 Decembertel Recognised gainslosses m m m Currency hedging 29 11 10 Interest rate hedging Recognised currency hedging gains in 2004 were favourable mainly due to the effect of the weaker US dollar on hedges of the net investment in overseas subsidiaries.
Gains and losses on instruments used for hedging are not recognised until the exposure that is being hedged is itself recognised.
Unrecognised gains and losses on instruments used for hedging and the movements are set out below Gain Losses Net
Unrecognised at 1 January 2004 5 4 1 Arising in previous years Recognised in 2004 4 2 2 Not recognised in 2004 1 2 1 Arising in 2004 Not recognised in 2004 11  11 Unrecognised at 31 December 2004 Of which Expected to be recognised in 2005 1 1 Expected to be recognised in 2006 or later Net unrecognised gains on derivatives used for hedging were 10 million at 31 December 2004 compared to 1 million at 31 December 2003 and nil at 31 December 2002.
The weighted average variable rate payable on the interest rate swaps used to alter the currency and interest rate profile of debt issued at 31 December 2004 was 3% 2003 3% 2002 4%.
The weighted average variable rate is based on the rate implied in the yield curve at the balance sheet date.
All derivative instruments are unsecured.
However Reuters Group does not anticipate nonperformance by the counterparties who are all banks with recognised longterm credit ratings of A3A or higher.
Carrying and fair values of Group financial assets and liabilities at 31 December weretel Carrying Fair Carrying Fair Carrying Fair value value value value value value m m Derivative instruments Other financial assets Fixed asset investments Longterm debtors Investments held for sale see note 16 108 194 Other shortterm investments and cash 83tel728 728 Other financial liabilities Shortterm borrowings 181 181 365 365 441 441 Longterm borrowings 329 329 406 406 353 353 Other financial liabilities 97 97 113 113 88 88 The fair value of fixed asset investments and investments held for sale is the carrying value unless the investment has a readily determinable market value which is higher.
The fair value of listed shortterm investments was based on quoted market prices for those investments.
The carrying amount of the other shortterm deposits and investments approximated to their fair values due to the short maturity of the instruments held.
The fair value of shortterm borrowings approximated to the carrying value due to the short maturity of the investments.
Shortterm debtors and creditors have been excluded from the above analysis and all other disclosures in this note other than the currency risk disclosures.
NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT continued 54 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 12 DERIVATIVES AND OTHER FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS continued Financial instrument sensitivity analysis The analysis below summarises the sensitivity of the fair value of the Groups financial instruments to hypothetical changes in market rates.
Fair values are the present value of future cash flows based on market rates at the valuation date.
The estimated adverse changes in the fair value of financial instruments are based on an instantaneous i 1% increase in the specific rate of interest from the levels effective at 31 December 2004 with all other variables remaining constant and ii 10% weakening in the value of sterling against all other currencies from the levels applicable at 31 December 2004 with all other variables remaining constant.
Fair value changes arising from 10% weakening 1% increase in in  against interest rates other currencies Fair value adverse adverse Currency and interest rate swaps 64 27 10 Forward contracts   16 Total 64 27 26 Monetary assets and liabilities by currency after crosscurrency swaps excluding the functional currency of each operation at 31 December 2004 were Net foreign currency monetary assetsliabilities Swiss Japanese Hong Kong
US dollar
Other
Total
Functional currency of operation
US dollar
Swiss franc Japanese yen Hong Kong dollar
Total
Exchange differences that arise as a consequence of trading transactions and the translation of monetary assets and liabilities are taken to the profit and loss account.
In accordance with the Groups accounting policy exchange differences attributable to longterm foreign currency borrowings used to finance the Groups foreign currency investments are taken directly to reserves.
Consequently longterm foreign currency borrowings have been excluded from the above table.
The currency and interest rate profile of the Groups financial assets at 31 December 2004 was Cash and shortterm investments Fixed rate investments Weighted average Weighted average Noninterest Floating rate Fixed rate interest rate at time for which Total bearing assets investments investments 31 December rate is fixed m m % Years Sterling 416 80 336 US dollar 469 58 411 Euro 33 7 26 Other  3 31 December tel831 5  3 31 December  2% 1 31 December  2% 1 Interest on floating rate investments is earned at rates based on local money market rates.
Floating rate investments include 370 million 2003 303 million 2002 135 million of money market deposits which mature within three months of the balance sheet date.
Fixed rate investments are those investments which have an interest rate fixed for a period of greater than one year.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 12 DERIVATIVES AND OTHER FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS continued The currency and interest rate profile of the Groups financial liabilities after allowing for interest rate and crosscurrency swaps at 31 December 2004 was
Other
Floating rate Total liabilities borrowings m m
US dollar
Swiss franc
31 December  December tel771 31 December The floating rate borrowings comprise bank loans and overdrafts bearing interest at rates based on local money market rates commercial paper and medium term notes.
The weighted average interest rate on borrowings at 31 December 2004 was 4% 2003 4% 2002 4%.
The above analysis excludes creditors falling due within one year which are of a nonfinancial nature.
Total financial liabilities are repayable as followstel Other Other Other financial financial financial Borrowings liabilities Borrowings liabilities Borrowings liabilities Within one year Between one and two years Between two and five years Over five years 305 28 324
In April 2003 Reuters entered into a committed syndicated credit facility for 1.0 billion.
520 million of the facility either expired or was voluntarily cancelled in 2004.
At 31 December 2004 Reuters had 480 million available under the facility.
The facility was undrawn during 2004.
The commitment expires and final repayment is due in April 2008.
At the same time as the syndicated credit facility was arranged committed bilateral facilities of 90 million were also put in place on similar terms.
During 2004 66 million of the facilities either expired or were voluntarily cancelled.
At 31 December 2004 Reuters had 24 million available all of which was undrawn.
No loans were outstanding under this facility during 2004.
In addition at 31 December 2004 the Group had unused shortterm uncommitted bank borrowing facilities denominated in various currencies the sterling equivalent of which was approximately 200 million at money market rates varying principally between 2% and 6% depending on the currency.
56 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Restated Restatedtel
Fixed assets Intangible assets 1telTangible assets 1telInvestments 16 Investments in joint ventures Share of gross assets 110 108 207 Share of gross liabilities 50 56 110 Share of net assets of associates 23 230 266 Other investments 192 1448 Current assets Stock Debtors 18 544 708 1019 Deferred taxation 2telInvestments Investments held for sale 16 108 Other shortterm investments 1telCash at bank and in hand 83 72 158 1725 1677 2008 Creditors Amounts falling due within one year 20 1257 1766 2198 Net current assetsliabilities 468 89 190 Total assets less current liabilities 1202 1103 1258 Creditors Amounts falling due after more than one year 21 348 425 354 Provisions for liabilities and charges Pensions and similar obligations 23 49 63 59 Deferred taxation 24 29 33 27 Other provisions 25 164 175 159 Net assets 612 407 659 Capital and reserves 26 Calledup share capital 359 358 358 Share premium account 96 91 91 Other reserve 1717 1717 1717 Capital redemption reserve 1 1 1 Profit and loss account reserve 1673 1479 1695 Shareholders equity 412 212 428 Equity minority interests 200 195 231 Capital employed 612 407 659 Restated following the adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 see Accounting Basis on page 72.
The balance sheet of Reuters Group PLC is shown on page 71.
The financial statements on pages 4373 and the Summary of differences between UK and US generally accepted accounting principles on pages 7480 were approved by the directors on 7 March 2005.
Tom Glocer David Grigson CEO CFO CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET at 31 December NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 13 SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS The tables below show total assets and noninterest bearing net assets by Customer Segment and by location on a basis consistent with the segmental analysis of profit in note 1.
For the reasons discussed in that note the assets in any location are not matched with the revenue earned in that location.
Noninterest
Total assets bearing net assets Restated Restated Restated Restatedteltel By customer segment m m m m Sales and Trading Research and Asset Management Enterprise 8 5 Media Total Customer Segment
Operations and Technology
Corporate Services
Instinet Group 918 1154 1344 30 9 79 Total assetsnoninterest bearing net assets 2459 2869 345telInterest bearing net assetsliabilities Total net assets Central total assets by customer segment consist principally of Reuters cash and shortterm investments.
Noninterest
Total assets bearing net assets Restated Restated Restated Restatedteltel By location m m m Europe Middle East and Africa The Americas 1072 1323 166telAsiaPacific
Total assetsnoninterest bearing net assets 2459 2869 345telFixed assets 734 1192 1448 Current assets 1725 1677 2008 Total assets 2459 2869 3456 Central total assets by location consist principally of those assets held by head office operations together with unamortised goodwill and other intangibles.
RECONCILIATION OF MOVEMENTS IN SHAREHOLDERS FUNDS for the year ended 31 December Restated Restatedtel m m m Retained profitloss for the period 211 90 394 Unrealised gain on deemed partial disposal of subsidiary undertakings  1 Unrealised gain on deemed partial disposal of associates  12 Unrealised gain on disposal of fixed asset investments  10 Translation differences taken directly to reserves 25 113 95 Taxation on translation differences taken directly to reserves 10 Shares issued during the year 6 2 Amounts creditedcharged in respect of employee share schemes 18 13 1 Purchase of own shares   65 Net movement in shareholders equity 200 216 528 Opening shareholders equity as previously stated 286 496 1109 Prior period adjustment see Accounting Basis on page 72 74 68 153 Opening shareholders equity as restated 212 428 956 Closing shareholders equity 412 212 428 NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET continued 58 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 15 TANGIBLE ASSETS
Computer equipment Freehold Leasehold systems and motor property property equipment vehicles
Cost
31 December tel1040 247 1746 Exchange differences
Disposals
31 December tel860 193 1397
31 December 2003 97 112 853 203 1265 Exchange differences Charged in the year
December 2004 73 93 710 166 1042 Net book amount 31 December  December tel187tel 2003 Net book amount of leasehold property m m Longterm leaseholds Shortterm leaseholds Total leasehold property 94 102 Contracted capital commitments not provided 14 INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Goodwill Trade names knowhow Total
31 December 2003 1036 39 161 1236 Exchange differences 30  7 37 Additions 6 1 7 Disposals 82   82 Adjustments see note 31 on page 69 6   6 31 December 118 Amortisation and impairment 31 December 2003 798 11 52 861 Exchange differences 16  3 19 Disposals 68   68 Charged in the year Amortisation 38 3 21 62 Impairment 14   14 31 December 2004 766 14 70 850 Net book amount 31 December December INVESTMENTS Interests in Interests in Interests in Other joint ventures associates own shares investments
Fixed asset investments m Net assetscost 31 December 2003 as previously stated Prior period adjustment   74  74 31 December 2003 as restated 52 226  54 332 Reclassifications  31   31 Exchange differences Arising in year  share of Operating lossesprofits Profit on disposal of business 9  9 Interest receivable
Dividends received Loans repaid to joint ventures see note 29 Disposals see note 31 Impairment    1 1 Shareholder taxes 2    2 31 December 2004 60 20  28 108
31 December 2003 4   4 Charged in the year 31 December 2004  3 3 Net book amount Net assetscost 60 20  28 108 Goodwill 3   3 31 December 2004 60 23  28 111 Net book amount Net assetscost as previously stated Prior period adjustment Net assetscost as restated 52 226  54 332 Goodwill 4   4 31 December 2003 as restated 52 230  54 336 Fixed asset listed investments at 31 December 2004 Carrying value    13 13 Market value   19 19 Interests in Interests in Interests in Other joint ventures associates own shares investments
Current asset investments m
31 December 2003 Reclassifications   31 31 Additions   82 82 Exchange differences    2 2 Impairment    3 3 31 December 2004    108 108 Current asset listed investments at 31 December 2004 Carrying value   29 29 Market value    115 115 Prior to the adoption by the Group of UITF38 Accounting for ESOP Trusts the shares held in Reuters Group PLC by the Reuters ESOTs were held as a fixed asset investment.
In accordance with the requirements of UITF38 these shares have been deducted from shareholders equity.
This change has been accounted for as a prior period adjustment and previously reported figures have been restated accordingly see note 26 on page 66.
Fixed asset other investments consist principally of small equity investments.
Impairment write downs have been made when based on directors valuations a permanent diminution in the carrying value of the investment has occurred.
The reclassification of investments from interests in associates within fixed asset investments to other investments within current asset investments arises from the partdisposal of Reuters interest in TSI see note 31 on page 69 and reflects managements intention to dispose of its remaining shareholding.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 59 NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET continued 60 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 16 INVESTMENTS continued On 16 November 2004 Reuters purchased the 49% of the voting shares of Radianz that it did not already own from Equant thereby increasing its shareholding from 51% to 100% of voting shares.
The acquisition of the additional 49% stake is included within current asset investments.
The 49% was acquired with a view to resale and the stake has not been previously consolidated in the Group financial statements.
As permitted by the Companies Act Radianz has not been consolidated at 31 December 2004.
The original investment has continued to be equity accounted in accordance with FRS 9 Associates and Joint Ventures as shown in the table above.
The aggregated capital and reserves of Radianz as at 31 December 2004 were 96 million and the loss for the year was 7 million.
Balances between Reuters and Radianz as at 31 December 2004 and details of the nature and extent of transactions between the two parties during the year are given in note 29 Related Party Transactions.
During 2004 Reuters wrote down the carrying value of its investment in Radianz by 3 million.
Had all listed investments been disposed of on 31 December 2004 no tax would have been payable on the assumption that none of the earnings would be repatriated.
1.0 million TSI shares subject to inthemoney options held by Reuters employees who worked at TIBCO Finance Technology Inc.
Reuters subsidiary which was incorporated into other Reuters businesses in 2001 have been included in the market value of current asset investments at the value of the option proceeds.
17 STOCKtel m m Contract work in progress 3 22 Less progress payments Equipment stock Total stock 3 21 18 DEBTORStel m m Amounts falling due within one year Trade debtors Less allowance for doubtful accounts Instinet counterparty debtors Amounts owed by joint ventures and associates Other debtors Prepayments and accrued income Amounts falling due after more than one year Other debtors Prepayments and accrued income Total debtors 544 708 1019 19 OTHER SHORTTERM INVESTMENTStel
Government securities
Other deposits
Unlisted
Certificates of deposit
Term deposits
Overseas
Other deposits
Overseas
Total other shortterm investments 753 622 570 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 20 CREDITORS AMOUNTS FALLING DUE WITHIN ONE YEARtel m m Trade creditors
Instinet counterparty creditors Deferred income Amounts owed to joint ventures and associates Other creditors Other taxation and social security 061 1412 Bank overdrafts Bank loans Other borrowings Current UK corporation and overseas taxation Proposed dividend Total creditors falling due within one year 1257 1766 2198 Current UK corporation and overseas taxation comprises UK corporation tax Overseas taxes Total current UK corporation and overseas taxation CREDITORS AMOUNTS FALLING DUE AFTER MORE THAN ONE YEARtel m m Term notes 329 406 353 Accruals and deferred income 17 19 Other creditors 2 Amounts owed to joint ventures Total creditors falling due after more than one year 348 425 354 The maturity profile of all bank overdrafts bank loans and other borrowings is given in note 12.
22 CONCENTRATION OF CREDIT RISK Reuters Group is exposed to concentrations of credit risk.
Reuters Group invests in UK and US government securities and with high credit quality financial institutions.
Reuters Group limits the amount of credit exposure to any one financial institution.
The Group is also exposed to credit risk from its trade debtors which are concentrated in the financial community.
Reuters Group estimates that approximately 72% of its subscribers are financial institutions 17% are corporations in other sectors of the business community 4% are from the news media and 7% are government institutions and individuals worldwide 2003 70% 16% 6% and 8% respectively 2002 68% 19% 6% and 7% respectively.
In addition Instinet Group is exposed to the possibility of trades between its counterparties failing to settle.
Due to the settlement mechanisms employed the maximum exposure is generally limited to the market movement between the trade date and the settlement date.
There are no material unprovided offbalance sheet exposures or positions in respect of trades undertaken on or prior to 31 December 2004.
23 PENSIONS AND SIMILAR OBLIGATIONS Reuters Group has established various pension arrangements covering the majority of its employees.
In all plans except those which are internally funded the assets are held separately from those of the Group and are independently administered.
Defined contribution plans Reuters Group operates 34 defined contribution plans covering approximately 67% of its employees of which the largest plans are the Reuters Pension Fund the Reuters Retirement Plan and the Reuters 401K Pension Plans.
The percentage of employees covered and the company contribution to these plans were
Reuters Pension Fund 10.3% 9.5% Reuters Retirement Plan 16.1% 7.0% Reuters 401K Pension Plans 24.8% 6.0% NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET continued 62 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 23 PENSIONS AND SIMILAR OBLIGATIONS continued Defined benefit plans The Group also operates 33 defined benefit plans covering approximately 24% of employees.
Individually these plans are of a relatively minor nature.
The 17 largest plans are valued under SSAP 24 by independently qualified actuaries using the projected unit credit method.
The SSAP 24 provision is reviewed annually based on locally reported information with the most recent review being at 1 January 2004.
The smaller remaining plans are subject to regular valuations based on accepted actuarial practice and standards within the country in which the plan is established.
The largest plans are directly invested and others are invested in insurance contracts.
The remainder are internally funded in accordance with local practice with provisions in the subsidiary undertakings to recognise the pension obligations.
Funding policy is set in accordance with local requirements.
The largest defined benefit plans are the UK Supplementary Pension Scheme SPS and those in Switzerland Japan and Hong Kong.
The charges in respect of these plans in 2004 were 2 million 3 million 2 million and 1 million respectively 2003 2 million 5 million 3 million and 2 million respectively.
Details of the SSAP 24 valuation results in respect of these plans are given below.
UK SPS Switzerland Japan Hong Kong Percentage of employees covered 0.2% 4.2% 2.4% 1.0%
Investment return preretirement 6.9% 4.5% 3.0% 7.0% Investment return postretirement 5.4% 4.5% 3.0% 7.0% Salary growth 3.9% 3.0% 3.0% 5.0% Pension increases 2.4% 1.5% 2.0% Market value of assets m Present value of past service liabilities m Postretirement medical benefits In the US the Group closed its postretirement medical plan with effect from 1 July 2002.
A total of 190 employees retirees and covered spouses retain entitlement to postretirement medical benefits which remain unfunded.
The principal assumptions used in the most recent actuarial valuation undertaken at 1 January 2004 were a discount rate of 8% and that the growth in healthcare costs would decrease from 9% per annum in 2004 to 6% by 2007 and remain at 5% thereafter.
Movement on pension provisions and similar obligationstel m m Opening balance Profit and loss account see note 2 Defined contribution plans Defined benefit plans Postretirement medical benefits Utilised in the year Closing balance 40 million of the 49 million closing balance relates to schemes valued in accordance with SSAP 24 2003 52 million 2002 47 million.
FRS 17 Fourth year transitional disclosures Composition of the schemes Full actuarial valuations were carried out at various dates between 1 January 2003 and 31 December 2004 and updated to 31 December 2004 where necessary by independent qualified actuaries in accordance with FRS 17.
The major assumptions used by the actuary at 31 December 2004 were UK plans Overseas plans Postretirement medical benefitstelteltel Discount rate 5.25% 5.50% 5.50% 3.63% 4.03% 4.10% 5.75% 6.25% 6.75% Inflation assumption 2.75% 2.50% 2.25% 1.46% 1.44% 1.52% 2.00% 2.00% 2.00% Rate of increase in salaries 4.00% 3.75% 4.00% 2.56% 2.55% 3.06% Rate of increase in pensions in payment 2.75% 2.50% 2.25% 1.59% 1.42% 1.69% The assets in the scheme and expected return on assets were Expected rate of return on assets Equities 8.25% 8.25% 8.25% 7.12% 7.23% 7.60% Bonds 4.50% 5.00% 5.00% 3.04% 3.76% 3.86% Property 6.50% 6.67% 6.60% Cash 4.00% 3.75% 3.50% 2.18% 2.83% 2.65%
4.95% 4.77% 5.25% Market value m
Bonds
Property 9 11
Other
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 23 PENSIONS AND SIMILAR OBLIGATIONS continued The following amounts at 31 December were measured in accordance with the requirements of FRS 17
UK plans Overseas plans medical benefits
Total market value of assets    247 153 130 Present value of scheme liabilities 159 57 63 158 140 132 3 5 6 320 202 201 Deficit in the scheme 36 20 30 34 24 35 3 5 6 73 49 71 Related deferred tax asset Net pension liability 25 14 21 24 16 25 2 3 4 51 33 50 The assets and liabilities reported under UK plans cover a small UK scheme with 35 active members together with unfunded early retirement and retirement benefit schemes the liabilities of which are covered through book reserves.
The figures do not include Reuters Pension Fund as this is a defined contribution plan and its assets and liabilities are not required to be disclosed under FRS 17.
If the above amounts had been recognised in the financial statements the Groups net assets and profit and loss reserve at 31 December would be as follows Restated Restatedtel m m Net assets per consolidated balance sheet 612 407 659 Net pension liability already recognised in net assets Net assets before impact of FRS 1telNet pension liability under FRS 17 Net assets after impact of FRS 1telConsolidated profit and loss account reserve 1673 1479 1695 Net pension liability already recognised in profit and loss account reserve Profit and loss account reserve before impact of FRS 17 1700 1509 1719 Net pension liability under FRS 17 Profit and loss account reserve after impact of FRS 17 1649 1476 1669 Under the requirements of FRS 17 the following amounts would have been recognised in the performance statements in the year to 31 December 2004 2003 Post Post retirement retirement Overseas medical Overseas medical UK plans plans benefits Total UK plans plans benefits
Analysis of amount charged to operating profit Current service cost 2 10  12 1 11  12 Past service cost 1   1  1 1 Total operating charge 1 10 11 1 12 13 Analysis of amount credited to other finance income Expected return on pension scheme assets 46  10 26  8 Interest on pension scheme liabilities 4 5  9 3 5  8 Net return 1 1 1 1   NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET continued 64 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 23 PENSIONS AND SIMILAR OBLIGATIONS continued Amounts that would have been recognised in performance statements under FRS 17 continued 2004 2003 Post Post retirement retirement Overseas medical Overseas medical UK plans plans benefits Total UK plans plans benefits
Analysis of amount recognised in statement of total recognised gains and losses STRGL Actual return less expected return on pension scheme assets 1 1  2 2 10  12 Experience lossesgains arising on the scheme liabilities 11 5 1 5 821 7 Changes in assumptions underlying the present value of the scheme liabilities 8 14  22 1 5 4 Actuarial lossgain recognised in the STRGL 20 10 1 29 Movements in deficit during the year Deficit in the scheme at beginning of the year 20 24 5 49 30 35 6 71 Movement in the year Current service cost 2 10  12 1 11  12 Employer contributions  13 Past service costs 1  1  1  1 Other finance income  1  1 1 1 Actuarial lossgain recognised in the STRGL 20 10 1 29 Effect of currency translation  1  1  1  1 Deficit in scheme at end of year 36 34 3 73 20 24 5 49 History of experience gains and losses Difference between the expected and actual return on scheme assets Amount m 1 1  2 2 10  12 Percentage of scheme assets at period end % 0.8% 0.8%  0.8% 5.4% 8.6%  7.8% Experience gains and losses of scheme liabilities Amount m 11 5 1 5 8 2 1 7 Percentage of the present value of the scheme liabilities at period end % 6.9% 3.2% 33.3% 1.6% 14.1% 1.4% 20.0% 3.4% Total amount recognised in the STRGL Amount m 20 10 1 29 Percentage of the present value of the scheme liabilities at period end % 12.6% 6.3% 33.3% 9.1% 15.8% 9.3% 20.0% 11.4%
Overseas medical UK plans plans benefits
History of experience gains and losses continued m m m m Difference between the expected and actual return on scheme assets Amount m 9 17  26 Percentage of scheme assets at period end % 27.8% 17.9%  20.4% Experience gains and losses of scheme liabilities Amount m  9 3 12 Percentage of the present value of the scheme liabilities at period end %  5.4% 46.3% 5.7% Total amount recognised in the STRGL Amount m 9 47 1 57 Percentage of the present value of the scheme liabilities at period end % 14.8% 35.1% 27.9% 28.3% Two of the overseas plans are closed to new entrants therefore under the projected unit credit method the current service cost will increase as a percentage of payroll as members of the scheme approach retirement.
The service cost for these schemes totals 2 million in 2004.
Contributions to funded plans in 2005 are expected to increase slightly on 2004 levels.
The Group is anticipating that a further overseas plan may be closed to new entrants in 2005.
Existing members will retain accrued benefits in the scheme but transfer future contributions into a new defined contribution scheme.
24 DEFERRED TAXATION ASSETSLIABILITIEStel m m Opening balance 240 233 154 Exchange differences 2 13 Profit and loss account 33 20 79 Closing balance 205 240 233 The closing balance is analysed below Timing differences Fixed asset related 45 41 39 Tax losses 45 52 55 Reuters Group has provided for deferred tax liabilities in respect of dividends which are either accrued as receivable or where there is a binding agreement to remit the earnings of overseas subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates.
To the extent that earnings of its overseas subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates are not expected to be remitted in the foreseeable future no tax is expected to be payable.
Valuation
Assets allowance Liabilities Net Total timing differences at 31 December 2004 Fixed asset related Tax losses
The valuation allowance of 16 million in respect of fixed assets is made against assets in respect of which it is uncertain that suitable taxable income will be available when the timing differences reverse 2003 16 million.
Similarly the valuation allowance of 114 million in respect of losses is made where it is uncertain that suitable taxable income will arise.
It has increased by 11 million in 2004.
Other timing differences include reorganisation costs accrued employee costs including pension costs and other provisions.
Reuters does not recognise the potential future tax benefit of capital losses.
The net closing deferred tax balance has been analysed astel m m Deferred tax asset Amounts falling due within one year 132 143 113 Amounts falling due after more than one year 102 130 147 Deferred tax liability included in provisions for liabilities and charges 29 33 27 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 65 NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET continued 66 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 25 OTHER PROVISIONS The movement in other provisions during 2004 was as follows Legal Other Rationalisation compliance property Other Total m m 31 December Translation differences Charged against profit Utilised in the year
Reclassification
31 December Included within the rationalisation provision at the end of 2004 are obligations related to the Reuters Fast Forward and Instinet Group restructuring programmes which were first announced in 2003 and include headcount reduction and property rationalisation.
Severancerelated provisions are expected to be utilised during 2005 and propertyrelated provisions will be utilised over the remaining lease periods.
The legalcompliance provision represents the expected cost of settling disputes arising from contractual arrangements with thirdparty suppliers and individuals.
Other property provisions reflect Reuters contractual liability at the balance sheet date to make good dilapidations under ongoing rental agreements outside the rationalisation programmes.
26 CAPITAL AND RESERVES Capital Share Profit and loss Share Calledup redemption premium Other account holders share capital reserve account reserve reserve equity m m m 31 December 2001 as previously stated 358 1 89 1717 2378 1109 Prior period adjustment see Accounting Basis on page 72     153 153 31 December 2001 as restated 358 1 89 1717 2225 956 Shares issued during the year   2  2 Unrealised gains on disposal of fixed asset investment     10 10 Unrealised gain on deemed partial disposal of subsidiary undertaking    1 1 Unrealised gain on deemed partial disposal of associates     12 12 Purchase of own shares     65 65 Amounts credited in respect of employee share schemes     1 1 Translation differences     95 95 Loss for the year as restated     394 394 31 December 2002 as restated 358 1 91 1717 1695 428 Amounts charged in respect of employee share schemes     13 13 Translation differences     113 113 Loss for the year as restated     90 90 31 December 2003 as restated 358 1 91 1717 1479 212 Shares issued during the year 1 5   6 Amounts credited in respect of employee share schemes     18 18 Translation differences     25 25 Taxation on translation differences     10 10 Retained profit for the year     211 211 31 December 1717 1673 412 During 2004 6 million 2003 nil 2002 2 million was received by Reuters Group PLC on the issue of shares in respect of the exercise of options awarded under various share option plans.
Cumulative translation losses at 31 December 2004 totalled 188 million 2003 163 million 2002 50 million.
In 1998 a courtapproved capital reorganisation took place.
In exchange for every 15 ordinary shares in Reuters Holdings PLC shareholders received prorata 13 ordinary shares in Reuters Group PLC plus 13.60 in cash.
The difference between the proforma nominal value of shares in issue of Reuters Group PLC immediately prior to the reorganisation and the previously reported capital and reserves of Reuters Holdings PLC excluding the profit and loss reserve represents the merger difference which has since been reflected in the Other reserve.
As at 31 December 2004 the deduction from shareholders equity in respect of treasury stock held by the ESOTs was 209 million 2003 225 million 2002 235 million.
The number of unvested shares held by the ESOTs as at 31 December 2004 was 32.0 million 2003 34.4 million 2002 35.9 million.
These shares had a market value of 121 million as at 31 December 2004 2003 81 million 2002 64 million.
27 SHARE CAPITALtel m m
One Founders Share of 1 2100 million ordinary shares of 25 pence each Allotted calledup and fully paid One Founders Share of 1 Ordinary shares of 25 pence each Number of ordinary shares of 25 pence each millions 1435.5 1432.5 1432.5 Shares allotted during the year millionstel 2951607 shares in Reuters Group PLC were issued for cash under employee share schemes at prices ranging from 90p to 397p per share 3.0  0.4 The rights attaching to the Founders Share are set out on page 83.
The consideration for shares allotted during the period was 6 million 2003 nil 2002 2 million.
28 EMPLOYEE SHARE OPTION PLANS Reuters Group PLC operates share plans for the benefit of employees as explained in the Remuneration Report.
Since the flotation of Reuters Holdings PLC in 1984 107 million shares have been issued under these plans.
Activity relating to share options to subscribe for new shares for the three years ended 31 December 2004 was as follows Discretionary Weighted Save as employee and average youearn executive Plan exercise price plans plans 2000 Total Ordinary shares under option in millions including ADSs 31 December 2001 10.4 7.7 20.0 38.1 6.55
Exercised
Expired cancelled or lapsed 31 December 2002 10.7 38.6 16.7 66.0 5.10
Exercised
Expired cancelled or lapsed 31 December 2003 30.2 56.4 14.1 100.7 3.24
Exercised 0.5 2.5 Expired cancelled or lapsed 31 December 2004 29.9 59.2 11.4 100.5 3.11 Number of participants at 31 December 2004 7939 7238 5690 The following table summarises information relating to the number of shares under option and those which were exercisable at 31 December 2004 Weighted Options Exercisable average period Weighted exercisable at weighted Total shares remaining to average 31 December average under option full vesting exercisable 2004 exercise million months price million price Range of exercise prices Ordinary shares 9.0111.00 ADSs US 10.0130.00 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 67 NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET continued 68 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 28 EMPLOYEE SHARE OPTION PLANS continued In August 1990 January 1994 and August 2004 Reuters established ESOTs with the power to acquire shares in the open market.
The trustee of these trusts is an offshore independent professional trustee.
Shares purchased by the trusts which are included within reserves on the consolidated balance sheet will be used either to meet obligations under the companys restricted share plans described in the Remuneration Report on pages 3240 or to satisfy the exercise of options granted or to be granted under other employee share option plans.
Alternatively new shares may be issued to satisfy these option obligations.
SAYE options are issued at a 20% discount to the market price at the time of granting the options.
This does not give rise to a charge against profit as Reuters has taken advantage of the exemption allowed under UITF17 Employee Share Schemes.
29 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS During the year Reuters Group carried out a number of transactions with related parties in the normal course of business and on an arms length basis.
Details of these transactions are shown below 31 Services Amounts 31 December provided collected December 2003 received paid 2004 m m m m Amounts receivable
Factiva
Other
Amounts receivable 21 94 104 11 Amounts payable
Factiva
Other
Amounts payable 28 318 334 12 The above amounts relate to the rendering or receiving of services between both parties including agency arrangements and licence agreements.
The other amounts principally relate to TSI and the Reuters building at 3 Times Square.
In addition to the above amounts Reuters also has the following related party transactions Reuters had a promissory note payable to Factiva with a balance of 1 million outstanding at the start of 2004 which was repaid during the year.
Reuters also held an interest bearing loan of 5 million payable to Factiva at the start of 2004.
This was repaid during the year and a further interest bearing loan of 11 million was taken out during the year.
As part of the transaction to acquire 49% of Radianz voting shares from Equant Reuters assumed a liability of 22 million due to Radianz which prior to the sale represented capital contributions due from Equant.
30 OPERATING LEASE COMMITMENTS Minimum payments for noncancellable operating leases for terms in excess of one year from 31 December are as followstel m m Year ended 31 December 2004  Thereafter Total minimum lease payments At 31 December the Group had commitments to make payments during the following year under noncancellable operating leases as follows Land and buildings Otherteltel m m m m Operating leases which expire Within one year In the second to fifth years Over five years Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 31 ACQUISITIONS AND DISPOSALS
On 11 March 2004 Reuters acquired the 50% shareholding in Icor Brokerage Ltd that it did not already own and on 22 October 2004 acquired Fitzrovia International plc.
Fair value Book value adjustments Total m m Intangible fixed assets 1 Current assets 1 Current liabilities 1  1 Provisions for liabilities and charges 1  1 Net assets acquired 1 1 Cash consideration
The fair value adjustment relates to trademarks held by Fitzrovia International plc which were not recognised on that companys balance sheet.
The aggregate post acquisition contribution of the acquired entities to turnover and operating profit was immaterial.
In addition on 16 November 2004 Reuters Group acquired Equants entire stake in Radianz for 60 million in cash together with the release of future funding obligations of 22 million.
The accounting treatment of Radianz is described in note 16.
Disposals
During 2004 Reuters disposed of a number of subsidiary undertakings including TowerGroup Yankee ORT Reuters Investment Bermuda Ltd Reuters Funds Investments Ltd Reuters UGS Property Ltd plus a number of small whollyowned subsidiaries.
These disposals resulted in a net profit of 10 million.
Losses on deemed partial disposal of Reuters interest in Instinet Group arising on the exercise of Instinet share awards by Instinet Group employees during the year amounted to 1 million.
During the year Reuters made disposals of certain equity investments.
In February 2004 Reuters reduced its stake in TSI from 48.4% to 8.8% 6.2% fully diluted through a combination of public offering and a sale of shares back to TSI for aggregate net proceeds of 310 million realising a profit of 151 million.
Reuters disposed of its 34.2% stake in GL TRADE realising a gain of 48 million.
Other disposals of joint ventures and associates realised net profits of 7 million.
In June 2004 Radianz disposed of its voice service business the Reuters share of the gain arising on the disposal was 9 million.
In 2004 Reuters disposed of a number of small fixed asset investments realising a net loss on disposal of 1 million.
Instinet Group made disposals of certain fixed asset investments during 2004 including the disposal of its stake in Euronext a further partdisposal of its stake in Archipelago the disposal of its stake in the London Stock Exchange and other disposals of small fixed asset investments.
The net gain arising from these disposals was 20 million.
Realised net gains all of which were recorded in the 2004 profit and loss account were On disposal of subsidiary undertakings 10 On deemed partial disposal of subsidiary undertaking 1 On disposal of joint ventures and associates On disposal of business by joint venture 9 On disposal of other fixed asset investments Recorded in the profit and loss account 243 Adjustments to goodwill Adjustments of 6 million have been made to goodwill during the year see note 14 on page 58.
These relate to the renegotiation of earn out agreements in relation to the acquisitions of AVT Technologies Limited and Capital Access International LLC and also to the finalisation of fair value adjustments in respect of the acquisition of Multex.
The fair value adjustments are based on an independent valuation performed by professionallyqualified valuers.
32 SUBSIDIARY UNDERTAKINGS JOINT VENTURES AND ASSOCIATES The principal subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates at 31 December 2004 all of which are included in the consolidated financial statements are shown below.
Radianz became a subsidiary on 16 November 2004 when Reuters acquired the 49% voting stake owned by Equant.
The accounting treatment of Radianz is described in note 16 on pages 5960.
Percentage
Country of Principal area of equity Subsidiary undertakings incorporation of operation shares held Bridge Trading Company USA USA 100 Instinet Group Incorporated USA USA 62 Radianz Limited UK Worldwide 100 Reuters AG Germany Germany 100 Reuters America LLC USA USA 100 Reuters Australia Pty Limited Australia Australia 100 Reuters BV Netherlands Netherlands 100 Reuters Canada Limited Canada CanadaUSA 100 Reuters Europe SA Switzerland SpainPortugal 100 Reuters Finance PLC UK UK 100 Reuters Holdings Limited UK UK 100 Reuters Hong Kong Limited Cook Islands Hong Kong 100 Reuters Italia SpA Italy Italy 100 Reuters Japan Kabushiki Kaisha Japan Japan 100 Reuters Limited UK Worldwide 100 Reuters Middle East Limited Cook Islands Middle East 100 Reuters Nederland BV Netherlands Netherlands 100 Reuters SA Switzerland Worldwide 100 Reuters Services SA France France 100 Reuters Singapore Limited Singapore Singapore 100 Reuters Transaction Services Limited UK Worldwide 100
1 Denotes investment companies.
All others are operating companies.
2 Reuters owns 100% of the voting ordinary share capital of Radianz Limited.
Radianz also has C ordinary shares which are held by an Employee Share Ownership Trust.
Percentage
Country of Principal area of equity Joint ventures and associates incorporation of operation shares held Factiva LLC USA Worldwide 50 3 Times Square Associates LLC USA USA 50 The financial years for all the above undertakings end on 31 December.
Factiva is a 50% joint venture with Dow Jones providing a broad range of global news and a deep historical archive of business information which client organisations can integrate into their business applications and intranet portals.
3 Times Square Associates is a venture with Rudins Times Square Associates LLC formed to acquire develop and operate the 3 Times Square property and building.
33 POST BALANCE SHEET EVENTS On 28 February 2005 Reuters and Instinet Group entered into an agreement for Instinet Group to acquire Bridge Trading Company for US21.5 million in Instinet Group stock.
The transaction is subject to NASD approval and other customary conditions and is expected to close by the end of April 2005.
The transaction will be accounted for as a transfer of net assets between Group companies at fair value with consequent impact on the minority interest in Instinet Group.
There is no tax on the transaction.
Since the year end Reuters has reduced its holding in TSI to 7.4% generating total net proceeds of 9 million.
No tax is expected to be payable as a result of this transaction.
NOTES ON THE CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET continued 70 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 BALANCE SHEET OF REUTERS GROUP PLC at 31 December Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004tel 2002
Fixed asset investment 34a 5246 5246 2672 Current assets Debtors falling due within one year Prepayments and accrued income 1 Amounts owed by Group undertakings 716  1861 Debtors falling due after more than one year Prepayments and accrued income 2 Deferred taxation 3 Other debtors 48 Current liabilities Creditors amounts falling due within one year Amounts owed to Group undertakings 3736 2499 1227 Other borrowings Proposed dividends Net current liabilitiesassets 3179 2724 137 Total assets less current liabilities 2067 2522 2809 Other borrowings due after more than one year Net assets 2042 2294 2457 Capital and reserves 34c Calledup share capital 2telCapital redemption reserve Share premium account Other reserve Profit and loss account reserve 880 1145 1308 Capital employed 2042 2294 2457 Lossprofit attributable to ordinary shareholders This balance sheet was approved by the directors on 7 March 2005.
Tom Glocer David Grigson CEO CFO Advantage has been taken of the provisions of Section  of the Companies Act 1985 not to present a separate profit and loss account for Reuters Group PLC.
34 NOTES ON THE BALANCE SHEET OF REUTERS GROUP PLC a.
Fixed asset investment The majority of the investment represents the shareholding of Reuters Group PLC in Reuters Holdings Limited. b.
Borrowings
Other borrowings falling due within one year relate to issues of 70 million of Euro Commercial Paper which was repaid in January 2005 and 57 million of Euro Medium Term Notes repayable at various dates between April 2005 and May 2005.
Other borrowings falling due after more than one year relate to Euro Medium Term Notes issued which are repayable at various dates between 2006 and 2008.
These borrowings have a weighted average interest rate payable of 5% after allowing for interest rate and cross currency swaps. c.
Capital and reserves Calledup Capital Share Profit and share redemption premium Other loss account capital reserve account reserve reserve Total m m m 31 December  1145 2294 Amounts receivable in respect of unissued shares    7  7 Shares allotted during the year 1  5   6 Loss for the year 31 December 042 Following the approval of a High Court Scheme of Arrangement the majority of the issued share capital of Reuters Holdings PLC was acquired by Reuters Group PLC in February 1998.
The loss for the year mainly represents interest and revaluation on intercompany borrowings and dividends paid to shareholders.
During the year Reuters Group PLC granted an option to the Reuters Group PLC 2004 Employee Trust.
The Trust will use the option in order to satisfy awards granted to Reuters employees outside of the UK under the Restricted Share Plan once the scheme vests see page 34.
The movement in the Other reserve represents the option proceeds received.
Accounting basis The financial statements are prepared under the historical cost convention and in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and applicable accounting standards.
UITF38 Accounting for ESOP Trusts has been adopted for the first time in the 2004 financial statements.
As a result shares in Reuters Group PLC held by ESOTs have been reclassified from fixed asset investments and are now treated as a deduction from Shareholders Equity.
No new shares have been acquired by the ESOTs during the year.
In addition revisions to UITF17 Employee Share Schemes have changed the basis on which the costs of employee share schemes are charged to the profit and loss account.
The impact of both these changes in accounting treatment has resulted in prior period adjustments and previously reported figures have been restated accordingly.
The reclassification of shares acquired by the Reuters ESOTs from fixed asset investments to Shareholders Equity has reduced net assets by 74 million as at 31 December 2003 by 68 million as at 31 December 2002 and by 153 million as at 31 December 2001.
The impact of adopting the amendment to UITF17 was to decrease profit before tax by 2 million for the year to 31 December 2004 and to increase profit before tax by 7 million for the year to 31 December 2003 and 149 million for the year to 31 December 2002.
The prior period adjustment in the Statement of Total Recognised Gains and Losses of 151 million reflects the change in the basis on which charges to the profit and loss account are determined and the reversal of previous impairment charges.
Following recently issued SEC guidance Reuters Group has determined that transactionrelated regulatory fees in Instinet Group are more appropriately reclassified and shown gross within revenue rather than offset within brokerage clearing and exchange fees.
For the years ended 31 December 2004 31 December 2003 and 31 December 2002 the regulatory fee expenses were 30 million 38 million and 18 million respectively.
This adjustment has no impact on profit before tax.
The acquisition of the remaining equity interests in Multex Investor Europe and Multex Investor Japan in 2003 was accounted for in accordance with FRS 2 Accounting for Subsidiary Undertakings which represented a departure from the requirements of the Companies Act 1985.
Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements include the financial statements of Reuters Group PLC and its subsidiaries to 31 December.
The results of subsidiaries are included for the period during which they are a member of the Group Reuters Groups share of the postacquisition results of joint ventures and associates.
Investments in joint ventures and associates are included at the Groups share of the net assets and unamortised goodwill at the dates of acquisition plus the Groups share of postacquisition reserves.
Foreign currency translation On consolidation the profit and loss accounts and cash flow statements of entities with nonsterling functional currencies are translated into sterling at the average rates for the year.
Exchange differences arising on consolidation as a result of the translation of the profit and loss account from the average rate to the yearend rate are accounted for through reserves.
Exchange differences that arise as a consequence of trading transactions and the translation of monetary assets and liabilities are taken to the profit and loss account.
Foreign currency investments including subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates are translated at the 31 December rate and the associated exchange differences are taken directly to reserves.
Exchange differences attributable to foreign currency borrowings used to finance the Groups foreign currency investments are taken directly to reserves.
Treasury
Reuters Group receives revenue and incurs expenses in more than 70 currencies and uses financial instruments to hedge a portion of its net cash flow and operating profit.
The derivative contracts are treated from inception as an economic hedge of the underlying financial instrument with matching accounting treatment and cash flows.
The derivative contracts have high correlation with the specific underlying risks being hedged both at inception and throughout the hedge period.
Reuters uses financial instruments to hedge a portion of its interest exposure.
Profits and losses on financial instruments are reported as part of profit for the period to which they relate.
Financial instruments hedging the risk on foreign currency assets are revalued at the balance sheet date and the resulting gain or loss offset against that arising from the translation of the underlying asset into sterling.
The Group does not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
Revenue
Revenue represents the turnover net of discounts derived from services provided to subscribers and sales of products applicable to the year.
Revenue from sales of subscriptionbased realtime and historical information services are recognised rateably over the term of the subscription.
Revenue from contracts for the outright sale of systemsbased product solutions which include the sale of fully developed software licences is recognised at the time of client acceptance.
Shortterm contracts are accounted for on a completed contract basis.
Longterm contracts are accounted for in accordance with the contractual terms either on a percentage of completion basis or on a time and materials as incurred basis.
Revenue from associated maintenance and support services is recognised rateably over the term of the maintenance contract.
Where contracts allow Reuters to recharge costs from communications suppliers and exchanges onwards to subscribers this income is recognised as revenue.
Transaction products usage revenue is accounted for on a trade date basis.
Securities transactions Securities transactions between Instinet Group counterparties which pass through Instinet Group and in its role as agency brokers are recorded on a settlement date basis and therefore are only reflected in the balance sheet if there is a failure to settle.
Revenues and related expenses arising from such securities transactions are accrued from the date of the transaction.
Development
Development expenditure is charged against profit in the year in which it is incurred.
Pensions and similar obligations The expected costs of defined benefit pensions and postretirement medical benefits are charged against profit so as to spread the cost over the service lives of the employees affected.
For defined contribution schemes the charge to the profit and loss account represents contributions payable by Reuters Group during the period.
Restricted share and Instinet longterm incentive plans Costs of the restricted share and Instinet longterm incentive plans are charged to profit over the vesting period of the awards.
Tangible fixed assets Depreciation is calculated on a straight line basis so as to write down the assets to their residual values over their expected useful lives Freehold land Not depreciated Freehold buildings Normally 50 years Leasehold property Over the term of the lease Computer systems equipment office equipment and motor vehicles 2 to 5 years ACCOUNTING POLICIES 72 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Stock and contract work in progress Stock and contract work in progress are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value less progress payments received and receivable from clients.
Progress payments in excess of the value of work carried out are included within creditors.
Cost is calculated on a first in first out basis by reference to the invoiced value of supplies and attributable costs of bringing stocks to their present location and condition.
Net realisable value is the estimated market value less selling costs.
Shortterm investments Government securities are stated in the balance sheet at the lower of cost plus accrued capital appreciation and market value.
Income from these securities and any adjustment for changes in their market value during the year is reported as part of profit.
Movements in shortterm investments are reported under the heading of management of liquid resources in the cash flow statement.
Debt issuance Mediumterm notes and commercial paper are stated at the amount of the net proceeds plus accrued interest or any discount or premium.
Discounts or premia to the nominal value are amortised over the term of the issue.
Costs associated with debt issuance are charged against profit over the life of the instrument.
Foreign currency swap agreements and forward contracts are used to convert nonsterling debt into sterling.
Interest rate swaps swaptions and forward rate agreements are used to manage interest rate exposures.
Amounts payable or receivable in respect of these derivatives are recognised as adjustments to interest expense over the period of the contract.
Leasing
Operating lease rentals are charged against profit on a straight line basis over the period of the lease.
Operating lease incentives received are initially deferred and subsequently recognised over the minimum contract period.
Deferred taxation Tax deferred or accelerated by the effect of timing differences is accounted for to the extent that a transaction or an event that has occurred at the balance sheet date gives rise to an obligation to pay more tax in the future or a right to pay less tax in the future.
Deferred taxation is recognised on an undiscounted basis.
However deferred tax assets are only recognised to the extent that based on all available evidence it is more likely than not that suitable taxable profits will arise from which the reversal of the asset can be deducted.
Goodwill and other intangible assets Goodwill is calculated as the difference between the fair value of the consideration paid and the fair value of the Groups share of the net assets at the date of acquisition.
No value is attributed to internally generated intangible assets.
Purchased goodwill and other intangibles are capitalised and amortised through the profit and loss account on a straight line basis over their estimated useful economic lives which are up to 20 years depending on the nature of the business acquired.
Impairment reviews are carried out at the end of the first financial year after acquisition and where there is any indication of impairment.
Impairment is measured by comparing the carrying value of the asset with the higher of the net realisable value and the value in use.
Any impairment charges are recognised in the profit and loss account for the period in which they arise.
Interest in shares of Reuters Group PLC Shares held by the employee share ownership trusts are recorded in the balance sheet as a deduction from Shareholders Equity at cost less shares unconditionally vested.
Fixed and current asset investments Fixed asset investments are held at cost net of permanent diminution in values as assessed by the directors.
Where it is Reuters Groups intention to dispose of an investment in the shortterm the investment is treated as a current asset and valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
01 ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with UK GAAP which differ in certain significant respects from US GAAP.
Prior period restatements In November 2003 the Group entered into cross currency interest rate swaps to hedge fixed rate Euro debt into floating rate other currencies principally US dollars.
These instruments have a maturity date of November 2010.
Under
UK GAAP the resulting US dollar foreign currency debt has been designated as a net investment hedge and foreign currency translation gains and losses arising on the instrument are recorded directly to equity and included in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
During the year as part of an overall review of complex derivative instruments the Group concluded that under US GAAP the gains or losses on these instruments are required to be included in the income statement.
The amounts for 2003 have been restated to remove the amount recorded directly to equity and include the amount within the income statement under US GAAP .
Under UK GAAP computer software licences acquired and other direct internal costs incurred for internal use software are expensed as incurred.
The
Group has reviewed its accounting for such items during the year and has concluded that the same treatment should not be applied under US GAAP which requires capitalisation of certain internal use software costs.
The Group has restated prior years to properly reflect the capitalisation and related amortisation of these costs under US GAAP .
The impact on the net loss basic and diluted earnings per ADS and Shareholders Equity in accordance with US GAAP of these restatements is as follows 2003 2002 Net loss in accordance with US GAAP m m Net loss in accordance with US GAAP as reported 38 127 Foreign exchange gain on derivative 18 Capitalisation of internal use software costs 422 Tax effect of adjustments 7 6 Net loss in accordance with US GAAP as restated 23 111 Basicdiluted earnings per ADS before 2003 2002 accounting change pence pence Basicdiluted earnings per ADS before accounting change as reported 16.3 49.5 Basicdiluted earnings per ADS before accounting change as restated 9.5 42.8 Basicdiluted earnings per ADS after accounting change Basicdiluted earnings per ADS after accounting change as reported 16.3 54.3 Basicdiluted earnings per ADS after accounting change as restated 9.5 47.6 2003 2002 Shareholders equity in accordance with US GAAP m m Shareholders equity in accordance with US GAAP as reported 245 528 Foreign exchange gain on derivative Capitalisation of internal use software costs 31 32 Tax effect of adjustments 10 9 Shareholders equity in accordance with US GAAP as restated 266 551 Revised accounting for ESOTs and employee share schemes in 2004 Under UK GAAP  the Group adopted Urgent Issues Task Force UITF Abstract 38 Accounting for ESOP Trusts for the 2004 financial statements as explained in the accounting policies note on pages 7273.
As a result shares in Reuters Group PLC held by employee share ownership trusts ESOTs have been reclassified from fixed asset investments and are now treated as a deduction from Shareholders Equity.
In addition revisions to UITF Abstract 17 Employee Share Schemes have changed the basis on which the costs of employee share schemes are charged to the profit and loss account.
The impact of these changes in accounting treatment has resulted in prior period adjustments and previously reported UK GAAP figures for 2003 and 2002 have been restated accordingly.
The summary of adjustments between UK and US GAAP has therefore been restated to reflect the restated UK GAAP figures and also changes to the differences between UK and US GAAP  as explained below Shares held by employee share ownership trusts ESOTs Under UK GAAP shares in Reuters Group PLC held by ESOTs are now shown as a deduction from Shareholders Equity until such time as share options vest unconditionally in employees whereas previously they were shown as a fixed asset investment.
Under US GAAP shares held by ESOTs are shown as a deduction from Shareholders Equity until share options are exercised by employees.
Employee Share Schemes Under UK GAAP  compensation charges relating to employee share schemes are based on the intrinsic value of the awards at the date of grant calculated as the market value of the shares less any option price to employees.
Previously awards satisfied by the issuance of shares from ESOTs primarily certain stockbased longterm incentive plans were expensed to the profit and loss account based on the original cost of shares held by the ESOTs less impairment.
Under US GAAP  the compensation charge of long term incentive plans is based on the value of the awards at the balance sheet date.
Under both UK and US GAAP  the total compensation charge is adjusted to take account of performance conditions and the compensation charge is spread over the service period.
The adjustment arising from this difference is classified within Employee costs.
A description of the relevant accounting principles which differ materially is given below. a.
Revenue recognition Under UK GAAP  revenue from contracts for the outright sale of systemsbased product solutions which include the sale of fully developed software licences is recognised at the time of client acceptance.
Under US GAAP  specific rules establish the criteria that must be met for revenue recognition.
Under these rules certain contracts with multiple elements require an amount of revenue to be deferred until all criteria are met for revenue to be recognised.
The UK to US GAAP adjustments in 2003 and 2002 arise from the release of revenue deferred in prior years.
No revenue has been deferred for the purposes of US GAAP in 2004.
Under UK GAAP soft dollar revenues are netted against operating costs in the profit and loss account.
Under US GAAP soft dollar revenues are presented gross in revenues and operating costs 2004 148 million 2003 169 million 2002 192 million.
There is no difference in net income as a result of the classification.
Under UK and US GAAP interest income arising on cash provided as security on stockborrowing transactions related to Instinet Groups clearing business is recorded in revenue.
Under UK GAAP interest on fixed income securities and on cash balances is recorded below operating activities in the profit and loss account.
Under US GAAP this interest is recorded in revenue. b.
Software
Under UK GAAP  costs of developing computer software products and websites are usually expensed in the year in which they are incurred.
Under
US GAAP  the costs of developing computer software products subsequent to establishing technical feasibility are capitalised.
Additionally certain costs relating to website development incurred subsequent to the planning stage are also capitalised.
The amortisation of the capitalised costs is based on the estimated future revenues or remaining estimated useful economic lives of the products involved.
Under UK GAAP  computer software licences acquired for internal use are expensed the year they are incurred.
Under US GAAP  certain costs relating to computer software licences acquired for internal use are capitalised.
Computer software costs that are incurred in the preliminary project stage are expensed as incurred.
Once the capitalisation criteria have been met external direct costs of licences and services consumed and internal employee costs incurred in developing or obtaining internal use software are capitalised.
Costs capitalised are amortised over the life of the licence. c.
Joint ventures and associates Under UK GAAP the difference between the book value and fair value of SUMMARY OF DIFFERENCES BETWEEN UK AND US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles GAAP 74 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 75 the assets contributed to joint ventures and associates is recognised in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
Under US GAAP the difference is released to the income statement over the anticipated life of the assets contributed to the venture.
Under UK GAAP  stock compensation expenses are not required to be recorded in respect of certain joint ventures and associates stock option plans.
Under US GAAP  the Groups share of the results of joint ventures and associates has been adjusted to reflect stock compensation charges where appropriate.
Under US GAAP  the Groups share of the results of joint ventures and associates is adjusted to reflect the nonamortisation of goodwill since 1 January 2002. d.
Gains on deemed disposal of subsidiary undertakings and associates Under UK GAAP gains on the deemed partial disposal of subsidiary undertakings and associates involving nonqualifying consideration are recorded in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
Under US GAAP these gains are recorded in the income statement and are calculated using asset and consideration values as determined under US GAAP. e.
Gainloss on disposal of subsidiary undertakings Under UK GAAP  goodwill is amortised on a systematic basis whereas under US GAAP goodwill is not amortised but tested for impairment on an annual basis.
Under US GAAP  therefore the carrying value of goodwill can be higher and result in a different gain or loss on disposal of subsidiary undertakings.
Under UK GAAP  the gain or loss on disposal of an overseas subsidiary is calculated with reference to assets translated to sterling at the foreign currency exchange rate prevailing at the date of disposal.
Under US GAAP on disposal of a foreign currency subsidiary the amount attributable to that entity and accumulated in the translation adjustment component of equity is removed from the separate component of equity and is reported as part of the gain or loss on sale of the subsidiary. f.
Gain on disposal of associates Under UK GAAP equity accounting for associates is based on results prepared in accordance with UK GAAP.
Under US GAAP  the Groups share of results of associates is adjusted to be based on results prepared in accordance with US GAAP .
Under UK GAAP  goodwill is amortised on a systematic basis whereas under US GAAP goodwill is not amortised but written down when an impairment arises.
These differences result in the carrying value of associates being different under US GAAP  and therefore different gains and losses arise on disposal.
Under UK GAAP the gain or loss on disposal of an investment in an associate held in a foreign currency is calculated with reference to the investment translated to sterling at the foreign currency exchange rate prevailing at the date of disposal.
Under US GAAP on disposal of a foreign currency associate the amount attributable to that entity and accumulated in the translation adjustment component of equity is removed from the separate component of equity and is reported as part of the gain or loss on sale of the associate. g.
Fixed asset investments Under UK GAAP fixed asset investments are held in the balance sheet at cost net of permanent diminution in value as assessed by the directors.
Under US GAAP fixed asset investments which are available for sale are stated at fair value with unrealised gains or losses included in the statement of other comprehensive income.
Under US GAAP  traded fixed asset investments are stated at fair value with movements in fair value included in the income statement. h.
Goodwill and other intangibles Under UK GAAP goodwill and other intangible assets are amortised.
Under
US GAAP prior to 1 July 2001 goodwill was amortised over its estimated useful life consistent with UK GAAP .
In 2002 Reuters adopted the provisions of Financial Accounting Standard No.
142 FAS 142 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets and as a result goodwill is no longer subject to amortisation under US GAAP.
In addition the nonamortisation of goodwill provisions of FAS 142 were effective immediately for goodwill arising on all acquisitions completed after 30 June 2001.
Under UK GAAP goodwill impairment reviews are carried out at the end of the first financial year after acquisition and where there is any indication of impairment.
Impairment is measured by comparing the carrying value of the business with the higher of the net realisable value and the value in use.
Under US GAAP the Group performed a transitional impairment test effective 1 January 2002 as required by FAS 142.
Goodwill impairment reviews are also conducted whenever the Group considers there to be an indication of impairment.
Beginning in 2002 the Group also completes an annual goodwill impairment test as required by FAS 142.
Under US GAAP where the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value then a goodwill impairment is recorded based on the excess of the carrying value of goodwill in a reporting unit over the implied fair value of that goodwill.
Under UK GAAP the fair value of quoted securities issued to effect a business combination is measured at the market price at the date of closing the acquisition.
Under US GAAP the fair value of the securities issued is determined using the market price for a reasonable period before and after the date that the terms of the acquisition are agreed to and announced.
Under UK GAAP contingent consideration arising as part of a business combination is included within goodwill and recorded as a liability at the time of the acquisition.
Under US GAAP  contingent consideration is recorded as an adjustment to goodwill at the time it is realised.
Under UK GAAP liabilities recorded in respect of contingent consideration are discounted to net present value and included within goodwill at the time of the business combination.
Under US GAAP as the liability is recorded when the contingency is resolved the value taken to goodwill can be different.
Both UK GAAP and US GAAP require purchase consideration in respect of subsidiaries acquired to be allocated on the basis of fair values to the various net assets of the acquiree at the date of acquisition.
The excess of purchase consideration over the fair value assigned to the net assets is treated as goodwill.
Both UK GAAP and US GAAP require separately identifiable intangible assets to be held separately from goodwill.
Under US GAAP a different definition of intangible assets applies therefore additional intangible assets may be identified under US GAAP. i.
Current asset investments Under UK GAAP  current asset investments are held in the balance sheet at the lower of historical cost and net realisable value.
Under US GAAP available for sale current asset investments are stated at fair value with unrealised gains and losses included in the statement of other comprehensive income. j.
Employee costs Reuters grants options under saveasyouearn SAYE plans at a 20% discount.
Under UK GAAP the share issues are recorded at their discounted price when the options are exercised.
Under US GAAP the discount is regarded as employee compensation and is accrued over the vesting period of the grants.
Under US GAAP if a SAYE scheme is offered at a lower price than those offered previously and participants are able to transfer out of an existing scheme into the new scheme variable accounting rules apply.
Under these rules a compensation charge is recorded on issue of the option for the intrinsic value of the award at the grant date and any subsequent movement in the share value results in a remeasuring of the compensation charge which continues until the option is exercised.
Variable plan accounting applies to all options in existing higher priced schemes and also to options in lower priced schemes to the extent that those options have been transferred from a higher priced scheme.
Under UK GAAP no compensation charge is recorded when the vesting terms of an option award are accelerated or when an option plan is amended with substantially similar terms as the old plan.
Under US GAAP  additional compensation cost is recognised when the vesting of an option has been accelerated and those options would otherwise have been forfeited unvested.
Additional compensation cost is also recognised where a new measurement date is established following the amendment of a stock option plan where the exercise price is less than the market value of the underlying shares on the new measurement date.
Under UK GAAP the liability for national insurance on stock options is accrued based on the intrinsic value of the options on the date of grant and adjusted for subsequent changes in the market value of the underlying shares.
Under US GAAP this expense is recorded when the liability crystalises upon exercise of the stock options.
Under UK GAAP compensation charges relating to employee share schemes are based on the intrinsic value of the awards at the date of grant calculated as the market value of the shares less any option price to employees.
Under
US GAAP the cost of longterm incentive plans is remeasured to the value of the awards at the balance sheet date until the final measurement date.
Under both UK and US GAAP the total compensation charge is adjusted to take account of the performance conditions and the compensation charge is spread over the service period.
Under UK GAAP costs relating to employee share schemes dependent on company performance in a particular period are recognised in full in that year regardless of when the options vest.
Under US GAAP  the cost of such schemes is spread over the period from the date of grant to the vesting date of the options.
Under UK GAAP the expected costs under defined benefit pension and postretirement arrangements are spread over the service lives of employees entitled to those benefits.
Variations from regular cost are spread on a straight line basis over the expected average remaining service lives of relevant current employees.
Under US GAAP the annual pension cost comprises the estimated cost of benefits accruing in the period adjusted for the amortisation of the surplus arising when FAS 87 Employers Accounting for Pensions was adopted.
The valuation assumptions used to determine the annual pension cost under US GAAP are the same as those used to determine the FRS 17 cost as set out in note 23 on pages 6164.
Under UK GAAP the transfer of employees that held unvested stock option awards to a joint venture does not give rise to a charge against profit.
Under
US GAAP the stock awards are considered to be held by nonemployees and accordingly a stock option expense relating to the fair value of the unvested awards is included in share of operating profitloss in joint ventures over the remaining vesting period. k.
Restructuring
In 2003 under US GAAP  Reuters adopted the provisions of Financial Accounting Standard No.
146 FAS 146 Accounting for Costs Associated with Exit or Disposal Activities.
FAS 146 has been applied in respect of employee severance provisions and property cost provisions.
US GAAP requires that employee severance costs that are not onetime termination charges be recognised when it is probable that these costs will be incurred and the amount is capable of being estimated.
Under UK GAAP Reuters recognises provisions for employee severance charges once the Group has a constructive obligation to incur the costs.
A constructive obligation is considered to exist when a detailed formal plan is in place and a valid expectation has been raised in those affected.
Under UK GAAP Reuters recognises provisions for costs associated with the exit of a property once the intention to exit has been announced.
Under US GAAP charges for costs associated with the exit of properties are recognised upon vacation of the property or legal termination of the lease contract. l.
Derivative instruments Under US GAAP the Group adopted FAS 133 Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities as amended by FAS 138 on 1 January 2001.
FAS 133 introduced new rules in respect of hedge accounting and the recognition of movements in fair value through the income statement.
As a result of the adoption all derivatives and embedded derivative instruments whether designated in hedging relationships or not are carried on the balance sheet at fair value.
The company has not designated any of its derivative instruments as qualifying hedge instruments under FAS 133.
Accordingly changes in the fair value of derivative and embedded derivative instruments have been included within current earnings under US GAAP .
Under current UK GAAP the company has continued to apply hedge accounting and is not required to record its derivative instruments or any of its embedded derivative instruments on the balance sheet at fair value.
Under UK GAAP compound derivative instuments that have multiple underlyings can be designated as a net investment hedge and where this treatment is applied foreign currency translation gains and losses arising on the instrument are recorded in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
Under US GAAP such instruments cannot in all cases be designated SUMMARY OF DIFFERENCES BETWEEN UK AND US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles GAAP continued 76 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 as a net investment hedge and therefore foreign currency translation gains and losses arising on the instrument may in some cases be recorded in the income statement. m.
Consolidation of subsidiary undertakings Under UK GAAP  investments in certain subsidiaries are treated as financing arrangements in substance and the net investment reflected within shortterm investments.
Under US GAAP  such subsidiaries are consolidated under the voting interest model and assets are reflected within the appropriate accounts.
This has resulted in a reclassification between asset categories within current assets in the current year.
On 16 November 2004 Reuters purchased the 49% voting stake of Radianz that it did not already own from Equant thereby increasing its shareholding from 51% to 100% of the voting shares.
Under UK GAAP  the acquisition of the additional 49% stake is included within current asset investments at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
As this 49% was acquired with a view to resale and the stake has never been treated as a longterm investment in the opinion of the directors it does not represent a continuing investment in Radianz and is therefore included within current asset investments.
The original investment has continued to be accounted for using equity accounting.
Under US GAAP  Radianz is treated as a joint venture of Reuters Group for the period 1 January 2004 to 16 November 2004 and for the years ended 31 December 2003 and 2002.
The acquisition of the additional 49% stake in Radianz has been accounted for as a step acquisition and Radianz has therefore been fully consolidated as a subsidiary from the date of acquisition.
Under US GAAP such subsidiaries are consolidated under the voting interest model and the assets and liabilities are recorded within the appropriate balance sheet categories.
This has resulted in a reclassification from current assets to other balance sheet line items in the current year.
It is the opinion of the directors that Radianz meets the criteria set forth in FAS 144 as a disposal group and is therefore classified as an asset held for sale.
The summarised results of Radianz under UK GAAP for the period 1 January 2004 to 16 November 2004 and for the years ended 31 December 2003 and 2002 are set out below 1 Jan 16 Novtel Summary income statement m m m Revenue 257 327 331 Operating costs 275 381 446 Loss from continuing operations 20 58 121 Profit from discontinuing operations 2 55 Net loss 5 59 165 The summarised balance sheet information for Radianz under UK GAAP as at 31 December 2003 is set out below Summary balance sheet m Current assets 90 Noncurrent assets 84 Current liabilities 68 Noncurrent liabilities 3 Net assets 103 n.
Sale and leaseback Under UK GAAP  property sale and leaseback transactions where the leaseback meets the criteria of an operating lease are accounted for as an operating sale and leaseback regardless of any sublease of the leased property.
Under US GAAP where a portion of the leased property is sublet and that sublease is not minor the sale and leaseback is accounted for as financing.
The asset is retained on the balance sheet at its written down value and depreciated over the term of the lease.
The proceeds received from the sale of the property are deferred on the balance sheet as a financing liability whilst lease rental payments are offset against the liability as made the difference between the initial proceeds received and the rental payments is recorded as financing cost over the term of the lease. o.
Interest
Under UK GAAP liabilities recorded in respect of contingent consideration Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 NOTES ON SUMMARY OF DIFFERENCES BETWEEN UK AND US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles GAAP arising as part of business combinations are discounted to net present value.
The discount is unwound through the profit and loss account over the life of the liability.
Under US GAAP no liability is recorded in respect of contingent consideration therefore the interest charge is adjusted as appropriate. p.
Taxation
Under UK GAAP FRS 19 Deferred Taxation requires deferred taxes to be accounted for on all timing differences.
Deferred tax assets are to be recognised to the extent that on the basis of all available evidence it can be regarded as more likely than not that there will be suitable taxable profits from which the future reversal of the underlying timing differences can be deducted.
Assets not recognised are shown by way of a valuation allowance in the balance sheet.
Under US GAAP  deferred taxes are accounted for in accordance with FAS 109 Accounting for Income Taxes on all timing differences and a valuation allowance is established in respect of those deferred tax assets where it is more likely than not that some portion will remain unrealised.
This has not given rise to a significant adjustment in the UK to US GAAP reconciliation.
The adjustment is primarily the result of the deferred tax impact of the other US GAAP adjustments made in the reconciliation. q.
Dividends
Under UK GAAP dividends are provided for in the year in respect of which they are declared or proposed.
Under US GAAP  dividends are recognised only in the period in which they are formally declared.
The effects of these differing accounting principles are shown in notes 3639.
02 CASH FLOW STATEMENT The cash flow statement set out on pages 5055 has been prepared in conformity with UK FRS 1 Revised Cash Flow Statements.
Set out below is a summary consolidated cash flow statement under US GAAP Restated Restatedtel Notes m m Net cash inflow from operating activities telNet cash inflowoutflow from investing activities Net cash outflow from financing activities 3 370 142 450 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents under US GAAP 78 123 211 Net increasedecrease in cash under UK GAAP 24 97 86 The principal differences between the UK GAAP cash flow statement and the cash flow statement presented in accordance with FAS 95 are as follows
1 Under UK GAAP net cash inflow from operating activities is determined before considering a net cash outflow from returns on investments and servicing of finance 2004 10 million 2003 28 million 2002 64 million b dividends received from associates 2004 4 million 2003 3 million 2002 2 million and c taxes paid 2004 43 million 2003 33 million 2002 73 million.
Under US GAAP  net cash inflow from operating activities is determined after these items.
Net cash inflow from operating activites under US GAAP also includes 10 million cash inflow in respect of Radianz Limited.
2 Under UK GAAP  net cash flow from capital expenditure financial investments and acquisitions and disposals 2004 343 million inflow 2003 216 million outflow 2002 217 million outflow are classified separately while under US GAAP they are classified as investing activities.
Under UK GAAP movements in shortterm investments 2004 164 million increase 2003 99 million increase 2002 378 million decrease are not included in cash but classified as management of liquid resources.
Under
US GAAP shortterm investments with maturity of three months or less at the date of acquisition 2004 57 million increase 2003 37 million decrease 2002 234 million decrease are included in cash and cash equivalents.
Only shortterm investments with a maturity of over three months 2004 107 million increase 2003 136 million increase 2002 144 million decrease are classified as investing activity.
Net cash inflowoutflow from investing activities under US GAAP also includes 2 million cash outflow in respect of Radianz Limited.
Under UK GAAP cash outflow from the acquisition of computer software licences and other direct internal costs incurred for internal use software 2004 4 million 2003 14 million 2002 29 million have been included in net cash inflow from operating activities.
Under US GAAP this expenditure has been capitalised and therefore the cash outflow has been included in the net cash inflowoutflow from investing activities.
3 Under UK GAAP dividends paid 2004 140 million 2003 140 million 2002 139 million are classified separately while under US GAAP dividends paid are classified as financing activities.
Under UK GAAP the purchase of Reuters shares by the ESOTs 2004 nil 2003 nil 2002 65 million is classified as investing activities whereas under US GAAP this is classified as financing activities.
Under UK GAAP cash flows relating to the movement in bank overdrafts 2004 11 million inflow 2003 11 million outflow 2002 63 million outflow are classified as movements in cash while under US GAAP they are classified as a financing activity.
78 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 36 ADJUSTMENTS TO NET INCOME Restated Restatedtel Profitloss attributable to ordinary shareholders in accordance with UK GAAP 351 50 255 US GAAP adjustments a.
Revenue recognition b.
Software 7 4 c.
Joint ventures and associates d.
Gains on deemed disposal of subsidiary undertakings and associates e.
Gainloss on disposal of subsidiary undertakings f.
Gain on disposal of associates 25 1 g.
Fixed asset investments h.
Goodwill and other intangibles j.
Employee costs k.
Restructuring l.
Derivative instruments m. n.
Sale and leaseback 1 o.
Interest
Taxation
Minority interest in US GAAP adjustments Incomeloss before cumulative effect of change in accounting principle Cumulative effect of change in accounting principle for FAS 142 Minority interest effect of change in accounting principle Net incomeloss attributable to ordinary shareholders in accordance with US GAAP Restated Restatedtel pence pence pence Earnings and dividends Before accounting change Basic earnings per ADS in accordance with US GAAP Diluted earnings per ADS in accordance with US GAAP After accounting change Basic earnings per ADS in accordance with US GAAP Diluted earnings per ADS in accordance with US GAAP Dividend paid per ADS including UK tax credit for 2002 Weighted average number of shares used in basic EPS calculation millions 1400 1396 1395 Dilutive shares Used in diluted EPS calculation 1434 1414 1395 NOTES ON SUMMARY OF DIFFERENCES BETWEEN UK AND US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles GAAP continued Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 37 ADJUSTMENTS TO SHAREHOLDERS EQUITY Restated Restatedtel Capital employed before minority interest in accordance with UK GAAP US GAAP adjustments a.
Revenue recognition b.
Software 22 31 32 c.
Joint ventures and associates g.
Fixed asset investments h.
Goodwill and other intangibles h.
Contingent consideration i.
Current asset investments 84 j.
Employee costs k.
Restructuring l.
Derivative instruments m.
Consolidation of subsidiary undertakings 10 n.
Sale and leaseback 1 p.
Taxation q.
Dividends
Minority interest in US GAAP adjustments Shareholders equity in accordance with US GAAP STATEMENT OF OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME Restated Restatedtel m m Net incomeloss in accordance with US GAAP 436 23 111 Other comprehensive incomeloss net of tax Unrealised gains on certain fixed asset investments arising during year less amounts taken to net income net of losses Foreign currency translation differences Adjustments to reflect minimum pension liability Comprehensive incomeloss in accordance with US GAAP 469 153 227 NOTES ON SUMMARY OF DIFFERENCES BETWEEN UK AND US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles GAAP continued 80 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 03 ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES REQUIRED BY US GAAP Derivative instruments The current year gain on derivative instruments is 58 million 2003 15 million loss 2002 28 million loss.
At 31 December 2004 the balance sheet includes a derivative asset of 45 million.
The current year gain includes a gain of 21 million 2003 26 million loss 2002 19 million loss relating to currency forward contracts embedded within longterm customer contracts.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements FAS 123R In December 2004 the FASB issued FASB Statement No.
123 revised 2004 Share Based Payment FAS 123 R.
The statement is a revision of FASB Statement No.
123 Accounting for StockBased Compensation and supersedes APB Opinion No.
25 Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees and its related implementation guidance.
FAS 123 R establishes standards for accounting for transactions in which an entity exchanges its equity instruments for goods and services primarily employee services.
The statement requires a public entity to measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments to be based on the grant date fair value of the award as determined using an option pricing model which considers the unique characteristics of those instruments.
The cost should be recognised over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award.
FAS 123 R is applicable to the Group from the start of the first interim and annual reporting period beginning after 15 June 2005.
The implementation of FAS 123 R will require the Group to establish the grant date fair value for all its employee share option plans.
The Group is in the process of assessing these fair values and the resulting impact on the Groups financial position.
FAS 153 In December 2004 the FASB issued FASB Statement No.
153 Exchanges of Nonmonetary Assets FAS 153 as an amendment to APB Opinion No.
Accounting for Nonmonetary Transactions.
The guidance in APB Opinion No.
29 is based on the principle that exchanges on nonmonetary assets should be measured based on the fair value of the assets exchanged with certain exceptions to that principle.
FAS 153 amends APB Opinion No.
29 to eliminate the exception for nonmonetary exchanges of similar productive assets and replaces it with a general exception for exchanges on nonmonetary assets that do not have commercial substance.
A nonmonetary exchange has commercial substance if future cash flows of the entity are expected to change significantly as a result of the exchange.
FAS 153 is effective for nonmonetary exchanges occurring in fiscal periods beginning after 15 June 2005.
This accounting pronouncement is not expected to have a significant impact on the Groups financial position or the results of its operations.
EITF 0301 In June 2004 the Emerging Issues Task Force EITF issued EITF 0301 The Meaning of OtherThanTemporary Impairment and Its Application to Certain Investments.
The issue includes determining the meaning of other than temporary impairment and its application to debt and equity securities within the scope of FAS 115 Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity securities and equity securities that are not subject to the scope of FAS 115 and not accounted for under the equity method of accounting.
The Group is in the process of assessing the impact of this pronouncement on the Groups financial position.
39 SUMMARISED BALANCE SHEET US GAAP BASIS Restated Restatedtel m m
Fixed tangible assets 479 823 1012 Current assets 1645 1531 1850 Other assets Goodwill and other intangibles Total assets 2725 3031 3542 Liabilities and shareholders equity Current liabilities 1339 1985 2167 Longterm liabilities Deferred taxes Minority interest Shareholders equity before deductions Shares held by employee share ownership trusts Total shareholders equity 619 266 551 Total liabilities and shareholders equity 2725 3031 3542 Radianz Limited a subsidiary of Reuters Group has been treated as a disposal group held for sale.
At 31 December 2004 assets of 142 million and liabilities of 55 million were held within the balance sheet in respect of Radianz.
Goodwill and other intangibles are net of accumulated amortisation of 658 million 2003 620 million 2002 578 million.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 01 ORDINARY SHARES As of 2 March 2005 there were 1403957850 ordinary shares outstanding excluding 32550175 ordinary shares owned by certain employee share ownership trusts see note 28 on the consolidated balance sheet on pages 6768.
02 MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS The company had received notice under section 198 of the UK Companies Act 1985 as at 2 March 2005 that the following parties held notifiable interests in its shares
Number Number of issued of shares of shares share capital March 2005 March 2004 March 2005 Fidelity Investments 130364252 94238074 9.08 Legal and General Investment Management 58006887430766694.04 Barclays PLC 53902608 46046872 3.75 Merrill Lynch Investment Managers 48978642 48978642 3.48 The companys major shareholders do not have any different voting rights from the other ordinary shareholders.
Brandes Investment Partners and Franklin Templeton Investments decreased their holdings during the first half of 2004 and no longer hold a notifiable interest.
Barclays PLC acquired a notifiable holding during 2004 and its holding has fluctuated around the 4% mark throughout 2004.
As shown above Fidelity Investments has increased its shareholding during 2004 by around 36 million shares.
There were relatively few other movements in the major shareholders.
The Founders Share Independence integrity and freedom from bias in the gathering and dissemination of news and information are fundamental to Reuters Group.
Reuters Founders Share Company Limited the Founders Share Company was established to safeguard those qualities and holds a single Founders
This share may be used to outvote all ordinary shares if other safeguards fail and there is an attempt to effect a change in control of the company.
Control for this purpose means 30% of the ordinary shares.
The directors of the Founders Share Company have a duty to ensure as far as they are able by the proper exercise of the powers vested in them that the Reuters Trust Principles are observed see page 8283.
The Founders Share Companys directors are nominated by a Nomination Committee which includes certain serving directors of the Founders Share Company one person nominated by each of four news associations two people appointed by the Chairman of Reuters Group PLC and two people appointed after consultation with the European Court of Human Rights.
A director of the Founders Share Company may not be a director or employee of Reuters Group.
The current directors of the Founders Share Company are as follows Trustee since Leonard Berkowitz 1998 The Honourable Mrs Anson GBM CBE JP 2002 Sir Michael Checkland 1994 Bertrand Collomb 2004 Uffe EllemannJensen MP 2001 Dr Frene Ginwala 2004 Pehr Gyllenhammar Chairman Toyoo Gyohten 2000 Joseph Lelyveld 2004 John McArthur 2001 Sir Christopher Mallaby GCMG GCVO 1998 Mammen Matthew 2002 The Right Hon The Baroness Noakes DBE 1998 Sir William Purves CBE DSO 1998 Jaakko Rauramo 1999 Dr Mark Wssner 2001 Jacques de Larosire de Champfeu KBE and Robert Erburu retired as trustees in October 2004.
Each Founders Share Company director is normally required to retire at the annual general meeting of the Founders Share Company following the fifth INFORMATION FOR SHAREHOLDERS anniversary of his or her nomination or last renomination and will be eligible for renomination unless he or she has reached the age of 75.
Except as described above to the best of Reuters Groups knowledge the company is not directly or indirectly owned or controlled by another corporation by any foreign government or by any other natural or legal person severally or jointly and currently there are no arrangements that may at a subsequent date result in a change in control of the company.
03 CORPORATE STRUCTURE The Reuters Group conducts its business through a portfolio of companies including wholly and partlyowned subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates.
Information concerning the most significant companies is contained in note 32 on the consolidated balance sheet on page 70.
04 TRADING MARKETS The companys ordinary shares are traded on the London Stock Exchange.
American Depositary Shares ADSs each representing six ordinary shares are traded on the NASDAQ Stock Market.
The ADSs are evidenced by American Depositary Receipts ADRs issued by JPMorgan Chase Bank as Depositary under a Deposit Agreement dated 18 February 1998 the Deposit Agreement among the company the Depositary and ADR holders.
The table below sets out for the periods indicated i the reported high and low sales prices for the ordinary shares based on the Daily Official List of the London Stock Exchange and ii the reported high and low sales prices of the ADSs on NASDAQ.
The London Stock Exchange NASDAQ Pounds per share US dollars per ADS High Low High Low Annual market prices Quarterly market prices First quarter 2.04 0.96 19.65 9.59 Second quarter 2.00 1.04 20.27 9.92 Third quarter 2.67 1.70 25.06 17.52 Fourth quarter 2.68 2.19 27.09 22.47 Quarterly market prices First quarter 4.29 2.41 49.15 25.72 Second quarter 4.15 3.33 45.01 35.38 Third quarter 3.56 2.89 39.40 31.75 Fourth quarter 4.09 3.23 45.30 34.92 Monthly market prices August 3.282.8935.4131.75 September 3.493.1237.3133.92 October 3.753.2341.4634.92 November 4.093.6645.3040.78 December 3.893.6045.1441.35 Monthly market prices January 3.993.6444.9340.83 February 4.223.9848.4044.82 March to 2 March 4.22 4.17 48.67 47.60 Analysis of shareholders As of 2 March 2005 there were 1403957850 Reuters ordinary shares in issue including the shares referred to below but excluding ordinary shares held by employee share ownership trusts.
There were 28180 shareholders on the ordinary share register analysed in the chart below.
As of the same date 815268 ordinary shares and 22321434 ADSs representing 133928604 ordinary shares were held on the record in the US.
These ordinary shares and ADSs were held by 243 record holders and 2119 record holders respectively and represented 0.058% or evidenced ADSs INFORMATION FOR SHAREHOLDERS continued 82 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 respectively representing 9.54% respectively of the total number of ordinary shares outstanding.
Since certain of these ordinary shares and ADSs were held by brokers or other nominees the number of record holders in the US may not be representative of the number of beneficial holders or of where the beneficial holders are resident.
Note
1 Includes all holdings below 100000 shares except for private investors whose holdings are analysed below this level.
Dividends
The table below sets forth the amounts of interim final and total dividends excluding any associated UK tax credit discussed on pages 8586 paid in respect of each fiscal year indicated.
Pound sterling amounts per share have been translated into US cents per ADS each representing six ordinary shares at the actual rates of exchange used for each of the respective payments of interim and final dividends.
Pence per share Cents per ADS Interim Final Total Interim Final Total Dividends in accordance with UK GAAP
1 The final dividend in respect of 2004 is payable on 28 April 2005 to holders of ordinary shares on the register at 11 March 2005 and on 5 May 2005 to holders of ADSs on the record at 11 March 2005 and will be converted into US dollars from sterling at the rate prevailing on 5 May 2005.
See page 11 for a discussion of the Groups dividend policy.
05 HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT The ultimate holding company for the Group Reuters Group PLC was incorporated in England and Wales on 24 December 1996 though its predecessor was formed in London in 1851.
Reuters Group PLCs registered office and corporate headquarters are located at 85 Fleet Street London EC4P 4AJ UK telephonetel and will be moving in 2005 to 30 South Colonnade Canary Wharf London E14 5EP  UK.
06 MEMORANDUM AND ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION The following description summarises certain material rights of holders of the companys ordinary shares of 25 pence each and material provisions of the companys Memorandum and Articles of Association the Articles the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Reuters Founders Share Company Limited the Founders Share Company and English law.
The following description is a summary only and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the Articles which have been filed with the SEC and Companies House and the Companies Act.
All of the outstanding ordinary shares are fully paid.
Accordingly no further contribution of capital may be required from the holders of such shares by Reuters.
In this description the term holder refers to the person registered in the register of members as the holder of the relevant share and the term beneficial owner refers to a person other than the holder who has a beneficial interest in the relevant share.
JPMorgan Chase Bank which acts as Depositary under the Deposit Agreement relating to the American Depositary Shares or ADSs is the holder of the ordinary shares represented by the outstanding ADSs.
General
Reuters Group PLC is incorporated under that name and is registered in England and Wales with registered number .
Its objects are set out in the fourth clause of its Memorandum of Association and cover a wide range of activities including the following collecting information and supplying news and information services and products acquiring and operating wireless installations satellites and other means of communication utilising the Groups communications capabilities to provide various financial and securities markets services and carrying on any other business supplemental to the foregoing or capable of enhancing the Groups profitability or capitalising on the Groups expertise.
The Memorandum of Association provides a broad range of corporate powers to effect these objectives.
The Reuters Trust Principles and the Founders Share Company The Articles contain two sets of restrictions relating to the ownership of Reuters shares.
These restrictions are intended to ensure continued compliance with the following principles the Reuters Trust Principles set out in the Article F.114 that Reuters shall at no time pass into the hands of any one interest group or faction that the integrity independence and freedom from bias of Reuters shall at all times be fully preserved that Reuters shall supply unbiased and reliable news services to newspapers news agencies broadcasters and other media subscribers and to businesses governments institutions individuals and others with whom Reuters has or may have contracts that Reuters shall pay due regard to the many interests which it serves in addition to those of the media and that no effort shall be spared to expand develop and adapt the news and other services and products of Reuters so as to maintain its leading position in the international news and information business.
For the purposes of the Reuters Trust Principles the Articles define the term Reuters to mean Reuters Group PLC and every subsidiary of it from time to time supplying news services.
The first set of restrictions contained in the Articles applies to persons that become interested in 15% or more of the ordinary shares outstanding at any time excluding any shares held by Reuters Group as treasury shares.
The term interested is defined in the Articles by reference to provisions of the Companies Act which require persons to disclose to public companies interests in voting shares in excess of a prescribed percentage.
Subject to certain exceptions all shares held by a person who reaches the 15% limit will be disenfranchised and the shares exceeding the 15% limit must be disposed of.
This set of restrictions is more fully described below under Rights and restrictions attaching to shares  Restrictions on ownership  Disenfranchisement and disposals of excess interests.
Second the companys share capital includes the Founders Share which is held by the Founders Share Company a company limited by guarantee consisting of individuals referred to as the Reuters Trustees who constitute both its members and directors.
The Founders Share empowers the Founders Share Company to cast such number of votes as will pass any resolution supported by and defeat any resolution opposed by the Founders Share Company if it believes that any person or persons have obtained or are seeking to obtain control of Reuters Group.
Control for these purposes is Investment trusts unit trust mutual funds34% Pension funds24% Otherbelow analysis threshold21%
Foreign banks 4% Insurance companies 4% Private investors2% Nonprofit organisations1% Foreign governments 1% Analysis of shareholders Investment trusts unit trust mutual funds34% Pension funds24% Otherbelow analysis threshold21%
Foreign banks 4% Insurance companies 4% Private investors2% Nonprofit organisations1% Foreign governments 1% Analysis of shareholders defined as the ability to control the exercise of 30% or more of the votes that may be cast on a poll at general meetings.
Under the Articles the special rights attaching to the Founders Share may not be varied or abrogated in any respect without the prior written consent of the Founders Share Company.
The rights attaching to the Founders Share are described in more detail below under Rights and restrictions attaching to shares  Voting rights  Rights conferred by Founders Share.
The restrictions on interests in ordinary shares and the extraordinary voting rights of the Founders Share may be characterised as antitakeover provisions to the extent they may have the effect of preventing a bid for control of Reuters Group.
Tender offers or other nonmarket acquisitions of shares are usually made at prices above the prevailing market price of a companys shares.
Acquisitions of shares by persons attempting to acquire control through market purchases may support the price of shares at market levels higher than otherwise would be the case.
The restrictions and extraordinary voting rights summarised in this section may be expected to preclude such offers.
Directors
The companys Articles provide for a board of directors consisting of not fewer than five nor more than 15 directors.
The Articles require that in performing their duties the directors have due regard for the Reuters Trust Principles insofar as by the proper exercise of their powers and in accordance with their other duties as directors the directors may do so.
The Articles contain provisions that require the board of directors to include at least five nonexecutive directors before a new executive director can be appointed.
Under the Articles a director may not vote in respect of any contract arrangement or proposal in which the director or any person connected with the director has any material interest other than by virtue of the directors interests in securities of or otherwise in or through the company.
This is subject to certain exceptions relating to proposals a giving the director any guarantee security or indemnity in respect of obligations incurred at the request of or for the benefit of Reuters Group b giving any guarantee security or indemnity to a third party in respect of obligations of Reuters Group for which the director has assumed responsibility under an indemnity or guarantee c relating to an offer of securities of Reuters Group in which the director may be entitled to participate or will be interested as an underwriter d concerning any other company in which the director is beneficially interested in less than 1% of the issued shares of any class of the company or the voting rights available to its shareholders e relating to the adoption modification or operation of any employee benefits plan which will provide the director with the same benefits as other employees and f relating to any liability insurance that Reuters is empowered to purchase for its directors or employees in respect of actions undertaken as directors or officers of Reuters Group.
The directors are empowered to exercise all the powers of Reuters Group to borrow money subject to the limitation that the aggregate principal amount outstanding in respect of monies borrowed by the Reuters Group shall not exceed a sum equal to the higher of twoandahalf times the companys share capital and aggregate reserves calculated in the manner described in the Articles and 5000 million unless sanctioned by an ordinary resolution of the companys shareholders.
At each annual general meeting of Reuters shareholders at least onethird of the directors or if their number is not a multiple of three the number nearest to but not greater than onethird shall retire from office by rotation.
The directors to retire by rotation at the annual general meeting include any director who is due to retire at the meeting by reason of age.
A retiring director shall be eligible for reelection subject to the requirements of the Combined Code.
Starting at this years annual general meeting the Board will ask all directors to stand for reelection on an annual basis.
For additional information see the Directors Report and Corporate Governance which appear on pages 26 and 2931.
Directors are not required to hold shares in order to qualify as a director.
A director not holding any shares may nevertheless attend and speak at general meetings of the company.
Rights and restrictions attaching to shares
Holders of ordinary shares are entitled to participate in the payment of dividends pro rata to their holdings.
The Founders Share is not entitled to participate in the payment of dividends nor will any dividend be paid on any shares held by Reuters in treasury.
The Board may propose and pay interim dividends and recommend a final dividend in respect of any accounting period out of the profits available for distribution under English law.
A final dividend may be declared by the shareholders in general meeting by ordinary resolution but no dividend may be declared in excess of the amount recommended by the Board.
The company may allot ordinary shares in lieu of cash dividends subject to shareholder approval at the time the relevant dividend is declared.
In addition the company may declare and pay equivalent dividends to shareholders outside the United Kingdom in local currencies and pay such dividends to the Depositary for value on the payment date.
Voting rights Rights conferred by ordinary shares Voting at a general meeting of shareholders is by show of hands unless before or on making known the result a poll is demanded in accordance with the Articles.
If voting is by show of hands each holder of ordinary shares who is present in person has one vote.
On a poll every holder of ordinary shares who is present in person or by proxy has one vote for every ordinary share held.
This year the Board has decided that voting on all resolutions will be carried out by way of a poll.
This approach is consistent with the recommendations of the recently published Myners Report to the Shareholder Voting Working Group.
Holders of a substantial number of ordinary shares may be disenfranchised under the circumstances described under Restrictions on ownership below.
Rights conferred by Founders Share The Founders Share confers upon the Founders Share Company the right to cast such number of votes as are necessary to defeat any resolution which would vary or abrogate the rights of the Founders Share.
The Articles provide that the alteration of specified articles relating to the Founders Share and the Reuters Trust Principles are deemed to constitute a variation of the rights of the Founders Share.
In addition any resolution proposing the winding up of Reuters Group voluntarily by the Court or any reconstruction of Reuters Group or any resolution which would attach to any share voting rights not identical in all respects with those of the ordinary shares is deemed to be a variation of the rights of the Founders Share.
Additionally if there are in the opinion of the Founders Share Company reasonable grounds for believing that any person and his associates have obtained or are attempting to obtain directly or indirectly control of Reuters Group the Founders Share Company is entitled in its absolute discretion to serve Reuters with a written notice a Founders Share Control Notice to that effect.
Control is defined for these purposes as the ability to control the exercise of 30% or more of the votes which may be cast on a poll at a general meeting.
At all times after the service of a Founders Share Control Notice and pending its rescission the Founders Share confers upon the Founders Share Company the right to cast on a poll such number of votes as are necessary to ensure the effective passing of any resolution in favour of which it votes and to ensure the defeat of any resolution against which it votes.
The Articles provide that the opinion of the Founders Share Company in respect of the service or rescission of a Founders Share Control Notice shall be final and binding and may not be challenged on any grounds whatsoever.
The Founders Share Company is entitled at any time to serve Reuters with a written request for an extraordinary general meeting and the directors are obliged to comply with such request.
If they do not comply the Founders Share Company is entitled to convene an extraordinary general meeting.
If a Founders Share Control Notice has been served however the Founders Share Company can convene an extraordinary general meeting without first requesting that the directors do so.
Four Reuters Trustees present at the relevant Trustees meeting can bind all the Founders Share Company directors to exercise the voting rights attaching to the Founders Share so as to defeat a resolution that would be deemed to Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 83 INFORMATION FOR SHAREHOLDERS continued 84 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 be a variation of the rights attached to the Founders Share.
However the vote of a majority of the Reuters Trustees the chairman of the Founders Share Company having a casting vote in the event of equality of votes is required to determine whether a Founders Share Control Notice should be served and if so the manner in which the voting rights attaching to the Founders Share shall be exercised excluding the vote of any Reuters Trustee who is associated with or materially financially interested in the person attempting to obtain control of Reuters.
Restrictions on ownership Ordinary shares Under the Articles a person is interested in shares if among other things he is interested directly or through his family or one or more companies or through an interest in association with others pursuant to an agreement or understanding or through a trust or if he controls the voting rights of others.
The definition of interest in shares in the Articles is made by reference with specified variations to certain provisions of the Companies Act.
Disclosure of interests in ordinary shares The Articles provide for the disclosure of interests in Reuters ordinary shares by reference to the Companies Act provisions mentioned above with specified variations.
Under these provisions as currently in force if a person acquires an interest in voting shares of a public company amounting to 10% or more of the voting shares of any class or if he increases or reduces such holding by at least 1% or if he ceases to have such holding he is obliged to notify the company within two days of the day on which he acquired 10% or any such change in his interest took place.
Further if his interest is a material interest the 10% referred to above is reduced to 3%.
The Articles provide for disenfranchisement of shares which are the subject of a notice under Section 212 of the Companies Act which allows a company to require disclosure of certain details concerning ownership of its shares if the person served with the notice is in default in answering it.
The Articles also provide for the imposition of restrictions on transferability of the shares concerned and on the right to receive dividends if such shares represent at least 0.25% of the class concerned.
Such restrictions cannot however be imposed until the expiry of 14 days after the date of the Section 212 notice.
Any such restrictions cease if the shares concerned are sold pursuant to a takeover offer or to an unconnected third party or through the London Stock
The restrictions on transferability only apply to certificated shares.
Where a holder of uncertificated shares is in default in answering a Section 212 notice the Articles provide that the Founders Share Company may require the Groups directors to apply to the Court for such order as may be appropriate.
Disenfranchisement and disposals of excess interests Subject to certain exceptions described below certain restrictions apply to persons that become interested as defined in the Articles in 15% or more of the ordinary shares.
If any person becomes interested in 15% or more of the outstanding shares excluding any shares held by Reuters as treasury shares the Relevant Shares the directors are required to serve a Restriction Notice on that person on any other person known to the directors to have an interest in the Relevant Shares and if different on the registered holder of the Relevant
While a Restriction Notice in respect of Relevant Shares is in force a registered holder of the Relevant Shares is not entitled to attend or vote either in person or by proxy at any general meeting or at any meeting of the holders of any class of Reuters shares.
In addition a Restriction Notice will require such person to dispose of any Relevant Shares exceeding the 15% limit and supply evidence to the company that such disposal has occurred within 21 days or such longer period as the directors consider reasonable.
If such disposition is not made within the specified period the directors must as far as they are able dispose of any shares exceeding the 15% limit.
Under the Articles any belief resolution decision or action of the directors held made or taken pursuant to any of the provisions concerning restrictions on ownership shall be conclusive final and binding on all persons concerned and may not be challenged on any grounds whatsoever.
The restrictions are subject to certain modifications where a person becomes interested in 15% or more of the issued shares of any class by reason of a rights issue or an underwriting in the ordinary course of its business.
The Founders Share Ownership of the Founders Share is restricted to the Founders Share Company.
Under its Memorandum of Association the Founders Share Company is not permitted directly or indirectly to dispose of the Founders Share or of any interest therein or to grant any rights in respect of the Founders Share or any interest therein.
Treasury Shares Reuters may acquire and thereafter hold up to 10% of its issued listed share capital in treasury.
Any such acquisition must be financed from the distributable profits of Reuters.
Subject to certain limited exceptions the rights attaching to shares while held in treasury will be suspended.
Treasury shares may only be subsequently disposed of by Reuters by way of cash sale transfer for the purposes of or pursuant to an employees share scheme or cancellation.
Preemptive rights new issues of shares sale of treasury shares and repurchase of shares Holders of ordinary shares have no preemptive rights under the Articles.
However the ability of the directors to cause the company to issue shares securities convertible into shares or rights to shares or to sell treasury shares otherwise than pursuant to an employee share scheme is restricted.
Under the Companies Act the directors are with certain exceptions unable to allot any equity securities without express authorisation which may be contained in the Articles or given by its shareholders in general meeting but which in either event cannot last for more than five years.
The Companies Act imposes further restrictions on the issue of equity securities for cash or sale of treasury shares for cash other than by offering them first to existing shareholders unless the statutory requirement is displaced or modified by the shareholders in general meeting or under the companys Articles.
At Reuters annual general meeting to be held on 21 April 2005 a resolution will be proposed to authorise the directors to allot relevant securities as defined in the Companies Act including any equity securities up to an aggregate nominal amount of 108000000 until the earlier to occur of the annual general meeting in 2006 or 21 July 2006.
A resolution will also be proposed to authorise equity securities as defined in the Companies Act to be issued within this limit by way of a rights offer or otherwise pro rata to existing shareholders but other issues of equity securities except for shares issued pursuant to employee share schemes will be limited to an aggregate of 17000000 in nominal value.
Subject to applicable provisions of English law the company may purchase its ordinary shares.
Currently it has general authority to repurchase up to 143254000 ordinary shares at prices ranging from 25 pence and not more than 5% above the average of the middle market quotations taken from the Daily Official List of the London Stock Exchange for the five business days before the purchase is made.
At the Reuters annual general meeting on 21 April 2005 a resolution will be proposed to increase this authority to 143540000 ordinary shares.
The directors would only make such purchases after considering the effects on earnings per share and the benefits for shareholders generally.
Rights in a winding up If Reuters Group PLC is wound up the liquidator may with the authority of an extraordinary resolution divide among the holders of ordinary shares and the Founders Share pro rata to their holdings Reuters assets after satisfaction of liabilities to creditors provided however that the Founders Share Company may receive up to 1 and no more.
Variation of rights and alteration of share capital If at any time the companys share capital is divided into different classes of shares the rights attached to any class may be varied subject to the provisions of the Companies Act with the consent in writing of holders of threequarters in value of the shares of that class or upon the adoption of an extraordinary resolution passed at a separate meeting of the holders of the shares of the class.
At every such separate meeting all of the provisions of the Articles relating to proceedings at a general meeting apply except that the quorum is to be the number of persons which must be two or more who hold or represent by proxy not less than onethird in nominal value of the issued shares of the class.
The company can increase its share capital by ordinary resolution in conformity with the provisions of the Companies Act.
However new shares cannot have voting rights which are not identical to those of ordinary shares without the prior written consent of the Founders Share Company.
Furthermore the company may issue shares with preferred and other special rights or restrictions provided that the prior written consent of the Founders Share Company has been sought for issuing any shares with rights not identical to those of ordinary shares.
The company can consolidate divide and cancel any of its shares other than the Founders Share by extraordinary resolution and can reduce its share capital other than the Founders Share.
Annual general meetings and extraordinary general meetings Annual general meetings must be convened upon advance written notice of 21 days.
An extraordinary general meeting must be convened upon advance written notice of 21 days for the passing of a special resolution and 14 days for any other resolution depending on the nature of the business to be transacted.
The notice must specify the nature of the business to be transacted if it is other than routine business or if an extraordinary or a special resolution is proposed.
The notice may also specify a time not more than 48 hours prior to the time fixed for the meeting by which a person must be entered on the companys register in order to have the right to attend and vote at the meeting.
Limitations on voting and shareholding There are no limitations imposed by English law or the companys Articles on the right of nonresidents or foreign persons to hold or vote ordinary shares or ADSs other than the limitations that would generally apply to all of Reuters shareholders.
07 EXCHANGE CONTROL Under English law and the Articles persons who are neither residents nor nationals of the UK may freely hold vote and transfer their ordinary shares in the same manner as UK residents or nationals.
There are currently no UK foreign exchange control restrictions on remittances of dividends to nonresident holders of ordinary shares or on the conduct of Reuters operations.
08 EXCHANGE RATES The following table sets forth for the periods indicated the average or the high and low Noon Buying Rates for pounds sterling in US dollars per 1.
Fiscal year ended 31 December Average Month High Low 2000 1.52 August 2004 1.85 1.79 2001 1.44 September 2004 1.81 1.77 2002 1.51 October 2004 1.84 1.78 2003 1.64 November 2004 1.91 1.83 2004 1.84 December 2004 1.95 1.91 2005 to 4 March 1.91 January 2005 1.91 1.86 February 2005 1.92 1.86
1 The average exchange rates have been calculated using the Noon Buying Rates on the last trading day of each calendar month during the period.
On 4 March 2005 the Noon Buying Rate was US1.92 per 1.
Fluctuations in the exchange rate between the pound sterling and the US dollar will affect the US dollar amounts received by holders of the ADSs upon conversion by the depositary of cash dividends paid in pounds sterling on the ordinary shares and represented by the ADSs.
Also fluctuations in the exchange rate may affect the relative market prices of the ADSs in the US and the ordinary shares in the UK.
For the effect on the Groups results of operations of fluctuations in the exchange rates between the pound sterling and the other major currencies including the US dollar in which revenues are received and expenditures are made by us see the Operating and financial review on pages 1125.
09 TAXATION INFORMATION FOR US SHAREHOLDERS The following is a summary of the material US federal income tax and UK tax consequences of the ownership of ordinary shares or ADSs by a US holder who holds the ordinary shares or ADSs as capital assets.
The summary does not purport to be a complete technical analysis or listing of all potential tax effects relevant to a decision to acquire the companys ordinary shares or ADSs.
Nor does it take into account the specific circumstances of any particular investors some of which may be subject to special rules such as dealers in securities US holders who hold directly or indirectly 10% or more of the voting stock or US holders who elected to apply the provisions of the former income tax convention between the United States and the United Kingdom.
In addition the summary is based in part upon the representations of the Depositary and the assumption that each obligation in the Deposit Agreement and any related agreement will be performed in accordance with its terms.
The summaries of US and UK tax laws are based on the US Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended its legislative history existing and proposed regulations published rulings and court decisions current tax laws current UK Inland Revenue published practice and the terms of the UKUS double tax treaty which came into effect on 31 March 2003 the Treaty as appropriate all of which are subject to change at any time possibly with retrospective effect.
For the purposes of this discussion a US holder is any beneficial owner of ordinary shares or ADSs that is i a citizen or resident for tax purposes of the US ii a corporation organised under the laws of the US or any US State iii an estate the income of which is subject to US federal income tax without regard to its source or iv a trust if a court within the US is able to exercise primary supervision over the administration of the trust and one or more US persons have the authority to control all substantial decisions of the trust.
Taxation of dividends UK taxation Under current UK taxation legislation no withholding tax will be deducted from dividends paid by the company.
A shareholder that is a company resident for UK tax purposes in the UK will not generally be taxable on any dividend it receives from the company.
A shareholder who is an individual resident for tax purposes in the UK is entitled to a tax credit on cash dividends paid on ordinary shares or ADSs equal to oneninth of the cash dividend or 10% of the dividend plus the tax credit.
Such shareholders will be taxable on the total of the dividend and the related tax credit which will be regarded as the top slice of the shareholders income.
The tax credit may be set off against a UK resident individual shareholders total income tax liability but no cash refund will be available.
A US holder will not be entitled to any tax credit from the UK Inland Revenue in respect of a dividend although there will be no further UK tax to pay in respect of that dividend.
US federal income taxation The gross amount of any dividend paid to a US holder will generally be subject to US federal income taxation.
Such a dividend will not be eligible for the dividendsreceived deduction generally allowed to US corporations with respect to dividends from other US corporations.
The amount of the dividend to be included in income will be the US dollar value of the pound sterling payments made determined at the spot pound sterlingUS dollar rate on the date of the dividend distribution regardless of whether the payment is in fact converted into US dollars.
Qualified dividend income An individual US holders qualified dividend income is subject to tax at a reduced rate of tax of 15% provided that the ordinary shares or ADSs are held for at least 61 days of the 121 day period beginning on the date which is 60 days before the exdividend date and the holder meets other holding period requirements.
Dividends will not however qualify for the reduced rate if the company were to be treated for the tax year in which dividends are paid or for the prior year as a foreign investment company a foreign personal holding company or a passive foreign investment company a PFIC for US federal income tax purposes.
Recently enacted legislation repealed the foreign investment company and foreign personal holding company provisions for tax years beginning after 31 December 2004.
Reuters Group does not believe that it would be treated as a foreign investment company or a foreign personal holding company for 2004 or that it is a PFIC or was a PFIC for 2004.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 85 INFORMATION FOR SHAREHOLDERS continued 86 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Accordingly Reuters Group considers that dividends paid with respect to the ordinary shares or ADSs will be qualified dividend income and subject to the US holders satisfaction of the holding period requirements described above should be eligible for the reduced 15% US federal income tax rate.
Reuters
Groups dividends generally will be foreign source passive income for US foreign tax credit purposes.
Taxation of capital gains UK taxation Upon a sale or other disposal by a holder of ordinary shares or ADSs a gain or loss may be recognised for UK capital gains tax purposes equal broadly to the difference between the sterling value of the disposal proceeds and the holders tax basis in the relevant ordinary shares or ADSs and subject to the availability of any applicable exemptions.
Under the Treaty capital gains on disposals of ordinary shares or ADSs will generally be subject to tax only in the jurisdiction of residence of the relevant holder as determined for the purposes of the Treaty unless the ordinary shares or ADSs are held as part of the business property of a permanent establishment of that holder in the UK in which case such capital gains may be subject to tax in both jurisdictions.
The Treaty also contains an antiavoidance rule which will be relevant to individuals who are residents of either the UK or the US and who have been resident of the other jurisdiction the US or the UK as the case may be at any time during the six years immediately preceding the relevant disposal of ordinary shares or ADSs.
The Treaty provides that in such circumstances capital gains arising from the disposal may be subject to tax not only in the jurisdiction of which the holder is resident at the time of the disposal but also in that other jurisdiction.
US federal income taxation Upon a sale or other disposal by a US holder of ordinary shares or ADSs a gain or loss may be recognised for US federal income tax purposes equal broadly to the difference between the US dollar value of the disposal proceeds and the US holders tax basis determined in US dollars in the relevant ordinary shares or ADSs.
Generally such gain or loss will be regarded as a capital gain or loss and as a longterm capital gain or loss if the US holders holding period for such ordinary shares or ADSs exceeds one year.
Longterm capital gains of a noncorporate US holder are generally subject to a maximum tax rate of 15%.
Any such gain or loss will generally be income or loss from sources within the US for foreign tax credit limitation purposes.
The deductibility of a capital loss is subject to limitations since the ADSs and ordinary shares are publicly traded their disposal will be considered to occur on the trade date regardless of the US holders method of accounting.
In addition a US holder that receives foreign currency upon the sale or exchange of ordinary shares or ADSs and subsequently converts the foreign currency into US dollars will have a foreign exchange gain or loss based on any appreciation or depreciation in the value of the foreign currency against the US dollar.
Foreign exchange gain or loss will generally be US source ordinary income or loss.
Deposits and withdrawals of ordinary shares by US holders in exchange for ADSs will not result in the realisation of a gain or loss for US federal income tax purposes.
Additional tax considerations UK inheritance tax An individual who is domiciled in the US for the purposes of the UKUS Estate and Gift Tax Convention the Convention and who is not a national of the UK for the purposes of the Convention will not generally be subject to UK inheritance tax in respect of ordinary shares or ADSs on the individuals death or on a transfer of ordinary shares or ADSs during the individuals lifetime provided that any applicable US federal gift or estate tax is paid.
However such an individual will be subject to UK inheritance tax if the ordinary shares or ADSs are part of the business property of a permanent establishment of the individual in the UK or pertain to a fixed base in the UK of an individual who performs independent personal services.
Special rules apply to ordinary shares or ADSs held in trust.
In the exceptional case where the disposition is subject both to UK inheritance tax and to US federal gift or estate tax the Convention generally provides for any tax paid in the UK to be credited against tax liable to be paid in the US or for tax paid in the US to be credited against the tax payable in the UK based on priority rules set out in the Convention.
UK stamp duty and stamp duty reserve tax No UK stamp duty or stamp duty reserve tax SDRT will be payable on the transfer of an ADS or agreement to transfer an ADS provided that the instrument of transfer or written agreement is executed and retained outside the UK and does not relate to any matter or thing done or to be done in the UK.
UK stamp duty will generally be payable on conveyances or transfers of ordinary shares at the rate of 0.5% of the amount or value of the consideration if any for the transfer rounded up to the next multiple of 5.
SDRT will be imposed at the rate of 0.5% of the amount or value of the consideration for the transfer if an agreement is made for the transfer of ordinary shares unless an instrument of transfer of the ordinary shares in favour of the purchaser or its nominee is executed and duly stamped within six years of the day that the agreement is made or in a case where the agreement is conditional the day that the condition is satisfied in which case any SDRT paid will be repaid together with interest where the SDRT is not less than 25 on a claim for repayment or to the extent not paid the charge to SDRT will be cancelled.
SDRT is in general payable by the purchaser of ordinary shares but there are regulations which provide for collection from other persons in certain circumstances including from CREST where the relevant ordinary shares are held in CREST.
UK stamp duty or SDRT will generally be imposed on any instrument transferring ordinary shares to a person or to a nominee or agent for such a person whose business is or includes issuing depositary receipts such as the ADSs for relevant securities.
In these circumstances stamp duty or SDRT will be charged at the rate of approximately 1.5% of the amount or value of the consideration for the conveyance or transfer on sale or otherwise 1.5% of the value of the security transferred at the date the instrument is executed.
A transfer into CREST will not be subject to this charge.
An agreement to transfer ordinary shares will normally give rise to a charge to SDRT at the rate of 0.5% of the amount or value of the consideration for the ordinary shares.
However if a duly stamped instrument of transfer of the ordinary shares is executed in pursuance of the agreement and duly stamped within six years of the date on which the agreement is made or in a case where the agreement is conditional the date that the condition is satisfied any SDRT paid will be repaid.
To the extent the SDRT has not already been paid the charge to SDRT will be cancelled.
SDRT is in general payable by the purchaser of ordinary shares.
However there are regulations which provide for collection from other persons in certain circumstances.
US PFIC status If a foreign company is a PFIC then certain distributions and gains can be allocated rateably over a US holders holding period with the effect that the amount allocated to the current taxable year and any taxable year before the company became a PFIC would be taxable as ordinary income in the current year and the amount allocated to other taxable years would be taxed at the highest rate in effect for that year on ordinary income.
The tax is also subject to an interest charge to recover the deemed benefit from the deferred payment of the tax attributable to each such year.
As stated above under the heading Taxation of capital gains  US federal income taxation the company reasonably believes that it was not a PFIC in 2004 and does not anticipate becoming a PFIC.
However the tests for determining PFIC status are applied annually and it is difficult to make accurate predictions of future income and assets which are relevant to this determination.
Accordingly Reuters Group cannot assure US holders that the IRS would agree with its belief nor can the company assure US holders that it will not become a PFIC.
US holders are urged to consult their own tax advisors about the PFIC rules including the consequences to them of making a marktomarket election with respect to Reuters Groups ordinary shares and ADSs in the event that it qualifies as a PFIC.
US information reporting and backup withholding A US holder is generally subject to information reporting requirements with respect to dividends paid in the US on ordinary shares or ADSs and disposal proceeds realised from the sale exchange redemption or other disposal of ordinary shares or ADSs.
In addition a US holder is subject to backup withholding currently at a rate of 28% on dividends paid in the US on ordinary shares or ADSs and disposal proceeds realised from the sale exchange redemption or other disposal of ordinary shares or ADSs unless the US holder is a corporation provides an IRS Form W9 or otherwise establishes a basis for exemption.
Backup withholding is not an additional tax.
The amount of any backup withholding will be allowed as a credit against a US holders US federal income tax liability and may be refunded provided that certain information is furnished to the IRS.
10 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS AND MATERIAL CONTRACTS Related party transactions  General Related party transactions are principally with Radianz Factiva TSI and Instinet Group each as described below.
Reuters Group has entered into arrangements with many of its subsidiary undertakings joint ventures and associates and has in addition provided financial information services to and purchased services from many of the companies with which it shares a common director.
Except as otherwise indicated all of these transactions are in the normal course of business on commercial terms.
Excluding transactions with Radianz Factiva TSI and Instinet Group services provided to related parties totalled 5 million and services purchased totalled 19 million.
Only in the case of the transactions with Radianz Factiva 3 Times Square Associates LLC 3XSQ Associates TSI and Instinet Group were any of the amounts involved material to either party.
These services are ongoing and continued at historical levels to the date of this report.
Radianz
During 2004 and in accordance with intercompany agreements including those described below Radianz provided the Group with network services totalling 277 million 2003 304 million 2002 284 million.
In 2004 Reuters Group provided Radianz with certain technical field engineering IT systems property and human resource services for a total cost of 66 million 2003 82 million 2002 126 million.
Network Services Agreement To secure the longterm availability of the Radianz network for the Reuters Group Reuters entered into a Network Services Agreement the NSA with Radianz in May 2000 in connection with the formation of Radianz.
The NSA had an initial term ending on 1 July 2005 and thereafter would remain in full force and effect for successive oneyear periods unless either party gave six months notice prior to the expiration.
Radianz agreed to provide reasonable assistance to Reuters in the event of termination of the NSA to ensure that Reuters could migrate the services from Radianz to a thirdparty company.
The NSA remains in effect following Reuters purchase of the Equant Groups entire stake in Radianz.
However in connection with Reuters exclusive discussions with BT to secure a longterm network services agreement Reuters has served formal notification of its intention to terminate the NSA at the 1 July 2005 expiry of the initial term.
The standards for performance of services provided in the NSA have been agreed between Reuters and Radianz.
In addition the NSA sets out the processes and procedures for managing the contract going forward.
In particular the NSA sets out details for monthly performance reviews to review capacity service levels operational changes and orders introduction of new services and ongoing requirements by Reuters.
There is also provision for quarterly meetings to discuss the contract and its operation and technical matters relating to the business continuity plans.
Reuters generally agreed to continue to use Radianz for its network services in support of global and strategic products during the term of the agreement.
Detailed provisions in respect of rates and charges were agreed between Radianz and Reuters.
Radianz agreed that it shall provide the network services to Reuters on terms which are no less favourable than reasonably comparable services offered to any other customer of Radianz and Reuters agreed to spend an agreed amount with Radianz annually.
Purchase of Equant Stake On 21 October 2004 Reuters entered into an agreement to purchase Equant s entire stake in Radianz for 60 million US110 million in cash together with the release of future funding obligations.
The transaction completed on 16 November 2004.
The purchase agreement included standard corporate representations and warranties by each of Equant and Reuters as to itself and was otherwise generally on customary terms and conditions for a transaction of this nature.
At the same time as Reuters announced its agreement to purchase Equant s stake Reuters also announced that it was in exclusive discussions with BT to secure a longterm agreement for the provision of network services which is expected to involve the sale of Radianz to BT .
For more information see Our markets drive our organisational structure  Communications networks on page 7.
Factiva
Factiva and Reuters each provide a variety of services to the other.
Factiva hosts and maintains Reuters pictures archiving service under a rolling oneyear contract.
Under a threeyear agreement commencing on 1 January 2003 Factiva permits Reuters to incorporate Factiva content in certain Reuters products.
Under a separate licence Factiva also permits Reuters staff to access Factiva content.
The total cost of the services provided by Factiva to Reuters in 2004 was 9 million 2003 7 million 2002 19 million.
Reuters provides Factiva with technical and administrative support services including use of Reuters premises facilities finance and payroll services subject to termination by Factiva on six months written notice or Reuters on twelve months written notice.
Reuters also provides content including its newswires to Factiva for incorporation in Factiva services for a royalty payment.
This agreement is currently being renegotiated.
In 2004 Reuters granted Factiva an additional trademark licence permitting Factiva to use Reuters name for an annual fee based on a percentage increasing in the next calendar year of Factivas gross revenues.
The licence continues until breach insolvency dissolution of the joint venture or Reuters owning less than 50% of Factiva.
The total cost of the services provided by Reuters to Factiva in 2004 was 23 million 2003 47 million 2002 61 million.
Under the terms of the agreement with Dow Jones and Co. be paid to Factiva.
Such terms also apply to Dow Jones.
In connection with the formation of the Factiva joint venture Reuters agreed to invest US20 million in cash in the venture over a period of five years by means of an interestfree promissory note.
At the beginning of 2004 this stood at 1 million.
It was repaid during the year.
At 31 December 2003 Reuters held a loan of 5 million 2002 7 million repayable to Factiva for the settlement of trading balances between Reuters and Factiva.
This bore interest at LIBOR and was repaid during the year.
A further loan of 11 million repayable to Factiva on which interest is payable at LIBOR was taken out by Reuters during the year and remained payable at 31 December 2004.
This is a shortterm deposit of surplus cash.
TSI
On 3 February 2004 Reuters Group reduced its stake in TSI from 48.4% to 8.8%.
During 2004 Reuters Group purchased 13 million of services from TSI 2003 16 million 2002 5 million.
Licences Reuters owns the underlying intellectual property and technology that was in existence at 31 December 1996 and that is incorporated into many of TSIs products.
Reuters licenses this technology to TSI.
TSI owns all technology and related intellectual property rights independently developed by TSI since 1 January 1997 including enhancements and improvements to the licensed technology which TSI itself licenses to Reuters.
Through the third quarter of 2003 Reuters had a licence distribution and maintenance agreement with TSI pursuant to which Reuters was required to pay TSI certain minimum distribution fees related to sales of TSIs products to Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 87 INFORMATION FOR SHAREHOLDERS continued 88 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 financial services market customers.
Under this agreement Reuters obligations with respect to the minimum distribution fees were to expire at the end of 2003 and TSI was restricted until May 2004 from selling its products and providing consulting services directly to companies in the financial services market except in limited circumstances if Reuters continued to pay the minimum distribution fees until that date.
In October 2003 Reuters entered into a revised commercial agreement with TSI.
Pursuant to the revised agreement TSI has the right to market and sell its products to customers in the financial services market except that TSI will not be able to market or sell risk management applications or market data systems for financial services companies or to sell to financial services customers through four specified resellers until May 2008.
Reuters will continue to have the right to use TSI technology internally and embedded within its products and TSI will provide certain feebased support services to Reuters.
The agreement provided that Reuters and TSI would work together to migrate Reuters existing customers maintenance contracts to TSI and that Reuters rights to resell ended in October 2003 subject to completion of a limited number of then in progress opportunities.
From October 2003 until March 2005 Reuters made quarterly payments of US5 million to TSI subject to reduction based on TSIs direct revenues from products and support sold to financial services customers.
On 27 February 2005 Reuters and TSI entered into an amendment to the commercial agreement under which TSI granted Reuters new rights to resell a defined set of TSI software products solely in conjunction with the sale by Reuters of its market data delivery solutions in return for Reuters paying TSI licence fees in minimum annual amount of US11 million.
The reseller rights have an initial term of one year which Reuters may elect to extend for two further oneyear terms.
The amendment also extended the time during which Reuters has the right to use TSI technology internally and embedded within its products by one year to 31 December 2012.
Repurchase by TSI At the same time as the licence agreement revision in October 2003 Reuters and TSI entered into an agreement pursuant to which TSI agreed to register sales by Reuters of its TSI shares under US securities laws and to repurchase up to US115 million of its shares from Reuters upon Reuters completing a single public offering of at least US100 million of TSI shares.
In February 2004 Reuters completed a registered public offering of 69 million TSI shares for US473 million 261 million and TSI repurchased an additional 17 million shares for US115 million resulting in aggregate net proceeds to Reuters after underwriting and transaction fees of approximately US563 million 310 million.
3XSQ Associates Reuters is party to a lease entered into in 1998 with 3XSQ Associates an entity owned by Reuters and Rudin Times Square Associates LLC formed to acquire develop and operate the 3 Times Square property and building.
Pursuant to the lease which has been amended from time to time Reuters leases approximately 692000 square feet for a term of approximately 20 years expiring in 2021 with an option to terminate 10 years early as to 77000 square feet and three successive tenyear renewal options as to the entirety of the space.
During 2002 2003 and 2004 Reuters made payments to 3XSQ Associates in respect of rent operating expenses taxes insurance and other obligations in the amounts of US32.7 million US33.3 million and US32.9 million respectively.
The lease is supported by a US120 million letter of credit provided by Reuters.
Instinet Group Reuters and Instinet Group are party to numerous agreements and arrangements including those described below under which they provide each other with various products services licences and other transactions.
Sale of Bridge Trading On 28 February 2005 Reuters entered into an agreement to sell Bridge Trading to Instinet Group for US21.5 million in Instinet Group stock subject to adjustment for working capital and net capital.
The transaction is anticipated to complete by the end of April 2005 subject to approval from the NASD and other customary conditions.
Pursuant to the agreement until 31 December 2005 Bridge Trading will continue to have exclusive rights to allow its existing clients to pay for Reuters Station through soft dollar credits generated by trading activity.
In addition Reuters has agreed for a period of one year not to operate a US broker dealer which allows its customers to pay for Reuters Station on a soft dollar basis and not to solicit Bridge Trading employees in each case subject to certain exceptions.
The agreement otherwise includes representations and warranties covenants and other terms customary for a transaction of this nature.
Following the sale Reuters will continue to provide certain transitional services to Bridge Trading for a period through to 31 December 2005 including a lease arrangement for space currently occupied by Bridge Trading various administrative technology and other support services and a royaltyfree licence to the Bridge Trading trademark.
Other than the licence such arrangements include fees generally based on allocated or attributable costs.
RGRS Under agreements between Reuters and Instinet Group Instinet Group customers gain the ability to submit orders to Instinet Group and to receive indications of interest from Instinet Group over the RGRS network.
Instinet
Group is not required to pay for orders it receives through RGRS.
The US agreement covering global orders submitted via a US connection term is to 17 December 2005 subject to annual renewal thereafter and is subject to termination rights if Reuters ceases to own a majority of Instinet Groups voting stock.
The UK agreement covering global orders submitted via a UK connection will continue until terminated by either party on six months notice.
In addition under a development agreement Reuters develops enhancements to the RGRS interface so that customers can better access Instinet Groups proprietary trading functionality.
The current term runs through to 19 September 2005 subject to annual renewal thereafter and terminable by either party on a change of control of Instinet Group including if Reuters ceases to own a majority of Instinet Groups voting stock.
Newport
SM
Under an agreement with Instinet Group Reuters has the exclusive right to provide the realtime market data for Instinet Groups Newport patent pending program trading application.
The current agreement term is to 19 September 2005 subject to annual renewal thereafter and is terminable by either party on a change of control of Instinet Group including if Reuters ceases to own a majority of Instinet Groups voting stock.
Market data Reuters had been entitled to redistribute certain proprietary equity securities data from Instinet Group under two data distribution agreements.
Under a data distribution agreement entered into at the time of the Instinet IPO in May 2001 Reuters had the limited right to be the exclusive data vendor distributing some of Instinet Groups proprietary equity securities data however this agreement terminated on 17 May 2004.
Under a separate agreement originally entered into with Island ECN which was acquired by Instinet Group in September 2002 Reuters has the right to redistribute a broader set of proprietary equity securities data from Instinet Group.
This agreement which continued in effect notwithstanding the termination of the exclusive arrangement described above has a term until 28 June 2005 subject to annual renewal thereafter.
Reuters is not required to make payments in connection with any such redistribution.
Customer agreement Instinet Group has entered into an agreement for certain Reuters information services and related hardware software and support on terms to Reuters independent thirdparty customers as well as an addendum under which Reuters has granted Instinet Group the right to redistribute certain information both internally and to its customers subject to termination upon 180 days notice by either party.
Preferred softdollar arrangement This agreement establishes a preferred commercial and softdollar arrangement for Instinet Group customers that purchase Reuters products and services.
This is available to certain customers who are increasing their level of business with Instinet Group Reuters or both.
Reuters compensates Instinet Groups sales personnel for new sales of Reuters products and services and Instinet Group will pay Reuters an annual fee for various administrative and marketing services related to training of Instinet Groups personnel.
The current agreement term is to 19 September 2005 subject to annual renewal thereafter and is terminable by either party on a change of control of Instinet Group including if Reuters ceases to own a majority of Instinet Groups voting stock.
Commission sharing agreement Instinet Group has agreed to open accounts for some institutional clients that Bridge Trading introduces to Instinet Group and to rebate Bridge Trading portions of the commissions these customers pay at a commercially reasonable rate.
This agreement is terminable at will by either party.
Triad Under an agreement with Bridge Trading Instinet Group has the ability to deliver indications of interest and advertised trades to its customers and potential customers through Reuters Triad network.
Instinet Group pays standard commercial rates for indications of interest and advertised trades it delivers through Triad.
The current term of the agreement is to 22 July 2005 subject to annual renewal thereafter.
Patent licensing agreement Reuters has granted Instinet Group a patent licence permitting Instinet Group to make use and sell products that include a system with functionality that identifies counterparties to a transaction and enables communication between the counterparties to negotiate the terms of the transaction.
This licence is for the life of the patent although it may be terminated under customary conditions.
In addition Reuters has the right to terminate in the event that Instinet uses the patent to create products that compete with any of Reuters products.
Reuters also has the right to terminate the licence generally if it ceases to own a majority of Instinet Groups voting stock subject to Instinet retaining some rights to the patent for products existing on or before the date of such termination.
Instinet has also agreed that if it obtains a patent for a system with substantially similar functionality it would grant Reuters a licence to that patent on terms no worse than the terms of this licence.
Global Solutions Agreement This agreement enables Instinet Group to license software from Reuters usually on a onetime fee basis on a worldwide basis.
Reuters has also agreed to provide software support for the licensed products.
Fixed income technology licence Instinet Group has granted Reuters a royalty free nonexclusive nonassignable worldwide right and licence to use some technology that is owned by or licensed to Instinet Group related to its fixed income securities platform.
This agreement will automatically terminate subject to Reuters retention of some rights with respect to specified products and enhancements once Reuters ceases to own more than 50% of Instinet Groups common stock.
Research and Analytics In September 2001 Reuters purchased Instinet Groups Research and Analytics RandA product an analytic software application that incorporates quotes news and access to an INET trading application.
Following the RandA purchase Instinet Group was permitted to continue to make available softdollar payment options to its customers in connection with their use of the RandA product and any replacement product and Reuters agreed until 18 June 2003 not to provide any soft dollar payment options to certain RandA customers directly or through a third party other than through Instinet Group.
Reuters and Instinet Group each agreed to provide various transitional services relating to the RandA product to the other until 30 April 2003 although Instinet Group continued to provide transitional services until 31 July 2004.
In addition Instinet Group agreed to provide Reuters assistance in migrating RandA customers to a Reuters desktop product under an incentive arrangement scheme.
The migration was completed in July 2004 with all migrating customers bering transferred to the Reuters Station product.
3 Times Square sublease Instinet Group is subject to an agreement with Reuters to sublease 368000 square feet of office space at 3 Times Square in New York City.
The sublease term is until 2021 with a onetime right of termination in 2011 as to approximately half the space.
Corporate agreement Reuters and Instinet Group are parties to a corporate agreement providing for among other things i Reuters rights to nominate directors to the Instinet Group board ii consent rights by Reuters with respect to specified significant transactions so long as Reuters beneficially owns at least 35% but less than a majority of Instinet Groups voting stock iii consent rights with respect to Instinet Group incurring more than US400 million net indebtedness other than in the ordinary course of its brokerage or similar businesses so long as Reuters holds a majority of Instinet Groups outstanding voting stock iv restrictions on Instinet Group voluntarily taking any action reducing Reuters ownership to less than 51% and v restrictions on Instinet Group becoming registered as a national securities exchange without Reuters prior consent if such registration would materially affect Reuters ability to exercise its voting and other rights related to its ownership of Instinet common shares so long as Reuters beneficially owns more than 30% of Instinet Groups voting stock.
Stockholder agreement In connection with Instinet Groups acquisition of Island in 2002 Reuters entered into various agreements with Instinet Group and certain stockholders of Island providing for among other things director nomination rights and voting restrictions on purchases sales and issuances of Instinet Group shares approval rights regarding certain transactions and registration rights.
Reuters is limited from acquiring additional shares of Instinet Group without the consent of Instinet Groups Board until September 2005 with certain exceptions and subject to earlier termination in some circumstances.
Other material contracts Savvis Network Services Agreement In connection with the Bridge acquisition in 2001 Reuters entered into a binding term sheet with Savvis Bridges network service provider under which Savvis agreed to provide internet protocol network services internet access and colocation services necessary to continue network services for the Bridge business and customers Reuters was acquiring.
The term sheet was formalised by an agreement entered into by the parties in September 2001 which has subsequently been amended at various times.
The agreement which has a fiveyear term contained minimum spend commitments for each year.
As a result of various setoffs and other reductions under the agreement for the ninemonth period ending 30 September 2005 Reuters will be required to spend a minimum of US32.1 million subject to adjustment and reduction under certain circumstances thereafter Reuters will have no further minimum spend commitments to Savvis.
If Savvis does not meet certain required quality of service levels Reuters is entitled to credits and in the event of a material breach of such quality of service levels Reuters is entitled to terminate the agreement.
In addition upon successful completion of its acquisition of Telerate Reuters would acquire Telerates network services agreement with Savvis relating to Telerate services.
Telerate Acquisition Agreement On 20 December 2004 Reuters entered into an agreement to acquire substantially all of the business of Telerate for base consideration of US100 million and Reuters 40870 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock in Savvis.
The purchase price is subject to adjustment for working capital and an increase by an amount currently estimated to be US28 million 15 million to the extent certain actions Telerate may independently take prior to closing result in corresponding reduction of Reuters anticipated postclosing restructuring costs.
Under the agreement Reuters has provided US34 million 18 million in funding to Telerate which together with interest will be applied against the purchase price upon the closing or repaid through a draw on a letter of credit in the event the deal acquisition does not proceed.
The agreement generally is on customary terms including representations warranties covenants conditions including regulatory approvals and indemnities by each of the parties.
A portion of the purchase price consisting of US30 million cash subject to increase in connection with an estimate of closing working capital and US15 million worth of Savvis stock valued at the closing will be put into escrow for two years to serve in general as the sole source of funding for any postclosing claims by Reuters.
The agreement may be terminated in certain circumstances including upon mutual agreement if the closing has not occurred by 20 December 2005 so long as the failure to close was not the result of the terminating partys material breach upon material breach by either party if any condition shall become impossible to satisfy if completion is prohibited by final court order or if any of Telerates US subsidiaries shall enter bankruptcy proceedings.
For more information on the pending Telerate acquisition see pages 7 and 20 as well as the discussion on the following page.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 89 INFORMATION FOR SHAREHOLDERS continued 90 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Telerate Transitional Services Agreement Reuters is party to a Transitional Services Agreement TSA with Telerate and certain of its subsidiaries dated as of 2 June 2003.
The TSA arises from Reuters and Telerates respective acquisitions of certain assets out of bankruptcy from Bridge in late 2001 and formalises a term sheet the parties had been operating under since that time.
Because the businesses Telerate acquired  the global Telerate business and certain businesses of Bridge in Europe and Asia  were dependent on the software systems and support capabilities acquired by Reuters and because some of the operations acquired by Reuters in Europe and Asia were to a lesser extent dependent on the assets and operations acquired by Telerate the parties entered into the TSA pursuant to which each agreed to provide the other with certain software andor services for a transitional period.
Under the TSA Telerate has a limited right to sublicence to its own clients certain proprietary software acquired by Reuters from Bridge.
Reuters also provides Telerate with a variety of services  including data management central system software development technical operations and back office support  associated with management of the Bridge Data Network acquired by Reuters.
Telerate had provided Reuters with facilities and maintenance for equipment supporting the data collection function of the Bridge Data Network in Europe and Asia among other services although these have largely been terminated over time as Reuters now provides these functions for itself.
For the term of the TSA Telerate is restricted in its ability to sell equities information products in North America where Reuters acquired the business of Bridge.
The term of the TSA originally commenced on 18 October 2001 and ran to 18 October 2005 but has been extended as described below.
Each party has a right to terminate services it is receiving under the TSA prior to the TSAs expiration.
In addition there is an obligation for each party to cancel services it is receiving if it is able to provide those services for itself or to contract for the services with a third party.
Each party has a right to terminate the TSA in the event of a material breach by the other party.
In connection with discussions relating to and the execution of the definitive agreement for Reuters acquisition of Telerate the parties agreed to extend the expiration date of the TSA while the acquisition is pending and in the event the acquisition is terminated without completion to extend the expiration date further to approximately 27 months from the date of termination of the acquisition.
The parties have agreed that upon the successful completion of the acquisition any outstanding invoicing and payment disputes under the TSA will be settled for a payment to Reuters of approximately 22 million including the release to Reuters of approximately 12 million escrowed under the TSA from payments of disputed amounts made by each of Reuters and Telerate during the term of the TSA.
Financing arrangement.
For a discussion of other material contracts see Treasury Policies Financing and Foreign Exchange on pages 2122.
11 CAPITAL INVESTMENTS EXPENDITURE AND DIVESTMENTS Since the beginning of 2002 Reuters Group has made a number of acquisitions and has invested in several new and existing businesses.
In keeping with its Fast Forward goal to simplify business operations Reuters has also disposed of or closed over 80 units during the period.
The principal acquisitions investments and disposals none of which exceeded a cost or proceeds of 50 million save where otherwise stated were
Fitzrovia International plc a leading investment fund research company was acquired in October 2004 by Lipper Ltd  a wholly owned subsidiary of Reuters.
Radianz Ltd in which Reuters acquired the 49% voting interest it did not already own from Equant in November 2004 for 60 million 110 million.
Total capital expenditure for acquisitions investments in joint ventures and associates and other investments during 2004 was 78 million 2003 161 million 2002 317 million.
On 20 December 2004 Reuters entered into agreements to acquire substantially all of the business of Telerate as well as a subsidiary of Quick that serves as the exclusive distributor of Telerate products in Japan.
Both transactions are anticipated to complete mid2005 subject to regulatory approvals for the Telerate acquisition and other customary conditions.
For more information see Pending acquisition of Telerate on page 7. site Inc. in March 2003 for 158 million.
Island Holding Company Inc.
2002 for stock consideration having a value at the closing of 194 million.
Capital Access International LLC a provider of fixed income holdings information was acquired in November 2002.
AVT Technologies Limited a specialist in automated dealing technology for foreign exchange transactions was acquired in December 2002.
Divestments
Reuters disposed of or closed a total of 12 units in 2004 for consideration totalling 474 million.
The principal disposals or closures in 2004 were TSI in which Reuters Group reduced its stake from 48.4% to 8.8% in February 2004 through completion of a public offering of 69 million TSI shares and sale of an additional 17 million shares back to TSI for aggregate net proceeds of approximately 310 million.
GL TRADE a financial software company in which Reuters held a 34.2% shareholding was divested in June 2004 for a consideration of 59 million.
ORT SAS a whollyowned credit rating subsidiary of Reuters was sold in June 2004 for a total consideration of 29 million.
TowerGroup a financial services research company in which Reuters held a 98% holding was sold in February 2004.
Yankee a whollyowned telecommunications research company was sold in May 2004.
Riskmetrics a company specialising in portfolio credit risk evaluation in which Reuters held a 24% stake was divested in January and June 2004.
Reuters remaining Greenhouse Fund investment portfolio was sold in June 2004 to a company established by RVC the independent fund management company created by former Reuters employees in 2001 to manage the Greenhouse Fund.
On 28 February 2005 Reuters entered into an agreement to sell Bridge Trading to Instinet Group for US21.5 million in Instinet Group shares subject to adjustment for working capital and net capital.
The transaction is anticipated to complete by the end of April 2005 subject to customary conditions.
Reuters disposed of or closed a total of 17 units in 2003 for consideration totalling 41 million.
The principal disposals in 2003 were Synetix Solutions Limited a joint venture focusing on data management solutions sold in January 2003 Wall Street on Demand a whollyowned subsidiary providing research acquired as part of the acquisition of Bridge sold in March 2003 Informa SA a provider of online credit and financial information in which Reuters held a 40% shareholding sold in September 2003 Datamonitor plc a research company specialising in industry analysis in which Reuters held a 20.5% ordinary shareholding sold on a piecemeal basis between July 2003 and November 2003 The Thai Apex services business a domestic equities information service in Thailand sold into a new joint venture formed by Reuters and Systex Corporation in December 2003 and Agence de Presse Mdicale International SAS a health information provider in France a whollyowned subsidiary sold in December 2003.
In addition Multex Investor Europe Limited was liquidated in July 2003.
The company had surplus assets of approximately 10 million which have been absorbed into the Group.
Reuters disposed of or closed a total of 56 units in 2002 for consideration totalling 29 million.
The principal disposals or closures in 2002 were London News Radio in which Reuters held a 20% shareholding sold in September 2002 Diagram Asset Management and Diagram EDI two noncore units providing software solutions for the financial markets that were acquired as part of the acquisition of Diagram fip SA in 2001 were sold in September 2002 and November 2002 respectively Sila Communications a wireless information provider in which Reuters held a 40% shareholding was sold in December 2002 and Atriax an electronic internetbased foreign exchange market place which ceased operations during 2002 is currently in the process of being liquidated.
Further information relating to investments acquisitions joint ventures and disposals in 2004 is provided in notes 16 and 31 on the consolidated balance sheet on pages 5960 and 69.
13 PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT The computer equipment that Reuters uses to create manage and deliver its products to customers across the world forms the bulk of its tangible fixed assets.
This equipment is distributed across global sites with greater concentration at the major global and regional technical centres.
As Reuters extends its use of hosting services and browser delivery for its products the quantity of equipment located at customer sites is being reduced.
The Groups principal facilities are the corporate headquarters 100000 sq. ft.
In September 2003 Reuters announced arrangements to consolidate its Londonbased operations into a new building at Canary Wharf during 2005.
Under the agreement Reuters has taken a lease on a 281000 sq. ft. building and transferred approximately 340000 sq. ft. the end of 2005. the US headquarters at 3 Times Square in New York City 692000 sq. ft. the technical centres in London 324000 sq. ft.
Hazelwood Missouri 109000 sq. ft.
Geneva 144000 sq. t. office for EMEA Singapore 180000 sq. ft. office for Asia and Hauppauge New York 50000 sq. ft. the four corporate office buildings located in St.
Louis County Missouri aggregate of 211000 sq. ft.
Reuters owns the land on which its London and Hauppauge technical centres are situated whereas its buildings in Geneva and Singapore were built on leased land.
The leases including periods covered by options to extend expire in 2095 and 2050 respectively.
The Reuters Building at 3 Times Square is owned and was developed by 3XSQ Associates which is owned by Reuters and Rudins Times Square Associates LLC.
In May 2001 Reuters commenced its lease of 692000 sq. ft. from the venture of which 368000 sq. ft. in turn has subleased 180000 sq. ft. to third parties.
The principal part of Reuters lease will expire in 2021.
See 3XSQ Associates sublease on page 88 for further information.
In 2003 the major technical centre building in Hazelwood Missouri was acquired from Savvis for a total consideration of 24 million.
Reuters subsequently entered into a sale and leaseback for the facility receiving 23 million under a 20 year arrangement.
During 2004 Reuters extended its facilities in Bangkok to 100000 sq. ft.
In Bangalore a second facility adjacent to the companys existing offices was secured providing approximately 150000 sq. ft. of office accommodation.
14 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS Except as described below Reuters Group is not subject to any legal or arbitration proceedings which may have or have had in the recent past significant effects on the companys financial performance or profitability.
Instinet Group is a party to certain legal proceedings including the following The Island ECN Inc. v.
Archipelago LLC and REDIBook ECN LLC Archipelago Securities LLC v.
Instinet Group Incorporated On 20 September 2002 Island ECN commenced an arbitration proceeding against respondents Archipelago LLC Archipelago and REDIBook ECN LLC REDIBook before the NASD.
Island alleged that each respondent entered into a subscriber agreement with Island which prescribed certain fees and despite Islands demand that each respondent abide by the terms of its contract each respondent refused to pay such fees.
Island is seeking damages of US5.2 million from Archipelago and US4 million from REDIBook.
Archipelago and REDIBook have answered and counterclaimed against Island by denying the substantive allegations of Islands statement of claim asserting certain affirmative defences and counterclaims against Island alleging that Island engaged in unfair discriminatory pricing practices against these respondents and asserting claims involving breach of contract breach of obligations of good faith and attempted monopolisation and conspiracy to restrain trade under the US Sherman Act.
The counterclaims allege damages of no less than US30 million before trebling for a total of no less than US90 million treble damages pursuant to the federal antitrust laws.
Archipelago is also seeking attorneys fees.
Additionally on 19 February 2003 Archipelago commenced a separate action against Instinet Group before the NASD in which it alleged that Instinet Group also engaged in unfair discriminatory pricing practices against it and asserted claims involving breach of contract breach of obligation of good faith and attempted monopolisation and conspiracy to restrain trade under the US Sherman Act.
Archipelago seeks no less than US41 million before trebling for a total of no less than US123 million trebled damages.
Instinet Group has answered and intends to defend the proceeding vigorously.
These two actions have been consolidated by agreement of the parties and are in the discovery phase.
Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 91 92 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 NexTrade Holdings Inc. v.
ProTrader Group LP  ProTrader Securities Corp.
ProTrader Technologies LP ProTrader Trading LLCsite LP. and Instinet Group Incorporated.
On 4 February 2003 NexTrade Holdings Inc.
Group in 2001 in the United States District Court Middle District of Florida Tampa Division.
The complaint alleges that these subsidiaries adopted and used the mark ProTrader in violation of  321 of the US Lanham Act.
The complaint further alleges that these subsidiaries use of the ProTrader mark is likely to cause confusion mistake or deception among purchasers of software services and goods bearing the name ProTrader which allegedly constitutes false designation of origin and unfair competition in violation of  43a of the US Lanham Act.
The complaint also alleges that these subsidiaries use constitutes trademark infringement in violation of Florida state statutes and its common law and unfair competition based on trademark infringement in violation of the common law of Florida.
Finally the complaint alleges fraud in the inducement based on defendants alleged deceitful negotiations to resolve the dispute.
Plaintiff seeks to recover all of these subsidiaries profits gains and advantages resulting from the unauthorised use of the ProTrader mark damages sustained by the plaintiff of no less than US15 million before trebling and that such damages be trebled and exemplary and punitive damages of not less than US90 million.
Defendants have answered the complaint by denying the substantive allegations asserting certain affirmative defences and by counterclaiming against NexTrade seeking a cancellation of the ProTrade trademark on the ground that it is descriptive and Plaintiff committed fraud on the Patent and Trademark Office during the prosecution of its application.
In June 2004 the Court ordered that Instinet Group as well as certain former officers of the ProTrader entities be named as additional defendants in the action.
Instinet Group and NexTrade all filed motions for summary judgment on 15 June 2004 and then filed renewed motions for summary judgment on 31 August 2004.
On 15 October 2004 the Court granted ProTrader and Instinet Groups motion with respect to their claim that NexTrade failed to demonstrate that it had sustained damages as a result of any alleged infringement and further decided that any profits of ProTrader and Instinet to which NexTrade may be entitled if any are to be offset by their losses which may be aggregated over the years of alleged infringement.
The Court also granted Plaintiffs motion for summary judgment dismissing Defendants counterclaims but decided that Defendants counterclaims are a valid defence to Plaintiffs trademark infringement claims.
On 21 January 2005 the Court ruled that neither party will be permitted to introduce evidence regarding Instinet Groups profits.
On 16 February 2005 the parties reached a settlement in the action and on 17 February 2005 the Court issued an order dismissing the action with prejudice subject to the right by any party to reopen the action within sixty days of the date of the order.
INFORMATION FOR SHAREHOLDERS continued Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 93 ELEVEN YEAR CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL SUMMARY for the year ended 31 Decembertelteltel 1995 1994 m m m m m m m m m m m
Revenue
2885 3235 3593 3885 3592 3125 3032 2882 2914 2703 2309 Net interest payablereceivable Profitloss before tax 437 56 344 15tel62telTaxation Profitloss attributable to ordinary shareholders 351 50 255 4tel39telNet assets Fixed assets 734 1192 1448 1963 1868 1205 1098 1046 1026 999 687 Net current assetsliabilities 468 89 190 134 293 170 577 79telLongterm creditors
612 407 659 1273 1153 663 389 1679 1459 1212 740 Tangible fixed assets
Depreciation
Development expenditure 12tel32tel202teltelteltel 1994
Earningsloss per ordinary share Dividends per ordinary share Book value per ordinary share Profitloss before tax as a percentage of revenue % 15.2 1.7 9.6 4.1 18.3 20.2 19.1 21.7 22.4 20.6 22.1 Return on tangible fixed assets % Return on equity % 112.5 15.7 36.8 4.6 65.0 92.2 78.5 25.6 33.7 34.8 50.8 UK corporation tax rate
Shares issued millions 1436 1433 1433 1431 1429 1423 1422 1694 1689 1677 1668
14500 16744 17414 19429 18082 16546 16938 16119 15478 14348 13548 User accesses 328000 338000 388000 592000 558000 520858 482380 429000 362000 327100 296700
2003 and 2002 have been restated following adoption of UITF17 and UITF38 and the reclassification of transactionrelated regulatory fees following recently issued SEC guidance see Accounting Basis on page 72.
2003 and 2002 user accesses have been restated to reflect the exclusion of mobile and other lowcost accesses.
1997 and 1998 have been restated to reflect changes to reporting user accesses in 1999.
1999 and 2000 have been restated following adoption of FRS 19.
1995 and 1996 have been restated to reflect the effect of FRS 10 issued in 1997 which required purchased goodwill and intangible assets to be capitalised and amortised through the profit and loss account.
1994 fixed assets have been restated to reflect the effect of UITF abstract 13 issued in 1995.
Ratios
1 Book value per ordinary share represents adjusted shareholders equity divided by the number of shares in issue after deducting shares held by employee share ownership trusts.
In 1994 to 1997 shares in Reuters Holdings PLC held by Group companies are also deducted.
In 1994 to 1997 shares in Reuters Holdings PLC held by Group companies are also deducted from shares in issue.
Adjusted shareholders equity is calculated after deducting the carrying value of interests in shares of Reuters Holdings PLC 1994 to 1997.
2 Return on tangible fixed assets represents profit after taxation as a percentage of average tangible fixed assets.
The average is calculated by adding tangible fixed assets at the start and the end of each year and dividing by two.
3 Return on equity represents profit attributable to ordinary shareholders divided by the average adjusted shareholders equity.
The average is calculated by adding adjusted shareholders equity at the start and the end of each year and dividing by two.
In 1998 a weighted average has been used to reflect the capital reorganisation.
94 Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 CROSSREFERENCE GUIDE TO FORM 20F The information in this document that is referenced in the following table constitutes Reuters annual report on Form 20F for the year 2004 and shall be deemed to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for all purposes.
No other information is included in the 2004 Form 20F.
Item Page 1 Identity of directors senior management and advisers na 2 Offer statistics and expected timetable na 3 Key information Selected financial data 5 Exchange rates 85 Capitalisation and indebtedness na Reasons for offer and use of proceeds na Risk Factors 2325 4 Information on the company History and development of the company 610 82 Business overview 610 Organisational structure 7 70 Property plant and equipment 91 5 Operating and financial review and prospects Operating results Liquidity and capital resources Research and development patents and licences etc Trend information 4 1221 Offbalance sheet arrangements Tabular disclosure of contracted obligations 6 Directors senior management and employees Directors and senior management
Board practices 26 2931
Share ownership 3334 3840 7 Major shareholders and related party transactions Major shareholders Related party transactions Interests of experts and counsel na 8 Financial information Consolidated accounts and other financial information See Item 17
Dividend policy Significant changes 9 The offer and listing Offer and listing details  price history of shares Plan of distribution na
Selling shareholders na
Expenses of the issue na 10 Additional information Share capital na Memorandum and Articles of Association Material contracts 2021 8790 Exchange controls
Dividends and paying agents na Statement by experts na Documents on display Subsidiary information na GLOSSARY Reuters Group PLC Annual Report and Form 20F 2004 Term used in annual report US equivalent or brief description Allotted Issued Associates Affiliates accounted for under the equity method Calledup share capital Ordinary shares issued and fully paid Capital allowances Tax term equivalent to US tax depreciation allowances Cash at bank and in hand Cash Class of business Industry segment Combined Code A set of corporate governance principles and detailed codes of practice Creditors Accounts payable Creditors Amounts falling due after more than one year Longterm debt Creditors Amounts falling due within one year Current liabilities Debtors Accounts receivable Destination of revenue The geographical area from which goods or services are supplied Freehold Ownership with absolute rights in perpetuity Interest receivable Interest income Origin of revenue The geographical area from which goods or services are supplied to a third party or another geographical area Profit Income Profit and loss account statemtent Income statement Profit and loss account reserve under capital and reserves Retained earnings Profit attributable to ordinary shareholders Net income Proposed dividend Dividend declared by directors but not yet approved by shareholders Share capital Ordinary shares capital stock or common stock issued and fully paid Share premium account Additional paidin capital or paidin surplus not distributable Shares in issue Shares outstanding Stocks Inventories Tangible fixed assets Property and equipment Item Page 11 Quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk 22 5255 12 Description of securities other than equity securities na 13 Defaults dividend arrearages and delinquencies na 14 Material modifications to the rights of security holders and use of proceeds na 15 Controls and procedures 16A Audit committee financial expert 30 16B Code of ethics 31 16C Principal accountant fees and services 47 17 Financial statements Report of the auditors Consolidated profit and loss account for each of the three years in the period ended 31 December 2003 and related notes Consolidated cash flow statement for each of the three years in the period ended 31 December 2003 and related notes Consolidated balance sheet as of 31 December 2003 2002 and 2001 and related notes Accounting policies Summary of differences between UK and US GAAP and related notes Report on remuneration and related matters 3240 18 Financial statements na Wednesday 20 April First quarter trading statement issued Thursday 21 April Annual General Meeting Time 1130 am Venue Cabot Hall Canary Wharf London E14 5AB Thursday 28 April Final dividend for 2004 payable to ordinary shareholders on the register as at 11 March 2005 Thursday 5 May Final dividend payable to ADS holders on the record as at 11 March 2005 Tuesday 26 July Results for first six months of 2005 announced Wednesday 3 August Ordinary shares go exdividend Wednesday 3 August ADSs go exdividend Wednesday 31 August Interim dividend for 2005 payable to ordinary shareholders on the register as at 5 August 2005 Wednesday 7 September Interim dividend payable to ADS holders on the record as at 3 August 2005 Thursday 27 October Third quarter trading statement issued Documents on display Documents referred to in this report are filed in the US with the SEC and can be read and copied at the SECs public reference room located at 450 Fifth Street NW Washington DC 20549.
Information on the operation of the public reference room can be obtained in the US by calling the SEC at 1800SEC0330.
Reuters Group public filings with the SEC are also available on the website maintained by the SEC at www. ec. through various Reuters products.
Corporate headquarters 85 Fleet Street London EC4P 4AJ Tel 44 0tel www. bout.
In June 2005 we shall be moving to our new corporate headquarters 30 South Colonnade Canary Wharf London E14 5EP Tel 44 0tel Registered in England
Investor queries Miriam McKay
Tel 44 0tel Fax 44 0tel Email miriam.
Media queries Simon Walker
Tel 44 0tel Fax 44 0tel Email simon.
Stephen Naru New York Tel 1tel Fax 1tel Email stephen.
RegistrarDepositary
For dividend queries duplicate mailings and changes of address Ordinary shares Lloyds TSB Registrars The Causeway
West Sussex BN99 6DA
Tel 44 0tel for callers within the UK Tel 44 0tel for callers outside the UK Fax 44 0telAmerican Depositary Shares JPMorgan Chase Bank N.
P .
Box 43013 Providence RI 029403013
Toll free for callers within the US 800 9901135 For callers outside the US 1 781 Fax 1 781 575 4082 Website siteshareholder
Electronic copies The Annual Report and Form 20F and the annual review are available on the internet at www. bout.
Listings
London Stock Exchange RTR. and NASDAQ RTRSY.
Options on ordinary shares are traded on the Euronext Liffe.
Futures contracts on ordinary shares are traded on the Euronext Liffe Universal Stock Futures market.
The American Stock Exchange in New York lists options on American Depositary Shares of
Options on American Depositary Shares are traded on the Pacific Exchange.
Corporate brokers JPMorgan Cazenove Limited
Financial PR Brunswick Group Limited Picture on cover 8 March 2004.
A Palestinian refugee woman wearing a prayer dress looks out from her home in a refugee camp.
Reuters Photographer Ali Jarekji Reuters .
All rights reserved.
Reuters the sphere logo Lipper and Bridge Trading are the trade marks or registered trade marks of the Reuters Group of Companies around the world.
