At intu we create compelling experiences that surprise and delight our customers Intu Properties plc Annual Report 2014 Intu Properties plc Annual Report 2014 We aim to attract people for longer  more often which helps our retailers flourish Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Whats inside this report This powers our business creating value for our retailers our communities and our investors and drives our longterm success
Strategic report
At a glance 2 2014 highlights 4 Chairmans statement 6 Business model and strategy Business model 8 Corporate responsibility approach 10 Market review 12 Strategy 14 Interview with the Chief Executive 16 Strategic review 18 Focus on new developments 26 T op properties 28 Key performance indicators 30 People 32 Key risks and uncertainties 38
Financial review
Financial review 40 Corporate responsibility Better together 48 Communities and economic contribution 49 Environmental efficiency 50 Relationships 52
Board of Directors 54 Executive management 56 Governance 57 The Board 58 Relations with shareholders 62 Audit Committee 63 Nomination and Review Committee 68 Directors remuneration report 71 Directors report 84 Statement of Directors responsibilities 86
Independent auditorssitear2014 Intu Properties plc site Strategic report At a glance Intu owns and manages some of the best shopping centres in some of the strongest locations right across the country including nine of the UKs top 20 Our year in facts and figures Direct employees and almost 89 000 employed in our centres
21m sq . ft.
Carbon reduction since 2011 30% of the UKs population visit an intu centre each year
Construction starts on new cinema and restaurant quarter at intu Potteries
Conditional development agreement for intu Broadmarsh
Works commence to refurbish intu Victoria Centre and create a new catering cluster
Announced acquisition of Puerto V enecia Zaragoza Spain.
Planning consent granted for major extension at intu Braehead
Refurbishment of intu Lakeside food court complete Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Our values
Bold
Genuine
Asset valuation Superregional centres intu T rafford Centre 2200m intu Lakeside 1255m intu Metrocentre 928m intu Braehead 599m intu Merry Hill 435m Cribbs Causeway  Bristol 243m T own and city centres Manchester Arndale 430m intu Derby 420m St Davids Cardiff 308m intu Eldon Square 273m intu W atford 335m intu Victoria Centre 314m intu Milton Keynes 278m intu Chapelfield 261m intu Bromley 171m intu Potteries 165m Spanish centres Parque Principado 106m Puerto Venecia 451m 1 Acquisition completed January 2015.
Occupancy
95% Passing rent 4 0 1 million Debt to assets ratio 44%
1.9 billi o n 1.3 billion in the UK and 0.6 billion in Spain
Acquisition of intu Merry Hill and intu Derby
Joint venture formed with KWAP at intu Uxbridge Intu Properties plc site Strategic report 2014 highlights
Our focus has been on total property returns and sustainable income pr oper ty v a l ua tions incr eased 8.2 per cent 648 million outperforming the IPD monthly retail index which increased 7.3 per cent total property return as calculated by IPD 13.1 per cent 2013  7.3 per cent net asset value per share diluted adjusted of 379 pence giving a total financial return for the year of 17 per cent on the pro forma opening net asset value per share of 335 pence underlying earnings per share 13.3 pence H1 6.4 pence H2 6.9 pence 2013  13.7 pence reflecting a reduction in likeforlike net rental income of 3.2 per cent in the year signed 210 longterm leases for 34 million new annual rent at an average 5 per cent above previous passing rent
Another year of progress in 2014 acquired two UK top 20 shopping centres intu Merry Hill and intu Derby  along with Sprucefield retail park in Northern Ireland in May 2014 for 855 million exchanged contracts in December 2014 t o a c quir e a t op 10 Spanish shopping centre  Puerto Venecia Zaragoza for 451 million.
Acquisition completed in January 2015 formed a joint venture at intu Uxbridge introducing an 80 per cent partner for 175 million a small premium to the December 2013 book value debt refinancing activity of 2 billion weighted average maturity over eight years cash and committed facilities of 671 million at 31 December 2014 Net rental income 2013 370m
2013 126m Underlying EPS 3p 2013 13.7p
2013 140m Profit for the year 2013 364m 364m 2011 Net rental income 277m 2010 397m 2014 Underlying EPS 13.3p Including Group share of joint ventures.
2 Adjusted for rights issue bonus factor.
Please refer to glossary for definition of terms.
Presentation of information Amounts are presented including the Groups share of joint ventures.
Comparative per share information is adjusted for the rights issue bonus factor .
See Financial Review  page 40 for details.
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Development momentum We have maintained the momentum of development and investment in our centres development pipeline of 1.9 billion 1.3 billion in the UK and 0.6 billion in Spain completed the remodelled food court at intu Lakeside on site with the leisure extension at intu Potteries and mall refurbishment and catering quarter at intu Victoria Centre on target to commence a major 110 million extension at intu W atford in 2015 Making the brand count We are seeing the benefits of our brand and scale active retailers on our transactional websitesite include John Lewis Next and T opshop almost 40 per cent yearonyear increase in website visits in December 2014 to nearly three million with an active marketing database of almost two million individuals introduced T ell intu and customer service measurement with the average Net Promoter Score increasing in the year Dividend per share NAV per share intu Metrocentre
2013 13.7p Net external debt 2013 3698m Debt to assets ratio 4 4 .2% 2013 48.5% Market value of investment properties 2013 7624m NAV per share diluted adjusted 2013 346p 1 Including Group share of joint ventures.
2 Adjusted for rights issue bonus factor.
Please refer to glossary for definition of terms.
Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Intu Properties plc site hope that after studying this report you will be pleased  as I am  at the way the business and the reputation of the Group has moved forward through 2014 positioning ourselves to take full advantage of the recovery in the economy .
Overview of 2014 activity In the course of the year under review  we acquired two top UK shopping centres intu Merry Hill and intu Derby .
This takes our ownership to nine of the top 20 shopping centres in the UK.
Both of these centres have enormous potential and we are already seeing the benefits of our asset management as rental values and market values have increased significantly in our eight months of ownership.
And in Spain we announced the acquisition of a top shopping centre Puerto Venecia in Zaragoza which completed in January 2015.
This demonstrates the seriousness of our intent to grow our business there.
The centre will be a model for creating highquality shopping resorts at our Spanish development options.
We have completed a twoyear programme for refinancing the majority of the Groups debt.
Throughout this period we have increased the tenor and reduced the average cost of our debt.
This strengthening of our financial position means that we are well placed to advance our development pipeline.
2014 also saw us complete the food court redevelopment at intu Lakeside and the transformation of the malls at intu Eldon
In addition we commenced two major catering and leisure projects at intu Victoria Centre and intu Potteries and we have moved the major extension at intu W atford forward to the point where we intend to commence the development in 2015.
Our branding now two years old is gaining significant traction the result of a fruitful combination of the customer service in our centres and our digital platform.
In our centres we introduced T ell intu allowing us to meet customers changing requirements faster .
Customer satisfaction has improved measurably since its introduction.
Digitally we now have the majority of our major retailers on our websitesite with the likes of John Lewis Next and T opshop added this year .
As well as half of the UKs population visiting an intu centre at some point in the year  we now have nearly two million individuals on our online database.
Through all these actions as well as the groundwork in previous years we have delivered a total shareholder return of 24 per cent in 2014.
May I refer you to the interview with our Chief Executive on pages 16 and 17 where David Fischel answers a number of key questions about the business and to the financial review presented by our Chief Financial Officer  Matthew Roberts on pages 40 to 46 where you will find a more detailed assessment of our achievements our challenges and our strategy .
Chairman s statement Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report
Y our Directors are recommending a final dividend of 9.1 pence per share bringing the amount paid and payable in respect of 2014 to 13.7 pence unchanged from the bonus factor adjusted 2013 dividend.
A scrip dividend alternative will be offered.
Looking forward Over the last few years we have positioned ourselves for the upturn in the economy .
I believe we are now beginning to see sustained though small improvements in disposable income generally responding to wage increases running ahead of inflation and lower fuel prices.
Uncertainties and fragility remain and this is not confined just to the economic sphere some measure of caution is still therefore desirable.
Retailers have also had a good end to 2014 which along with improved consumer confidence should see them growing their businesses.
Through the enhancements we have been making to our centres in terms of the retail and leisure mix our world class customer service and our digital platform we are well placed to deliver a favourable trading environment for retailers.
We will continue to build our business in Spain driving our developments there forward to replicate our successful UK model.
We remain focused on delivering strong returns over the medium term through rental growth in our existing assets superior returns from our development pipeline and the increasing strength of our brand.
Patrick Burgess
27 February 2015 Shareholder return in 2014 2 4% 2013 7% Reduction in C0 emissions since 2011 3 0% Corporate responsibility Our centres make an important contribution to their local neighbourhood both because of their location and our close and necessary engagement with the communities around us.
Responding to our corporate responsibility is an integral part of our commercial life through community environmental and stakeholder initiatives.
Our success in this field has been validated by the achievement of several highprofile awards.
We once again achieved the Business in the Community CommunityMark award one of only 52 companies to be accredited.
This year we were awarded the Best in continuing Carbon Reduction at the Carbon T rust Standard Bearers Awards for decreasing our carbon emissions by 30 per cent in three years.
Y ou can read more about this amazing achievement on page 51.
Throughout the year we have run projects encouraging and supporting employee mentoring and volunteering.
Our people I would like to record my thanks to the Board and with my fellow Directors our thanks to all our staff for their commitment and dedication to intus values and vision in the year .
The creation of intu Retail Services in 2013 has led to a greater sense of unity within the Group and in 2014 we have not neglected to ensure that all our staff have the right skills and training for their roles.
Through these endeavours we have seen a more motivated and committed workforce with a dramatic reduction in staff who leave within their first year of service.
I am glad to report that our approach was recognised when we received the Premises and Facilities Management Partner in Retail Facilities award this year .
We are the only shopping centre business to be accredited by the Institute of Customer Service.
Read more on pages 3237.
In 2014 we have positioned ourselves to take full advantage of the recovery in the economy Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Business model Our customers are at the heart of everything we do.
We are passionate about providing them with a compelling shopping experience so we ensure their needs inform every stage of our business model.
Putting our customers first ultimately creates value for our shareholders Balanced approach to risk intu brand Longterm focus Talented employees Our enablers Robust capital structure
Creating compelling experiences
Delivering longterm growth
Intu Properties plc site Strategic report
Pro f essional mo tiva t ed and empowered t eams specia lis ts in their fiel d f ocused on creating mutuall y beneficial opportunities and relationships with partners.
Creating compelling experiences The value we add We provide customers with a shopping experience that attracts people for longer more often We use insights from our indepth customer research to understand what customers want from their shopping experience.
T o satisfy this expectation our centres need to provide not only the right mix of retail leisure and catering but also a distinctive events programme digital connectivity and moments of surprise and delight.
T oday  our focus is on actively managing and developing our centres which are in some of the best locations across the country .
Establishing enduring relationships with retailers The value we add We help retailers flourish By creating great experiences for customers we generate powerful footfall that attracts and retains the right mix of retailers and catering and leisure operators for our centres.
Our high footfall locations along with the quality of the intu brand give tenants the confidence that they can roll out nationally with intu.
We maintain effective relationships and engage our tenants in the plans for and developments of our centres.
Delivering longterm growth The value we add Sustainable value to our shareholders and the communities in which we operate Through our brand we create uniquely compelling experiences that surprise and delight our customers.
This coupled with our scale and flexibility  attracts retailers.
We have nine of the UKs top 20 centres and more than half of the UKs population visit our centres each year .
This ensures that occupancy remains strong.
And this drives rental income over the long term.
Generating value for shareholders The value we add A trusted and recognisable name for both shoppers and retailers Our thriving centres are soughtafter investments creating sustainable value for shareholders and supporting access to capital for reinvestment.
We invest in achieving our strategic aims see page 14 by creating the perfect shopping experience and distinguishing Intu from our competitors.
Beyond financial value great shopping centres create a vibrant hub for the community and make a significant economic contribution to the region.
Putting our customers first ultimately creates value for our shareholders.
Nationwide shopping centre brand focused on enriching the customer experience providing compelling scale f or r e tail ers and o ther c ommer cia l partners.
A robust capital structure Astute financial management to maximise funding options for disciplined and shrewd investment.
A longterm focus Creative and collaborative approach to longterm investment and growth facilitated by development expertise and community focus.
A balanced approach to risk Risk management is underpinned by rigorous analysis in the context of potential threats to strategic objectives.
Strategic report Our approach Our corporate responsibility approach is based on three pillars of communities and economic contribution environmental efficiency and relationships with our stakeholders.
In 2014 we reached the target of reducing our carbon emissions by 30 per cent compared with 2011 likeforlike portfolio adjusted for occupancy.
We also diverted over 97 per cent of waste away from landfill recycled 69 per cent of waste and reduced water use by 2 per cent compared with 2011.
Our outstanding and sustained performance in energy efficiency was recognised by the Carbon T rust which awarded us the Best in continuing carbon reduction award at the Standard Bearers Awards.
The award recognises the challenging 30 per cent reduction target we set ourselves and the work we have done to achieve this since 2011.
Once again in 2014 we were accredited with the BitC CommunityMark one of only 52 UK companies to receive the award.
The CommunityMark is a national standard that publicly recognises leadership and excellence in the community .
In our joint community projects we work with local partners to help disadvantaged young people into work.
During 2014 we worked with nine community partners delivering 21 projects at our centres.
These projects have directly reached over 1200 people.
We continue to be included in FTSE4Good and the Dow Jones Sustainability Global Index and we were awarded the Green Star by GRESB.
We have also received a gold ranking in the Mayor of Londons Business Energy Challenge for our two centres in Greater London and our head office.
At Intu we believe that corporate responsibility must be driven by the strategic aims of the Company and be subject to the same quality of governance controls as other areas of the business.
We want Intu to be a longterm and sustainable business  and we can only ensure that if we care for the communities where our shopping centres are located and look after the environment that we all share Corporate responsibility approach CR governance
Environmental efciency
Our
Establishing enduring relationships with retailers
Delivering longterm growth
Intu Properties plc site Strategic report
Environmental efficiency
Our shopping centres are integral to the communities they serve.
They build social togetherness by providing places for people to come together to meet eat drink and socialise.
We also make an important contribution to the economic life within and beyond these communities providing jobs for local people.
Our centres support charities and community organisations that address fundamental issues in modern society which are important to the longterm success of our business including youth education and the prevention of antisocial behaviour .
Achieving Retail Gold Since 2005 intu has supported the Retail Gold initiative to prepare young people for a career in retail placing over 300 students with retailers.
This year we launched a tailored intu World Class Service module for students preparing for their retail placement.
With intu Braehead we are also providing employability support to people attending classes at the Kirklandneuk Community Centre.
We have a responsibility not just to manage and minimise our daytoday environmental impacts but also to share good practices and influence our delivery partners retailers and visitors towards more sustainable behaviour .
Ultimately  we want to create a more sustainable operating environment.
We focus our efforts on the common areas of our shopping centres where we have the biggest ability to drive change.
Bringing facilities management under our control has further increased our oversight of the environmental efficiencies we can achieve.
We target reductions in energy usage increase in recycling levels and decrease in water consumption.
Zero Waste Award intu Chapelfield is the first shopping centre ever to win a Gold Zero Waste Award for its commitment to reducing waste to landfill.
All staff and retailers are trained in recycling sorting waste and reducing contamination and understand why the centre takes waste management so seriously.
By the end of 2014 intu Chapelfield and nine other intu centres sent zero waste to landfill.
We need to understand the needs and expectations of a wide range of stakeholders in order to provide a business that offers a great shopping experience with informed investors passionate employees and well supported communities.
A key part of our corporate responsibility is managing and developing relationships with key stakeholders and engaging on relevant issues.
The main groups of stakeholders we engage with are C ommunities
In v es t ors Local and national government Our peopl e
Suppliers for more information A winning partnership This years Chairmans CR Prize went to the team at intu Lakeside who worked with the National Literacy Trust to support local young people with literacy difficulties and their families.
Partnership working is required for the prize helping young people facing educational medical social and employment difficulties is part of our CR approach.
Intu Properties plc site Strategic report he investment market is the strongest it has been for some years and we are seeing an upturn in the occupier market but we are constantly aware of the evolving demands of the retail market.
Investment market The weight of money in the retail property market has remained strong and with the increased availability of debt has heightened demand and resulted in downward pressure on yields.
The value of UK shopping centre investment transactions in 2014 was the highest for eight years and well above the longterm yearly average.
Shopping centre development is at low levels offering limited new supply .
The majority of activity is focused on extensions and reconfigurations.
The UK supply of new space in the year has declined by 75 per cent from the peak in 2008 setting the stage for increased occupancy and robust rental growth.
Occupier market The UK economy showed signs of continued improvement in 2014 with two full years of quarterly GDP growth and consumer confidence increasing through the year .
This has been supported by an increase in the UK average household disposable income with the Asda benchmark index showing a rise of 9 per cent over the year .
The economy is starting to see yearonyear wage growth outpacing inflation and a lower oil price which should give consumers a greater level of disposable income going into 2015.
Consumer spending has also continued to increase with higher likeforlike non food retail sales reported by the BRC throughout 2014 aggregating to 2.7 per cent for the year .
Retailer administrations in 2014 were at the lowest levels since 2010 according to the Centre for Retail Research with Phones 4U and La Senza being the largest.
They both closed all stores and accounted for approximately 1 per cent of Intus rent roll.
Since the year end two multibrand fashion retailers Bank and USC have entered administration but continue to trade and account for approximately 1 per cent of the rent roll.
Changing face of UK retail Online sales continue to grow  with the Office of National Statistics estimating that on average 11.2 per cent of sales were conducted online in 2014 an increase from 10.4 per cent in 2013.
Retailers need to offer a multichannel approach with shoppers now expecting consistent pricing and service across the physical store and online.
The UKs most successful brands have generally developed a multichannel Market review We understand our market and are taking advantage of the opportunities offered by the changing face of retail Major extension for intu Braehead Extensions and reconfigurations of existing centres offer excellent opportunities to create sustainable growth in rental income At Intu we see the rise of multichannel retail  online instore click and collect  as an opportunity rather than a threattelteltelteltelteltelteltelteltel UK retail construction pipeline  PMA estimate million sq. ft.
Source PMA l Complete l Plannedproposed Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Flagship stores key to multichannel approach Next has been highly successful at adapting to the evolving retail market Click and collect Below Choosing a product online but picking it up instore is becoming a popular option for shoppers driving footfall and incremental sales offer and understand the power of the physical store in their strategy .
As well as a profitable location in its own right the store can also function as a showroom for the product or a distribution location for their online sales.
More and more retailers note that online customers are opting to click and collect allowing the retailer to minimise their distribution costs and enhance sales through further purchases once in store.
As well as established physical retailers reviewing their portfolios to have space in the best retail locations several online retailers are now seeing the need for a physical presence to improve their sales and marketing with the likes of Simply Be building up a store network in key locations.
Retailers need fewer stores to cover the UK population than 20 years ago but increasingly need to focus on prime destinations.
Our focus has been to further enhance our centres as dayout familyfriendly destinations offering unrivalled shopping leisure and cateringsite and other digital and marketing opportunities.
This has positioned us well to benefit from these changes.
Outlook
The retail sector has been changing at a rapid pace and change is likely to continue in 2015 as the UK economy continues to strengthen.
The outlook for retail spending in 2015 is positive due to a combination of low inflation reviving growth in earnings and resilience in the labour market indicating that households real disposable incomes should increase over the course of the year .
We are strongly positioned to take advantage of increased demand from retailers.
The supply of new space is limited.
In 2008 a record year  over 8 million sq. ft. in the UK.
Levels fell with an alltime low in 2014 and even by 2019 the supply is only expected to have reached around 3 million sq. ft.
The UK s most successful high street brands are on the whole those that have developed their multichannel offer as the ecommerce sector has grown but their physical stores are still crucial.
Shopping centres will remain at the forefront of the retail market but they must continually evolve to maintain their relevance in the modern retail environment Jonathan De Mello Harper Dennis Hobbs Across the sector we are expecting to see a focus in 2015 on improving the customer experience with seamless multichannel engagement and an increasing sense of personalisation showrooming and convenience.
We believe that our active asset management and unique focus on creating the best possible customer experience will enable us to emerge as the leader of this trend among retail landlords.
We recognise that the influence of digital technology will continue to dominate tactical and strategic decisionmaking across the industry .
At Intu we see the rise of multichannel retail  online instore click and collect  as an opportunity rather than a threat.
We have always striven to be at the forefront of technological advances and 2015 will be no different as we begin to develop further ways to utilise data gathered from our digital network.
Intu Properties plc site Strategic report
We have clear strategic objectives to ensure the business model is put into action effectively Optimise performance of existing assets prioritising mediumterm total property return We aim to achieve this by Making our locations the most desirable for shopping and socialising Astutely managing the assets to take advantage of new trends and occupiers Building longterm partnerships with local authorities and communities How we measure our success
Occupancy
Income performance T otal financial return How we manage the risk Active management of tenant mix Leisure and catering space to increase over the next few years Our progress in 2014 Opened the redeveloped food court at intu Lakeside and on site with restaurant developments at intu Potteries and intu Victoria Centre Introduced new brands to our customers including Five Guys MAC Jack Wills and Hema Engaged with national and local government and worked with local partners to help disadvantaged people into work Our priorities in 2015 Increase the catering and leisure elements of our centres which leads to increased dwell time Continue to introduce new entrants to our centres which may be international entrants or online brands looking for a store presence Develop retail academy partnerships across the Group following a North East pilot Build local authority and parliamentary relationships with a major event to launch latest economic impact report Drive forward 1.3 billion investment programme in existing UK assets We aim to achieve this by Delivering the required planning approvals for all projects Generating the required level of demand to commence a project Having the required funding to progress the pipeline How we measure our success Prime property assets T otal financial return How we manage the risk Revolving credit facility increased from 375 million to 600 million during the year Detailed appraisal work and significant prelets continuing ahead of starting major development projects Our progress in 2014 Received town centre status and planning approval for extension at intu Braehead Completed letting of leisure scheme at intu Potteries in advance of opening in 2015 Introduced joint venture partner to intu Uxbridge and increased available facilities Our priorities in 2015 Commence work on the major extension at intu W atford Gain sufficient prelets to commence restaurant developments at intu Metrocentre and intu Eldon Square Achieving planning for intu Broadmarsh Make the brand count We aim to achieve this by Offering a distinctive customer signature experience at all our centres Having a bestinclass digital offering to retailers and customers Delivering a consistent national brand partnership experiential and advertising opportunity on and offline How we measure our success
Income performance How we manage the risk T raining and employee engagement to deliver brand promise and values T ell intu programme of customer feedback and analysis Digital investments to improve relevance as shopping habits change Our progress in 2014 Introduced T ell intu and measurement of Net Promoter Score which has increased by 30 per cent since its introduction Introduced more retailers to our transactional websitesite including John Lewis Next and T opshop Increased our marketing database to almost two million individuals Secured UKs first national single portfolio multichannel promotional launch for Home Our priorities in 2015 Build on the T ell intu programme to improve customer experience against Net Promoter Scores Monetise the initiatives and infrastructure we have put in place over the last two years Build on the success of Home to secure more national brand promotions Seize the growth opportunity in Spain We aim to achieve this by Building a platform of the best centres in Spain through acquisition and development Delivering the same brand experience and returns in Spain and the UK Moving the development options forward to a point where we can consider exercising them and commencing developments How we measure our success Income performance T otal financial return How we manage the risk Substantial property and financial due diligence undertaken before acquisition Local partner in Spain with market specialist knowledge Our progress in 2014 Announced the acquisition of Puerto Venecia a top 10 Spanish shopping resort Delivered 21 per cent capital growth on Parque Principado in our first full year of ownership Entered into an option for a development site in Palma Mallorca Our priorities in 2015 Integrate Puerto Venecia into the Group Rebrand Parque Principado as intu Asturias Work to bring the Mlaga development option forward to the point where we can consider exercising it Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Optimise performance of existing assets prioritising mediumterm total property return We aim to achieve this by Making our locations the most desirable for shopping and socialising Astutely managing the assets to take advantage of new trends and occupiers Building longterm partnerships with local authorities and communities How we measure our success
Occupancy
Income performance T otal financial return How we manage the risk Active management of tenant mix Leisure and catering space to increase over the next few years Our progress in 2014 Opened the redeveloped food court at intu Lakeside and on site with restaurant developments at intu Potteries and intu Victoria Centre Introduced new brands to our customers including Five Guys MAC Jack Wills and Hema Engaged with national and local government and worked with local partners to help disadvantaged people into work Our priorities in 2015 Increase the catering and leisure elements of our centres which leads to increased dwell time Continue to introduce new entrants to our centres which may be international entrants or online brands looking for a store presence Develop retail academy partnerships across the Group following a North East pilot Build local authority and parliamentary relationships with a major event to launch latest economic impact report Drive forward 1.3 billion investment programme in existing UK assets We aim to achieve this by Delivering the required planning approvals for all projects Generating the required level of demand to commence a project Having the required funding to progress the pipeline How we measure our success Prime property assets T otal financial return How we manage the risk Revolving credit facility increased from 375 million to 600 million during the year Detailed appraisal work and significant prelets continuing ahead of starting major development projects Our progress in 2014 Received town centre status and planning approval for extension at intu Braehead Completed letting of leisure scheme at intu Potteries in advance of opening in 2015 Introduced joint venture partner to intu Uxbridge and increased available facilities Our priorities in 2015 Commence work on the major extension at intu W atford Gain sufficient prelets to commence restaurant developments at intu Metrocentre and intu Eldon Square Achieving planning for intu Broadmarsh Make the brand count We aim to achieve this by Offering a distinctive customer signature experience at all our centres Having a bestinclass digital offering to retailers and customers Delivering a consistent national brand partnership experiential and advertising opportunity on and offline How we measure our success
Income performance How we manage the risk T raining and employee engagement to deliver brand promise and values T ell intu programme of customer feedback and analysis Digital investments to improve relevance as shopping habits change Our progress in 2014 Introduced T ell intu and measurement of Net Promoter Score which has increased by 30 per cent since its introduction Introduced more retailers to our transactional websitesite including John Lewis Next and T opshop Increased our marketing database to almost two million individuals Secured UKs first national single portfolio multichannel promotional launch for Home Our priorities in 2015 Build on the T ell intu programme to improve customer experience against Net Promoter Scores Monetise the initiatives and infrastructure we have put in place over the last two years Build on the success of Home to secure more national brand promotions Seize the growth opportunity in Spain We aim to achieve this by Building a platform of the best centres in Spain through acquisition and development Delivering the same brand experience and returns in Spain and the UK Moving the development options forward to a point where we can consider exercising them and commencing developments How we measure our success Income performance T otal financial return How we manage the risk Substantial property and financial due diligence undertaken before acquisition Local partner in Spain with market specialist knowledge Our progress in 2014 Announced the acquisition of Puerto Venecia a top 10 Spanish shopping resort Delivered 21 per cent capital growth on Parque Principado in our first full year of ownership Entered into an option for a development site in Palma Mallorca Our priorities in 2015 Integrate Puerto Venecia into the Group Rebrand Parque Principado as intu Asturias Work to bring the Mlaga development option forward to the point where we can consider exercising it Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Y ou have a 1.3 billion pipeline of developments in the UK.
How fast can we expect to see these developments and how will you fund them The development pipeline can be split into active management projects and major extensions.
We have several ongoing active management projects such as the leisure extension at intu Potteries and the refurbishment and restaurant quarter at intu Victoria Centre both of which will be completed in the second half of 2015.
We will also be commencing three other restaurant projects in the next few months.
All these projects can be funded from our existing facilities. under offer .
We anticipate beginning construction this year .
The catalyst for our other extensions the majority of which have planning approved will be the required level of tenant interest.
We should not need additional equity to finance these projects.
We can finance the extensions from existing available facilities raising debt against the value created from completed developments and recycling capital from other assets to reinvest into these growth opportunities including introducing partners into existing assets.
The major developments are likely to be spread over a number of years so the proceeds from financing a completed project can be used to help finance the next one.
Y ou have recently acquired a second centre in Spain.
Why is Spain such an attractive market for you and why do you think you can replicate your strategy there Spain has very attractive market dynamics with an economy moving out of recession and a sophisticated consumer and retail market but a retail sector where ownership of the regional shopping centre market remains highly fragmented and without a large committed pipeline of new centres.
It is a country where we see major opportunities for us to broaden our presence and further strengthen our position in the market.
We believe such expansion will be beneficial to our overall brand and digital positioning.
The country holds huge potential for the creation of genuinely regional destination centres in which we specialise.
Eighty per cent of Spains retail expenditure comes from 10 key catchments and we aim to be the leading owner  developer and manager of regionally preeminent shopping centre destinations for a significant number of those key areas.
The acquisition of Puerto Venecia in early 2015 after the successful acquisition of Parque Principado in 2013 substantially accelerates our activities in Spain.
We also have development options on sites in Mlaga Palma V alencia and Vigo.
It is our intention subject to shareholder approval to exercise the Mlaga option in March 2015.
We are advancing the other sites to the point where we can consider exercising the options.
Y ou have had a year of negative likeforlike net rental income.
What specific actions are you taking to address this and when can we expect to see a turnaround Over the last three years we have successfully repositioned the Group so that we are now well placed to benefit from the improved confidence of shoppers and retailers.
Rather than chasing a target level of occupancy throughout this period we have instead concentrated on being selective and ensuring that we have the right tenants in the right space.
This means we have not compromised on the quality of the tenant mix and have maintained or improved the tone of the rents in our prime centres.
While our results still reflect a lingering impact from the administrations of late 2012 and early 2013 it is clear that this active asset management strategy is starting to pay off .
For example in the case of Republic we took back all the units rather than let them at potentially lower rents to tenants who did not fit our desired retail mix.
It took a year  but all of these units are now relet to topquality brands such as Hugo Boss White Stuff Superdry and Footasylum at rents in line with the previous passing rent.
Interview with the Chief Executive Intu s improved 2014 results demonstrate we are well positioned to benefit further from rising consumer confidence and strengthening demand from retailers for quality space.
We welcome over 400 million customer visits per annum and our clear focus on delivering outstanding customer experience under the intu brand is proving a powerful factor in the successful performance of our centres David Fischel Chief Executive A Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Superregional centres 66% intu Trafford Centre 2200 million i n t u L a k e s i d e 1255 million i nt u M e t r o c e nt r e 928 million i n t u B r ae h e ad 599 million intu Merry Hill 435 million Cribbs Causeway Bristol 243 million Town and city centres 34% M a n c h e s te r A r n d a l e 430 million i n t u D e r b y 420 million St Davids Cardiff 308 million intu Eldon Square 273 million i n t u W a t f o r d 335 million intu Victoria Centre 3 1 4 m i l l i o n intu Milton Keynes 278 million i n t u C h a p e l fi e l d 261 million i n t u B r o m l e y 171 million i n t u P o t te r i e s 165 million The remaining elements of the likefor like net rental income shortfall in 2014 can be split into two areas.
First with our ongoing active management projects in particular at intu Victoria Centre we had to remove units from generating income while we reconfigured the centre to maximise rental potential on completion of the project.
Secondly there was a concentration of lease expiries at intu Braehead and intu Potteries this year .
We repositioned key tenants as we illustrated last year  and have now addressed the majority of the expiries but have operated with a higher vacancy level in these centres as a result.
Likeforlike net rental income is an important measure but total property return the combined income and capital returns encompasses everything we do and is the overall measure on which we focus.
Over the past five years our annualised total property return of 9.9 per cent per annum outperformed the IPD UK quarterly retail benchmark of 9.2 per cent. centre brand.
What value does this bring and what evidence of success do you have two years after the brand was launched Intu is one of the UKs biggest retail landlords and focused on providing a great experience for millions of UK shoppers with according to our estimates over half of the UKs population visiting an intu centre every year .
Asset valuation 0 b n 2013 7.6bn Including Group share of joint ventures.
Other properties 100 million 350 million.
T own and city centres 34% Manchester Arndale 430 million intu Derby 420 million St Davids Cardi 308 million intu Eldon Square 273 million intu Watford 335 million intu Victoria Centre 314 million intu Milton Keynes 278 million intu Chapeleld 261 million intu Bromley 171 million intu Potteries 165 million Superregional centres  66% intu Traord Centre 2200 million intu Lakeside 1255 million intu Metrocentre 928 million intu Braehead 599 million intu Merry Hill 435 million Cribbs Causeway Bristol 243 million Asset valuation n b 0 .
2013 7.6bn Our shoppers are at the heart of everything we do and providing them with compelling experiences also ensures that we establish enduring relationships with our retailers.
Our brand enables us to offer scalability to retailers and the size of the Group also helps to support the brand.
Our national brand enables us to deliver experiences and events for the customer that ownership of a single centre could not such as the Everyones Invited family friendly weekend of events in all our centres which increased footfall for the weekend yearonyear by around 13 per cent.
Our staff offer an unparalleled service and our digital platform gives customers access to brands in our centres 24 hours a day . onyear increase of almost 40 per cent.
Our active marketing database is almost two million strong and in 2015 we will focus on developing opportunities for more regular engagement and importantly  increased monetisation.
Our scale as owner of nearly half of the top 20 shopping centres in the UK means that we have a strong presence offering key entry points in the areas where retailers need to be.
We recognise that we are competing with other attractions not just shopping for our customers time and money and need to offer an attractive product on a national basis.
What are your strategic priorities for 2015 Our focus in 2015 will be on four main goals which we believe will result in strong total returns over the medium term optimising performance of existing assets with the delivery of likeforlike net rental income growth in 2015 and attractive total property returns driving forward the 1.3 billion investment programme in UK assets making the brand count and demonstrating the benefits of scale seizing the growth opportunity in Spain building on progress in the last three years Including Group share of joint ventures.
Other properties 100 million 350 million.
Intu Properties plc site Strategic report
T otal property return has increased in 2014 as yields compressed and rental values started to improve.
Valuation
The aggregate likeforlike market value of our investment property increased by 8.2 per cent in the year  outperforming the IPD monthly retail index up 7.3 per cent as we have in each of the last five years.
This contributed to a total property return of 13.1 per cent.
The weighted average nominal equivalent yield at 31 December 2014 was 5.32 per cent a reduction of 47 basis points in the year  reflecting market conditions and our ongoing asset management initiatives maintaining the prime and resilient nature of our assets.
Based on the gross portfolio value the net initial yield toppedup for the expiry of rent free periods was 4.60 per cent.
The likeforlike change in ERV was in line with the IPD benchmark with a further marginal increase in the second half of 2014.
Property revaluation surplus 2013 126m Four key themes have shaped our performance in 2014 delivering improved returns significant corporate activity making the brand count development momentum Strategic review Our strategic review shows how we have performed in the year and how we are positioning ourselves to deliver on our strategy in the future l Intu l IPD monthly retail indextel 2013 2014 Capital value movements % Full year Second half First half Group revaluation surplus  likeforlike 8.2% 1.0% 7.6%
Group weighted average nominal equivalent yield 5.32% 5.32% 5.35% Likeforlike change in Group nominal equivalent yield 47bp 3bp 44bp
Group toppedup initial yield EPRA 4.60% 4.60% 4.66% Group change in likeforlike ERV 0.3% 0.1% 0.2%
IPD monthly index retail.
In general the superregional centres continue to outperform with stronger valuation surpluses from yield compression and improvement in rental values.
In the case of Intu yield compression was mostly seen in the first six months of 2014 based on transactional evidence.
The larger city centre locations have seen smaller positive movements but there has been limited readacross to date in the smaller centres.
Notable changes in individual valuations include Market value Surplusdeficit 31 December 2014 31 December 2013 m m % intu T rafford Centre 2200 1900 300 16% intu Lakeside 1255 1125 123 11% intu Metrocentre 928 885 38 4% intu Merry Hill 435  27 7% St Davids Cardiff 308 272 38 15% Manchester Arndale 430 399 30 7% intu Derby 420  29 8% intu Milton Keynes 278 251 26 10% intu Victoria Centre 314 306 22 7% Parque Principado % Others including non likeforlike 2313 2343 45 Investment and development property including Groups share of joint ventures 8963 7624 648 8% 1 Since acquisition on 1 May 2014.
2 Treated as subsidiary at 31 December 2013.
3 Based on local currency.
1 Including Group share of joint ventures.
Total property return 1% 2013 7.3% Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report A great advantage of intus strong brand is that it enables us to think strategically and nationally rather than tactically and locally ur national scale means we can pilot ideas and quickly adopt those that work across all our centres.
This provides economies of scale ensures we learn from best practice within the Group and embeds our values consistently within our centres.
We are able to make national improvements in many areas of the business including customer service building management systems technical procurement and car park payments because our size gives us the means to test and review on a small scale first.
Our signature customer experience programme is one example of how we are able to use this process to strengthen our brand so that people know what intu stands for .
As part of this programme we wanted to create engagement tools to give our staff opportunities to interact more often with customers and make our customers shopping trips easier and more pleasant.
By testing several tools at different centres we could see which ones resonated with customers and were natural for intu staff to deliver .
The successful tools include intugrams envelopes containing vouchers for free services or products distributed as random acts of kindness joy jars jars containing small engaging toys to keep toddlers happy on the family shopping trip and free ponchos when it rains.
Using T ell intu our Net Promoter Score NPS measurement programme we identified the tools that work best trained staff to use the tools and then rolled out the programme to all our intubranded centres.
We then reviewed again to find our NPS has increased by 30 per cent since the engagement programme began in March 2014.
Supported by our national training programme and reinforced by the evidence from T ell intu we are able to only roll out those ideas that we know make a demonstrable difference.
Focus on Our scale The benefits of scale create  trial roll out Intu Properties plc site Strategic report intu T rafford Centre has benefited from the strong yield improvement seen on superregional centres and an increase in the headline rents as a result of evidence from new lettings intu Lakeside has benefited from the strong yield improvements on super regional centres and the completion of the food court development intu Metrocentre has benefited from the strong yield improvement on superregional centres but shortterm income reductions in parts of the centre about to undergo redevelopment have affected the overall valuation intu Merry Hill has benefited from increases in rental tone evidenced by new lettings since acquisition St Davids Cardiff and Manchester Arndale have both benefited from the yield improvement seen in larger city centre shopping centres with small improvements in rental tone intu Derby has benefited from increases in the rental tone with some yield improvement intu Milton Keynes has benefited from the yield improvement seen in larger city centre shopping centres intu Victoria Centre has been affected by the shortterm income reduction and accrued development expenditure of the ongoing refurbishment work with the improvement in yield partially offsetting this reduction Parque Principado Oviedo has benefited from improvements in yield as investor interest for the best Spanish assets has increased Strategic review continued Operating metrics 2014 2013 Occupancy 95% 95% of which occupied by tenants trading in administration 1% 1% Leasing activity  number  new rent 210 new rent relative to previous passing rent 5% 4% Likeforlike change in net rental income 3.2% 1.9% T otal property return 13.1% 7.3% Footfall 0% 2% Retailer sales likeforlike centres 2.5% 0% Rent to estimated sales exc.
Customer metrics Estimated dwell time superregional 2hrs 11mins Customer visits annualised 400m Average customer visits per centre 21m Shopping centre space 21m sq. ft.
Estimated retailer sales 5.5bn Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Occupancy remains firm at the 95 per cent level at which we have operated for most of the year and compares favourably to PMA s vacancy measure for big shopping centres of 11 per cent.
Likeforlike net rental income was 3.2 per cent lower in 2014 than 2013 with a narrower 2.8 per cent decrease in the second half .
Income interruption from centre redevelopments accounted for approximately one percentage point of the shortfall in particular at intu Victoria Centre and intu Eldon Square.
T enants failing in late 2012 and early 2013 still impacted the first half of 2014 their total impact in 2014 being around one percentage point.
The balance of the shortfall was around concentrations of lease expiries at intu Braehead and intu Potteries.
We agreed 210 new longterm leases in the year  amounting to 34 million new annual rent at an average of 5 per cent above previous passing rent likeforlike units and in line with valuers assumptions excluding one strategic leisure letting.
Significant activity in the year includes 58 catering lettings including Five Guys at intu T rafford Centre intu Lakeside and intu Metrocentre Chiquito at intu Metrocentre intu Potteries and intu Uxbridge Coast to Coast at intu T rafford Centre intu Metrocentre and intu Victoria Centre and Carluccios in newly converted space at intu Bromley .
Catering and leisure account for 11 per cent of the rent roll with a significant increase in the development pipeline new brands to individual centres include Superdry and a fullline River Island at intu Victoria Centre one of Dutch retailer Hemas first UK stores at intu Bromley  MAC at intu Lakeside intu Bromley and St Davids Fat Face at intu W atford and intu T rafford Centre and Jack Wills at intu T rafford Centre previously online only brands creating a physical presencesite retailer  W atch W arehouse at intu W atford a popup for Ratchet at intu Lakeside and two new Simply Be stores at intu Chapelfield and intu Merry Hill The difference between annual property income see Glossary of 436 million and ERV of 515 million represents 42 million from vacant units and reversion of 37 million 8 per cent from rent reviews and lease expiry .
Of the 37 million 5 million relates to reversions only realisable on expiry of leases with over 10 years remaining for example anchor units leaving 32 million 7 per cent from other lease expiries and rent reviews.
The lease expiry cycle can bring risk to shortterm earnings depending on the volume in a specific centre and when the expiries fall in the economic cycle but it also provides the opportunity to introduce reposition and rightsize tenants improving the tenant mix.
This year we have seen a significant concentration at intu Braehead and intu Potteries.
The chart below shows the pattern of lease expiries across the portfolio with a weighted average unexpired lease term of 7.4 years 31 December 2013  7.5 years.
Significant corporate activity We have undertaken significant corporate activity in 2014 and we believe that our scale and focus is key to our successful development and operation of prime regional shopping centres.
This year we have further consolidated our position in the UK acquiring two top 20 centres.
In Spain with the completion of the Puerto Venecia acquisition in January 2015 we now own two top 10 centres which along with the sites we have under option in other key locations position us well to build scale there along similar lines to our approach in the UK.
275 new shops opened or refitted in our centres in 2014 around 9 per cent of our 3100 units.
T enants have invested around 90 million in these stores a significant demonstration of their commitment to our centres.
As well as major flagship store investments like River Island at intu Metrocentre JD Sports introduced their new concept shopfit at intu T rafford Centre intu W atford and intu Chapelfield At the property level the total return from Intus portfolio was 13.1 per cent 2013 7.3 per cent.
The combination of capital value increases and broadly stable income demonstrates the strength of Intus assets over the medium and long term.
The number of visitors to our centres has increased marginally yearonyear in 2014 representing an outperformance of Experians measure of UK national retail footfall which declined 1 per cent.
Estimated retailer sales in our centres were up 3.1 per cent in the second half of 2014 giving a yearonyear increase of 2.5 per cent.
The ratio of rents to estimated sales for standard units reduced in the year to 12.5 per cent continuing the trend of the previous few years.
Top retailers choose intu centres Brands such as Superdry Jack Wills and MAC have opened new stores in our centres joining our wide range of established retailersteltelteltel 2013 2014 Change in likeforlike net rental income % 30teltel Expressed as a percentage of rent roll.
Excludes three per cent in respect of leases which have e xpired of which around threequarters are in negotiation or solicitors hands.
Lease expiry prole % Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Strategic review continued Since completion we have rebranded the two centres with new signage websites and World Class Service training for the teams.
The intu brand has been welcomed at both centres strengthened our local asset management and operational capabilities started work on detailed asset management plans with initial leasing activity positive to acquisition valuations at intu Merry Hill been encouraged by initial discussions with key retailers about opportunities to upsize their presence in the centre at intu Derby  through our early letting activity  increased the zone A rents from at Sprucefield started the process of unlocking the development potential of this welllocated site New joint venture In June we entered into a partnership in respect of intu Uxbridge with Kumpulan W ang Persaraan Diperbadankan KW AP the 19 billion Malaysian pension fund.
This transaction established a relationship with another significant overseas investor and demonstrated the investment demand for prime UK shopping centres under the management of a specialist operator such as Intu.
KW AP acquired an 80 per cent interest in intu Uxbridge for 175 million representing a 2 per cent premium to its 31 December 2013 valuation of 214 million 100 per cent basis.
We retain a 20 per cent interest and continue to manage the centre under the intu brand on behalf of the joint venture.
The transaction is a useful step in recycling capital into our substantial development pipeline while retaining the scale of our operations and has a deal structure which could be applicable to other assets.
Spanish acquisitions In December we exchanged contracts to acquire the Puerto Venecia shopping centre and retail park in Zaragoza Spain for 451 million.
Eurofund our development partner in Spain was closely involved in the original development of this 200000 sq. m. shopping resort.
The centre which opened in 2012 offers a mix of retail leisure and restaurants and was recognised by MAPIC in 2013 winning the best worldwide retail and leisure development.
UK acquisitions In May we completed our purchase of interests in two prime UK shopping centres intu Merry Hill and intu Derby and Sprucefield retail park Northern Ireland funded by a two for seven rights issue raising 500 million gross and 424 million of new debt facilities secured on the properties.
The final consideration was 855 million.
We have identified multiple growth opportunities which reinforce our investment case.
The acquisition was in line with our strategy to focus on the UKs most successful destinations.
Such assets are rarely traded so it is important to move decisively where opportunities arise to acquire interests particularly where our operator skills can be applied through our specialist asset and property management teams.
The transaction also established a joint venture with QIC a major global investor at intu Merry Hill.
It strengthened Intus position as the leading owner  developer and manager of prime UK shopping centres filled a gap in our national coverage and extended the footprint of our nationwide consumer facing brand.
Bulevar de los Manzanos Parque Principado Right Parque Principado to be rebranded as intu Asturias in 2015 was our first acquisition in Spain where we aim to replicate our successful UK business model Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report This is the template for our shopping resort developments in Spain.
The acquisition which completed in January 2015 is funded by a 50 per cent loan to value bridging loan which we can exchange for a fiveyear term loan secured on the asset.
The balance of the consideration has been met from our existing resources.
In 2015 we will be looking to introduce an investment partner into Puerto Venecia.
The acquisition is expected to be earnings accretive and following last years successful acquisition of Parque Principado Oviedo is another highquality addition for the Group taking our ownership to two of the top 10 shopping centres in Spain.
The transaction substantially accelerates our activities in Spain which is a country where we see major opportunities for the type of genuinely regional destination centre in which Intu specialises.
As we highlighted in October 2013 when we acquired Parque Principado the Spanish shopping centre market offers opportunities to create a quality business of scale which has the potential to generate superior total returns over the medium term.
Similar to our approach in the UK our aim is to be the leading owner  developer and manager of regionally preeminent shopping centre destinations for the major trade areas of Spain.
Eighty per cent of the countrys retail expenditure comes from 10 key catchment areas.
Ownership of the largest Spanish shopping centres is fragmented and many regions do not have a preeminent retail and leisure destination.
The committed pipeline of prime shopping centre developments across Spain is at a low level and we believe the opportunity exists to develop and build new schemes in a number of key regions of Spain.
We also have development options on sites in Mlaga Palma V alencia and Vigo.
It is our intention subject to shareholder approval to exercise the Mlaga option in March 2015.
We are working to bring the other developments forward to the point where we can consider exercising the options.
We believe such expansion will be beneficial to the Groups overall brand and digital positioning.
Refinancing activity Throughout 2014 we have continued to take advantage of the favourable debt markets to refinance the Groups near term debt.
Through a mix of term loans and longdated bonds financed in the last two years we have since 2012 increased the tenor of the debt by two years to eight years whilst reducing the cost of debt to 4.7 per cent.
With debt to assets at 44 per cent and available facilities of 671 million we are well positioned to continue with our strategy in Spain and our UK development pipeline.
See Financial review on pages 40 to 46 for more details.
Making the brand count Scale is important and the establishment of the intu brand further enhances our competitive advantage.
Our customers are at the heart of everything we do and providing them with compelling experiences that surprise and delight drives loyalty and in turn dwell time and spend.
This customer focus also ensures that we establish enduring relationships with our retailers.
Brand
When we rebranded in early 2013 we orientated every aspect of our business around the customer experience in our centres.
Since then we have brought more services inhouse to ensure we manage every step of the customer experience. promotional activities.
All our staff are trained to the same high standards in customer service with the commitment of the intu brand ensuring equivalent standards across all of our centres.
Over half of the UKs population visit an intu centre at some point through the year on or offline.
We have seen an increase in brand recognition which allows us to deliver events and promotions on a national basis.
Events in 2014 included Elephant Parade Everyones Invited and Student Night.
Elephant Parades national tour visited all intu centres and raised awareness for The Asian Elephant Foundation as well Making intu Metrocentre sparkle Above This iconic chandelier is at the heart of our transformation of intu Metrocentres Platinum Mall adding sparkle and raising 16000 for charity through sales of individual crystal hearts Catering for all tastes Below Five Guys a top US restaurant chain used intus national portfolio to roll out its brand across the UK Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Strategic review continued as entertaining shoppers.
Everyones
Invited brought a festival of family fun to the centres increasing footfall by 13 per cent yearonyear for that weekend. ite website.
All staff continue to take part in our World Class Service training which is the only national shopping centre programme accredited by the Institute of Customer
T o measure the impact of our brand approach we launched T ell intu this year which provides the Net Promoter Score of centres monthly .
The average score has increased from 46 when we launched it in March to 60 over the Christmas period.
Our research which confirms that happy customers stay longer and spend more has given considerable impetus to delivering a number of service improvements.
On the digital side we have now introduced free WiFi into nearly all of our centres investing in our own infrastructure rather than outsourcing.
Over 1.5 million people have registered with around 60 per cent opting in to receive marketing information.
Along with registrants on the website our marketing database now has almost two million active users.
Owning the infrastructure allows us to control this marketing and manage the customer experience.
2014.
It is now fully mobile responsive with improved content and an expanded shopping proposition.
Through our affiliates programme most of our major retailers are now on our transactional website including for example John Lewis Next and T opshop allowing us to offer shoppers their centre online 24 hours a day .
The benefits of these changes can be seen in the website traffic with a year onyear increase of almost 40 per cent in website visits in December 2014 to nearly 3 million.
Scale
As we discuss in the Market review  the face of retail continues to change with retailers needing to be in the best shopping locations.
Our scale positions us as a key landlord to retailers with nine of the top 20 shopping centres in the UK.
Over the past four years we have expanded significantly with the portfolio now valued at 9.0 billion almost doubling over the period through the addition of some of the top centres in the UK as well as value creation in our existing centres.
Our scale allows us to benefit from a wealth of experience and knowledge and apply best practice across all the centres.
With one websitesite we can market all the centres more efficiently to a national audience and attract customers to stay for longer and visit more often.
All of our 18 UK centres exceed 10 million visits each year and the busiest exceeds 40 million.
Over the last few years we have demonstrated that we will not compromise on quality for the sake of improvements in Tell intu Below Working hard on our brand experience is driving our commercial success.
How do we know Because in March 2014 we launched Tell intu the first realtime customer experience tracker of its kind in the shopping centre industry.
From the 17000 responses in 2014 we can prove that we have happier customers with a higher NPS who stay longer and spend more
Since you guys took over the glades its been a huge improvement back shopping locally again 1609  30 January 2015 intuBromley Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report flexibility in 2014 by refinancing much of the debt which was due to mature in the next few years.
At the end of 2014 we had cash and available facilities of 0.7 billion the major developments are likely to be spread over a number of years.
We intend to raise development finance where appropriate and additional finance from the value created by completed developments to reinvest in the next project recycling capital from other assets to reinvest into these growth opportunities at the point where they will deliver superior returns.
This may include introducing partners as we did at intu Uxbridge in 2014 In the case of major extensions and creation of significant new or reconfigured space we aim to have agreed terms with a sufficient level of tenants including strategic prelets before proceeding with construction.
For expansionary projects which create additional space for which direct incremental rent can be identified we would expect most projects to generate a stabilised initial yield on cost in the range of 6 to 10 per cent and a minimum of 7 per cent for major projects.
Where no significant additional space is created we assess project return in the context of an internal rate of return based on the anticipated overall impact of the expenditure on centre performance through enhancing the ambience the tenant mix and the rental tone. the shortterm occupancy level.
This gives retailers confidence in the longterm attractiveness of the centres.
We aim to ensure that our mix of tenants is what the customer wants and that the retailers are appropriately located to maximise their returns.
Development momentum We have made significant progress in the year with our pipeline of development opportunities completed the active management projects at intu Lakeside food court intu Eldon Square mall upgrade and intu Metrocentre Platinum Mall on site at intu Victoria Centre mall refurbishment and creation of 12 new restaurants and intu Potteries cinema and catering extension with both projects due to be completed in the second half of 2015 about to commence work on catering developments at intu Eldon Square intu Metrocentre and intu Bromley engaged the main contractor at Charter Place W atford and expect to be on site later in 2015 received town centre status and planning approval for an extension at intu Braehead We can finance our 1.9 billion pipeline through three main routes available facilities within the business as we have further improved our financial intu Uxbridge a hit with Wagamama Above The Wagamama restaurant chain chose intu Uxbridge to launch their new concept design Surprise and delight Left Our compelling experiences draw in the crowds.
This years Everyones Invited weekend increased footfall by 13 per cent aided by the appearance of X Factors Sam Callahan at intu Braehead Development pipeline 1 .9 b n 1.3bn in the UK and 0.6bn in Spain Targeted stabilised initial yield on cost for major projects 7% Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Focus on new developments We have a development pipeline of 1.9 billion 1.3 billion in the UK and 0.6 billion in Spain  and we expect to commence the major extension at intu Watford in 2015 for more information intu Eldon Square Restaurant development 25 million dedicated catering destination Greys Quarter  reconfiguring 80000 sq. ft. restaurants.
Over 50 per cent is exchanged or in solicitors hands and we anticipate work to commence on the project in the first half of 2015.
Restaurant development 18 million extension to the Qube dining area adjacent to the Imax Odeon cinema creating 11 new restaurants.
Prelets at over 50 per cent including Five Guys Chiquito T .
Fridays and Coast to Coast with another 25 per cent in solicitors hands.
We have commenced work for openings in early 2016.
Refurbishment and restaurant development 42 million development of a restaurant quarter and significant refurbishment of intu Victoria Centre is underway .
This project has already reignited interest from retailers with new lettings to Urban Outfitters Superdry and River Island.
Prelets on the restaurant quarter are approaching 50 per cent including T ortilla Eds Easy Diner Coast to Coast and Handmade Burger Co.
Charter Place extension 110 million 380000 sq. ft. entertainment hub for W atford.
Cineworld have exchanged contracts to be the anchor cinema operator and we now have offers on over 50 per cent of the units by rent.
We have engaged the main contractor and subject to preletting we anticipate that works will be under way this year with a target for completion in 2017.
We project stabilised initial yield on cost of 7.1 per cent.
Leisure extension 19 million 60000 sq. ft. the second half of 2015.
The leases for the nine screen Cineworld cinema and six new restaurants are all exchanged bringing Nandos Frankie and Bennys Pizza Express GBK Coast to Coast and Chiquito to the centres line up.
Intu Properties plc site Strategic report
UK planning approved New space sq. ft.
Indicative
Cost to completion
2015 13 intu Potteries Leisure extension intu W atford Charter Place predevelopment  2015 3 intu Eldon Square Restaurant development  20152016 12 intu Metrocentre Restaurant development  20152016 16 intu Bromley Queens Gardens 14 20152016 4 Other committed projects 20152017 20 Active management pipeline intu Lakeside Hotel 40 20152016 7 intu Bromley Boutique cinema and restaurants 20 20162017 9 intu T rafford Centre Barton Square courtyard enclosure 112 20162018 45 intu Merry Hill Reconfigurations  20152018 20 Other active management projects 2015telMajor extensions intu W atford Charter Place extension 380 20152017 106 intu Broadmarsh Redevelopment 50 20162018 70 intu Lakeside Leisure extension 225 20162019 95 intu Lakeside Retail extension 440 20172019 180 Cribbs Causeway Retail and leisure extension 380 20192021 105 intu Braehead Retail and leisure extension 475 20202022 200 intu Victoria Centre Retail and leisure extension 500 2020telTotal UK 1299 Spain developments Mlaga Shopping resort 20152018 170 Valencia Shopping resort 20192020 280 Palma or Vigo Shopping resort 20212022 115 T otal Spain 565 Total 1864
Shopping resort development 425 million 175000 sq. m.
Sol highway .
Engagement with key retailers has indicated a strong interest in the development.
We intend subject to shareholder approval to exercise the option in March 2015.
The expected stabilised initial yield on costs for the project is over 7 per cent.
1 Represents net additional floor space of retail catering and leisure.
Timing subject to change due to a number of internal and external factors.
3 Represents Intus share of costs.
Total project costs of 42 million of which 29 million has already been spent.
Total project costs of 19 million of which 6 million has already been spent.
Smaller committed and pipeline projects do not necessarily involve the creation of additional floor space.
7 Represents Intus share of costs assuming a joint venture partner introduced.
Mlaga Intu Properties plc site Strategic report T op properties Intu owns and manages nine of the UKs top 20 shopping centres in locations right across the country 1 intu T rafford Centre 3 intu Metrocentre 2 intu Lakeside 4 intu Braehead 9 St Davids Cardiff 6 Cribbs Causeway 7 Manchester Arndale Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report
Size sq. ft.
Number of stores
Property
Income
Headline rent
ABC1 customers Key stores Superregional centres 1 intu T rafford Centre 2200m 1973 100% 233 86.9m 415 65% Selfridges John Lewis Next Superdry Hollister  Apple Kurt Geiger  T ed Baker  Banana Republic Nespresso Forever 21 Victorias Secret Odeon Cinema Legoland Discovery Centre HandM Hamleys Marks and Spencer 2 intu Lakeside 1255m 1435 100% 251 59.7m 350 72% House of Fraser  Debenhams Marks and Spencer Hugo Boss T opshop Zara Primark Forever 21 Guess Vue Cinema 3 intu Metrocentre 928m 2085 90% 344 46.8m 300 55% House of Fraser  Marks and Spencer  Debenhams Apple HandM T opshop Zara Primark River Island Odeon Cinema 4 intu Braehead 599m 1136 100% 121 25.5m 250 62% Marks and Spencer  Primark Apple Next HandM T opshop Hollister  Superdry Sainsburys 5 intu Merry Hill 435m 1671 50% 264 23.1m 150 43% Marks and Spencer  Debenhams BHS Primark Sainsburys Next ASDA Boots HandM 6 Cribbs Causeway 243m 1075 33% 153 12.6m 305 76% John Lewis Marks and Spencer  Apple Next T opshop Timberland Jigsaw Hobbs Hugo Boss HandM Intown centres 7 Manchester Arndale 430m 1600 48% 249 21.7m 250 57% Harvey Nichols Apple Burberry LK Bennett T opshop Next UGG Hugo Boss Superdry Zara Hollister  YO Sushi Nandos 8 intu Derby 420m 1300 100% 180 28.4m 125 53% Marks and Spencer  Debenhams Sainsburys Next Boots T opshop Cinema de Lux 9 St Davids Cardiff 308m 1391 50% 203 16.2m 185 66% John Lewis Debenhams Marks and Spencer  Apple Hollister  Hugo Boss HandM River Island Hamleys Armani Exchange Gap 10 intu Eldon Square 273m 1350 60% 151 14.0m 300 60% John Lewis Fenwick Debenhams Waitrose Apple Hollister  T opshop Boots River Island Next 11 intu W atford 335m 726 93% 140 17.3m 250 83% John Lewis Marks and Spencer  Apple Zara Primark Next Lakeland Phase Eight Lego HandM T opshopT opman 12 intu Victoria Centre 314m 981 100% 104 16.9m 230 54% House of Fraser  John Lewis Next T opshop River Island Boots Urban Outfitters Superdry Office
Size sq. m.
Number of stores
Property
Income Key stores Spanish centres 13 Puerto Venecia 451m 119 100% 202 22.4m El Corte Ingles Primark IKEA Apple Decathlon 14 Parque Principado 106m 77 50% 161 7.8m Primark Zara HandM MediaMart Cinesa Eroski The amount presented is on the Scottish ITZA basis the English equivalent is 335.
The Group completed the acquisition of Puerto Venecia on 19 January 2015.
10 intu Eldon Square 13 Puerto Venecia Intu Properties plc site Strategic report We measure progress against strategic objectives using the following financial and non financial performance measures Key performance indicators
4 3 1tel Experian 2% 1% 0% 1% Why is this important Footfall is an important measure of a centres popularity with customers.
Retailers use this measure as a key part of their decisionmaking process on where to locate their stores.
How is this measured Footfall numbers across Intus centres including those managed by our partners are captured using a combination of person or car counting cameras located at specific entrance and exit points within the centre.
How have we performed Footfall was unchanged in 2014 ahead of the 1 per cent reduction in the national benchmark as measured by Experian.
Likefor like net rental income 4 3 1tel 2.7% 1.9% 3.2% Why is this important Measures the organic growth in income generated from the Groups properties in the year .
How is this measured Removes from the yearonyear movement in net rental income the impact of acquisitions developments and disposals.
How have we performed The reduction in likeforlike net rental income reflects units held to facilitate future development plans and the impact of tenant administrations and lease expiries.
Occupancy
1tel 96% 95% 95% 94% IPD retail Why is this important We aim to optimise the occupancy of our centres as attracting and retaining the right mix of retailers and catering and leisure operators will enhance our centres trading environment.
How is this measured The passing rent of let and underoffer units expressed as a percentage of the passing rent of let and underoffer units plus the ERV of unlet units.
How have we performed Occupancy remains at the same level as 2013 and remains above the IPD benchmark figure.
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Prime property assets 2 1tel 0.6% 1.8% 8.2% 7.3%
Why is this important Measures the capital return on the Groups property assets and compares this with the IPD index a recognised industry benchmark.
How is this measured Includes the capital growth on a likeforlike basis from the Groups properties.
How have we performed The Group recorded a significant valuation surplus in the year which again outperformed the IPD monthly index retail.
T otal financial return 4% 1% 14% Why is this important This is a measure of the movement in the underlying value of assets and liabilities underpinning the value of a share plus the dividend paid to shareholders.
How is this measured Uses the movement in adjusted net asset value per share plus the impact of dividends paid in the year .
The 2014 return is assessed using the opening NAV of 346 pence per share as adjusted for the bonus factor to reflect the rights issue.
Using the pro forma opening NAV of 335 pence gives a return of 17 per cent.
How have we performed The strong total financial return performance reflects the 8.2 per cent likeforlike property valuation gain the Groups earnings and the impact of the Groups capital structure.
Income performance 4 3 1tel Why is this important Underlying earnings per share is based on the underlying income generated in the year which gives an indication of the Groups ability to pay dividends.
How is this measured Underlying earnings exclude property and derivative valuation movements and exceptional income or charges.
The 2012 and 2013 figures have been adjusted for the rights issue bonus factor .
How have we performed Underlying earnings per share fell during the year due to the impact of the fall in likeforlike net rental income.
Shareholder return 4 3 2 1tel 7% 17% 24% 23%
REIT
Index
Why is this important Combines share price movement and dividends to produce a direct measure of the movement in shareholder value in the year .
How is this measured Uses the movement in share price during the year plus dividends paid in the year .
How have we performed The Groups share price has performed strongly in the year and compares favourably with the FTSE REIT index.
Source Bloomberg Key to strategic objectives measured by key performance indicators 2 Optimise performance of existing assets prioritising mediumterm total property return Drive forward 1.3 billion investment programme in existing UK assets Make the brand count Seize the growth opportunity in Spain 1 4 3 Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Our employees are fundamental to the success of our business and the delivery of our brand promise to all our customers People who work at Intu are passionate about what they do and proud of our reputation as the market leader of the UK shopping centre industry .
We expect the best from our employees and in return we are committed to offering a stimulating and rewarding working environment where they can achieve their personal and professional goals as they accomplish challenging business targets.
We appoint the best people and develop their talent promoting internally and rewarding commitment and innovation whenever we see it.
And it works  83 per cent of our staff declared themselves proud to work for intu up 2 per cent on last year .
Our HR strategy is built around five key themes to complement our corporate strategy .
We focus on three of these in this years report.
Talent development In 2014 we appointed a talent manager to help us achieve our aim to provide the same access to learning and development opportunities for all intu employees regardless of location role or level.
We also implemented a structured leadership programme to support succession planning identifying a group of senior managers to work with internal and external talent development specialists.
Two senior managers have now been promoted to the Executive Committee created a comprehensive and consistent induction programme for centre staff extended performance appraisal systems to staff at all levels Our values
We look at the familiar and we see something different we are insightful and imaginative but not for their own sake for we never lose sight of what is important and relevant
We act confidently and decisively always knowingly  perhaps at times controversially  but never rashly or without consideration
We are true to ourselves act fairly and communicate clearly we say what we mean and we mean what we say .
We recognise our obligations to our stakeholders and the wider society  and commit to put our utmost into everything we do
Our people are energised and inspired by our vision to deliver a compelling shopping experience
Reward and recognition
Performance management
HR
Strategy Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report 9 1% Of all staff agree intu puts customers at the heart of everything we do 8 3% Of our staff are proud to work for intu Next year we will extend the leadership programme and consolidate the succession plan to staff at all levels develop assessment techniques to better evaluate skills and resources throughout the organisation encourage staff to gain crossfunctional experience through project working build on the success of World Class Service through a series of development sessions focusing on delivering a compelling experience introduce a national apprenticeship scheme work towards achieving the Investors in People standard at all our intu branded centres Employee engagement Engaging with our staff  taking them with us on intus journey to achieve its ambitious targets is crucial to our progress.
They need to understand our business and know how they can contribute to feel part of the team.
For the third year in a row our employee survey records a rise in employee engagement from 701 in 2011 to 747 in 2014.
Employee survey 2014 Eighty four per cent of staff took part in the annual employee survey in November 2032 out of 2427 eligible employees.
Scores were up again in 42 of the questions measured in previous surveys and in over half the questions at least 70 per cent of respondents agreed or strongly agreed with the proposition.
The overall engagement score now stands at 747 2013  732 with favourable movement in all five domains that make up the engagement index work environment reward development operating culture and line of sight.
Career development at Intu Carly North Left Carly started her career with us in 1999 as a customer care assistant at intu Lakeside.
She was promoted to marketing coordinator and after a spell at intu Bromley as assistant marketing manager she returned to intu Lakeside as customer services manager in 2011 Staff at intu Merry Hill Intu Properties plc site Strategic report In 2014 we kept our staff informed with regular business briefings at national and local level and created a new employee handbook for intu Retail Services staff carried out brand immersion events for new staff developed an action plan based on the 2013 employee survey introduced a new employee volunteering programme relaunched the Employee Assistance Programme provided by the Retail T rust rolled out new policies for whistleblowing and use of social media Next year we will improve internal communications networks further deliver the action plans arising from the 2014 employee survey develop our intranet making content accessible to all staff  including employees who do not have direct daily access to the Intu network continue to encourage staff to take part in Intus corporate responsibility  community support and sustainability programmes expand our induction programmes to cover the full cycle of onboarding continue to review flexible working options learn from the experience of staff who leave us Reward and recognition Our competitive remuneration structure helps to retain and motivate the best with base salaries benchmarked against our peers in the industry .
Many employees are eligible for an annual bonus based on corporate measures that reflect the executive remuneration policy and are related to individual performance.
A proportion of the annual bonus is awarded in deferred shares to encourage focus on the Companys growth.
Managers may also be rewarded with longerterm share options and many staff can join a Share Incentive Plan subject to a qualification period.
People continued Employee numbers 2013 2027 Leavers in their first year 1 9 % 2013 35% Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Career development at Intu Gavin Prior Left When teenage night school student Gavin Prior responded to a newspaper advert for the role of Administration Assistant at The Harlequin  now intu Watford  in 1996 he probably didnt think that within 16 years he would be at the helm of a superregional destination.
From Services Manager to Operations Manager at intu Metrocentre he became one of Intus youngest general managers at intu Metrocentre in 2012.
He has recently been seconded to intu Merry Hill one of intus newest editions to the portfolio Human rights At Intu we respect the dignity  liberty and equality of everyone we work with.
Our policies and procedures are consistent with the United Nations universal declaration of human rights which sets a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations .
We are committed to implementing the UN guiding principles on business and human rights.
We only work with people who choose to work freely and we respect their rights to equal opportunities and freedom of association.
We work with our suppliers retailers and associated companies to ensure they meet acceptable standards of human dignity in their own sourcing policies.
We will continue to evaluate the pay and conditions of all our employees in particular new staff on or near to minimum wage to bring them into line with the rest of our staff in terms of wages and benefits and ensure fair working conditions.
Fair treatment of people who work for Intu or our suppliers is a key focus of our corporate responsibility approach.
As appropriate our Board CR Committee and CR Management Committee consider the potential human rights risks faced by Intu and assess approaches to mitigate those risks.
In 2014 we made a voluntary defined contribution pension plan available to all intu Retail Services staff for the first time introduced intus first national recognition and reward scheme called Win Y our Dream  which allows staff at all levels to nominate colleagues for outstanding achievement linked to our values Next year we will complete a comprehensive remuneration review across all parts of the business ask the Remuneration Committee to review proposals and approve Senior Manager and Executive Director salary levels and bonus awards promote share ownership opportunities to all staff to enhance engagement
In line with our policy of developing our talent we have filled many of our new roles from internal applicants.
Five shopping centres have new general managers four of whom are internal promotions or transfers.
Most of our large scale recruitment is due to expansion  as well as the transfer of staff when we acquired intu Derby and intu Merry Hill we recruited 468 new people into the Group during 2014.
Service profile Under 1 year 16% 2013 15% 1020 years 16% 2013 17% Age profile Under 30 19% 2013 18% Over 50 34% 2013 34% 110 years 65% 2013 64% over 20 years 3% 2013 4% 47% 2013 48% Gender profile Female Male 40% 60% 2013 37% 2013 63% Gender profile senior managers Female Male 29% 71% 2013 27% 2013 73% We appoint the best people and develop their talent promoting internally and rewarding commitment and innovation wherever we see it Intu Properties plc site Strategic report
Energised and inspired Left People who work at Intu are passionate about what they do and proud of our reputation as the market leader of the UK shopping centre industry How are we structured Our teams are grouped into six specialisms that underpin our business model p8 for more information about the business model Commercial and digital Adds value to assets through excellence and innovation in the disciplines of marketing customer experience and digital technology to build the brand and encourage customers to come more often and stay longer .
Includes intu Experiences which delivers income through advertising and brand partnerships.
The digital team is responsible for information and communications technology operations and pr oject deliv ery a cr oss the spectrum o f digita l a ctivity incl uding our tr ansa ctiona l w ebsit e  in tu. c o . uk.
Operations and intu Retail Services Each shopping centre is led by a dedicated general manager working within regional structures. for retailers and customers.
Asset management Drives the success of the centres by delivering sustainable asset growth through innovation sound investment and commercial decision making including proactive leasing of retail units dealing with rent reviews and lease renewals and managing smaller active asset management projects.
Development and construction Responsible for the planning management and delivery of new build refurbishment and extension projects across the portfolio from inception through to completion.
Finance
Provides reports and analysis of the Groups financial performance maintains a robust financial control framework and provides rigorous financial analysis and appraisals of projects and strategic options to support executive decisionmaking.
Governance and support Encompasses Legal Secretariat Human resources Corporate responsibility Communications and Public relations.
Balanced approach to risk intu brand Longterm focus Talented employees Our enablers Robust capital structure
Intu Properties plc site Strategic report e know from Tell intu that when our customers have a great experience at one of our centres they are more likely to stay longer spend more come back sooner and tell their friends.
The perfect intu customer experience depends on our people and the positive interactions they have with our customers.
So in 2013 we created intu Retail Services to bring all frontline staff working in our centres inhouse.
We wanted to ensure every member of staff feels part of the intu team and has a strong connection to Intu as a wider Group.
It also allows us to train all our staff in our World Class Service programme so that every member of the intu Retail Services staff understands the need to continually improve the experience of customers and retailers and to provide great standards and great service.
Our focus this year has been on recruitment induction and training to ensure staff have the right skills.
A great byproduct has been a more motivated and committed workforce with a dramatic reduction in staff who leave within their first year of service down from 35 per cent to 19 per cent.
T urnover is down by 18 per cent overall and absence levels are down by 15 per cent.
The success of our approach has been independently recognised.
At this years industry awards we won the PFM Partners in Retail Facilities award and intu is the only shopping centre business to be accredited by the Institute of Customer Service.
T ell intu continues to highlight how much our customers value staff who are knowledgeable and always looking to provide the best experience.
Focus on intu Retail Services Motivating our people to give their best Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Successful risk management underpins Intus ability to achieve its strategic objectives Key risks and uncertainties Intus Board has responsibility for establishing the Groups appetite for risk based on the balance of potential risks and returns and has overall responsibility for managing risks.
Risk management
This may be cleaners making sure that the centres are free of hazards or the construction team ensuring the right contractors are selected for developments.
Risks are considered in the daytoday decisions made by the business and this assessment of risk is underpinned by a formal risk review process conducted by each centre each department and the Executive team.
These reviews identify risks and assess them for controllability and stability .
Risks are measured for impact and likelihood gross risk being the worst case scenario if there were no controls in place net risk being the risk as it stands today and target risk being after any further planned risk reducing measures are implemented.
An assessment is also made of how quickly the risks would impact the business.
Impact and likelihood change as businesses and external factors evolve.
Intus ongoing risk management ensures that changes in impact and likelihood are identified and managed appropriately .
Property market Risk and impact Ma cr o en vir onmen t w eakness could undermine rental income levels and property values reducing return on investment and covenant headroom
Focus on prime assets upgrading assets and aligning the offering with demand for example by increasing leisure offering Covenant headroom monitored and stresstested Active management of tenant mix Regular monitoring of tenant strength and diversity Lobbying on key policies for example business rates 2014 commentary Likelihood and severity of potential impact have reduced during 2014 versus 2013 due to a number of factors including focus on tenant mix and increased property values S tr ong v a l ua tion incr eases for most centres resulting in improved L TV headroom T enant administrations reduced compared to 2013 Significant progress on planning and preletting of pipeline more than half of which is leisure and catering.
Leisure and catering space to increase by almost 50 per cent by 2018 Digital investment to improve relevance as shopping habits change See Market review for more information
Risk and impact Reduced availability of funds could limit liquidity  leading to restriction of investing and operating activities and or increase in funding cost
F unding s tr a t egy r egularl y reported to Board with current and projected funding position E ff ec tiv e tr easur y mana gemen t aimed at balancing long debt maturity profile and diversification of sources of finance Consideration of financing plans including potential for recycling of capital before commitment to transactions and developments S tr ong r ela tionships with lendersshareholders 2014 commentary Likelihood has reduced during 2014 versus 2013 due to the refinancing activity in the year .
Severity of potential impact is unchanged Financing activity during 2014 raised gross debt of 1.1 billion including Groups share of joint ventures R e v ol ving cr edit f a cility increased from 375 million to 600 million during the year Refinancing of intu Derby and intu Chapelfield during 2014 demonstrated flexibility of Secured Group Structure funding platform
See Financial review
Intus
Risk appetite underpins business strategy Risk understood through identication and analysis so risk is in line with risk appetite assessed and amended as required Control procedures implemented Effectiveness reviewed Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Key to strategic objectives impacted by risk
Risk and impact Ac ciden ts s y s t em f ail ur e or external factors could threaten the safe and secure environment provided for shoppers and retailers leading to financial and or reputational loss
Strong business process and procedures supported by regular training and exercises designed to adapt and respond to changes in risk levels Annual audits of operational standards carried out internally and by external consultants Culture of visitor safety Crisis mana gemen t and business continuity plans in place and tested including cyber security threats Retailer liaison and briefings Appropriate levels of insurance Staff succession planning and development in place to ensure continued delivery of World Class Service Strong relationships and frequent liaison with Police NaCTSO and other agencies 2014 commentary Overall likelihood and severity of potential impact has increased due to external factors.
However continuing improvement and consistency of operational procedures through intu Retail Services mitigate changes in external risk factors Operations of acquired centres have been successfully integrated Continuing groupwide cyber security project with key focus being proactive monitoring of technical infrastructure to mitigate cyber threats Work started towards achieving ISO 9001 14001 18001 and 55001 accreditation intu Retail Services has continued to deliver improvements in systems and processes including investment in inhouse fire and health and safety structure and a significant increase in centre management employees holding formal health and safety qualifications Reduced exposure to future energy costs and taxes through awardwinning energy reduction initiatives  30 per cent reduction in carbon emissions since 2011 Development and acquisition Risk and impact Misjudged or poorly executed project results in increased cost or income foregone hence fails to create shareholder value
Capital Projects Committee reviews detailed appraisals before and monitors progress during significant projects R esear ch and thir d par ty due diligence undertaken for transactions including local specialists in Spain Fixed price contracts for developments Local partner in Spain with market specialist knowledge 2014 commentary Likelihood and severity of potential impact have remained unchanged in 2014 versus 2013 Substantial property and financial due diligence undertaken before acquisitions completed in the year Property management and financial activities in respect of centres acquired in the year integrated with the Groups existing processes and policies Detailed appraisal work and significant prelets continuing ahead of starting major development projects Strategy and execution Risk and impact Misjudged or poorl y executed strategy fails to create shareholder value
Annual strategic review by Board informed by external research and advice Board and management team experienced in shopping centre and broader retail industry Engagement with national and international retailers Specialist advice and extensive research supporting major initiatives Careful assessment of potential partners to complement Intus skills experience and resources Rigorous control and review procedures in place to ensure successful implementation of strategy 2014 commentary Likelihood and severity of potential impact have remained unchanged versus 2013 with no significant new strategies implemented in the year New asset management structure implemented to enhance delivery of strategic goals Ext ending r ea ch thr ough introduction of new joint venture partners Par tnership a gr eemen ts designed to address both partners interests and ensure efficient asset management
See Chief Executives review
Brand
Risk and impact The integrity of the brand is damaged or the commercial benefits of the brand are not realised
Intellectual property protection Strong guidelines for use of brand S tr ong underl ying operational controls and crisis management procedures Ma jor tr aining pr ogr amme and rewards and recognition schemes designed to embed brand values and culture throughout the organisation Media monitoring T ell intu customer feedback programme of customer feedback collection and analysis 2014 commentary Brand has continued to gain momentum during the year and higher profile results in greater risks versus 2013 for both likelihood and severity of potential impact World Class Service training embedding brand and values External evidence of brand value evidenced by disposal of 80 per cent interest in intu Uxbridge 2 4 Optimise performance of existing assets prioritising mediumterm total property return Drive forward 1.3 billion investment programme in existing UK assets Make the brand count Seize the growth opportunity in Spain
Increased
Remained the same Change in level of risk Intu Properties plc site Strategic report
Strong growth in property valuations has resulted in a substantial increase in the profit for the year .
This valuation increase has not yet been reflected in net rental income as the Group holds units to facilitate future development plans and completes reletting units from 2013 administrations and lease expiries underlying earnings of 162 million up 15 per cent on 2013 reflecting the acquisitions in the year  with earnings per share of 13.3 pence down 3 per cent on 2013 impacted by the reduction in likeforlike net rental income NA V per share at 379 pence total financial return for the year of 14 per cent based on the bonus factor adjusted opening NA V per share of 346 pence and 17 per cent based on the pro forma opening NA V of 335 pence Financing metrics improved due to higher property valuations and refinancing activity debt to assets ratio at 44.2 per cent 2013  48.5 per cent below the Groups target maximum level of 50 per cent Presentation of information Joint ventures The Group has adopted IFRS 11 Joint Arrangements in 2014.
This new standard requires that all joint ventures which the Group previously chose to account for on a proportional consolidation basis are equity accounted.
This means that the income statement and the balance sheet now include single lines with the Groups total share of posttax profit and the net investment in joint ventures respectively .
The Groups profit for the year and total equity are unaffected by these changes.
Further details of the impact of adopting this accounting policy are given in note 48.
The new standard has a greater impact following the transactions in the year which created joint ventures in respect of intu Merry Hill Parque Principado and intu Uxbridge.
Further details of these transactions are given in notes 40 and 41.
Management both review and monitor the business including the Groups share of joint ventures on an individual line basis not on a posttax profit or net investment basis and therefore the figures and commentary presented are consistent with this management approach.
Note 48 and the Other information section give reconciliations between the two bases.
Rights issue In April 2014 the Company issued 278.2 million shares by way of a rights issue.
Further details are included in note Following a rights issue accounting standards require an adjustment to be made to the number of shares previously used to calculate earnings per share and in the Groups case to be consistent an adjustment is also made to the number of shares used to calculate the dividend and net asset value per share.
A bonus adjustment factor of 1.098 has been used to adjust the comparative figures in these results using the Companys closing exdiv share price on 28 March 2014 of 301 pence per share and the theoretical exrights price of 274 pence per share.
Financial review
1.71x above the Groups target minimum level of 1.60x cash and available facilities increased to 671 million 2013  325 million Major transactions in May the Group completed the acquisition of intu Merry Hill intu Derby and Sprucefield for 855 million.
Exceptional costs related to the acquisition totalled 12 million.
The acquisition contributed 27 million to the underlying earnings of the Group in June 2014 the Group sold 80 per cent of its interest in intu Uxbridge for consideration of 175 million before expenses.
The Group retains a 20 per cent interest which has been accounted for as a joint venture from 20 June 2014 in December the Group exchanged contracts to acquire Puerto Venecia Zaragoza with the acquisition completing in January 2015.
The 31 December 2014 balance sheet includes the deposit paid of 22.5 million within restricted cash.
The acquisition will be consolidated from the date of completion.
See Strategic review for further details intu Derby Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Results for the year Income statement Y ear ended 31 December Y ear ended 31 December Profit for the year m 600 364 Underlying earnings m 162 140 Underlying EPS pence 13.3 13.7 Net rental income 1 Including Group share of joint ventures.
2 Adjusted for the rights issue bonus factor .
The principal components of the change in underlying earnings are as follows net rental income increases due to acquisitions totalled 43 million reflecting the acquisitions of intu Merry Hill and intu Derby in 2014 and a full year contribution of intu Milton Keynes and Parque Principado acquired part way through 2013.
This is offset by a 5 million reduction due to the sale of 80 per cent of intu Uxbridge likeforlike net rental income reduced by 11 million 3.2 per cent see Strategic review underlying net finance costs increased by 3 million with the cost of debt drawn in the year to partfund the acquisitions of intu Merry Hill and intu Derby partially offset by the favourable impact of lower interest rates following debt refinancings in particular on the intu Metrocentre facility that was concluded at the end of 2013 ongoing administration expenses increased by 3 million largely due to costs related to management of recent acquisitions including new employees and professional fees our partners share of the reduction in finance costs following the intu Metrocentre debt refinancing has been the main factor reducing the non controlling interest credit by 3 million compared to 2013 The Group recorded a profit for the year of 600 million a substantial increase on the 364 million reported for the year ended 31 December 2013.
This increase was primarily due to an increase in the revaluation gain on property valuations to 648 million including the Groups share of joint ventures 2013  126 million lower exceptional finance costs of 51 million 2013  158 million largely due to the lower level of interest rate swap terminations in connection with debt refinancing These positive factors were partially offset by negative movement of 431 million in the change in fair value of the Groups financial instruments.
2014s results include a charge of 157 million including the Groups share of joint ventures whereas 2013 benefited from a 274 million credit Underlying earnings increased by 22 million to 162 million with underlying earnings per share which takes into account the shares issued to partfund the acquisition of intu Merry Hill and intu Derby  decreasing by 3 per cent to 13.3 pence.
Underlying earnings exclude valuation movements exceptional items and related tax and are presented as they are considered to be a key measure of the Groups performance and an indication of the extent to which dividend payments are supported by underlying earnings.
The underlying profit statement is presented in full in the Other information section.
Net rental income acquisitions disposals Net rental income likeforlike Net nance costs
Other 2014 Underlying earnings bridge 20132014 m Intu Properties plc site Strategic report based on the 31 December 2014 Equity One share price.
The India investment largely comprises a 32 per cent interest in Prozone a shopping centre developer listed on the Indian stock market included at 38 million on the Groups balance sheet at 31 December 2014.
See notes 24 and 25 for further details.
Net external debt is discussed in the cash flow and net external debt section.
Derivative financial instruments comprises the fair value of the Groups interest rate swaps.
The net liability at 31 December 2014 is 347 million an increase of 141 million in the year .
This can be largely attributed to a movement in the interest rate yield curve.
Cash payments in the year totalled 70 million 44 million of
Financial review
The balance of the payments has been included as underlying finance costs as they relate to ongoing interest rate swaps used to hedge debt.
As previously detailed the Group has a number of interest rate swaps entered into some years ago which are unallocated as due to a change in lenders practice they cannot be used for hedging the Groups borrowings.
At 31 December 2014 these swaps have a market value liability of 242 million 2013  143 million.
It is estimated the Group will be required to make cash payments on these swaps of 25 million in 2015 in line with the level of payments made in 2014.
The balance sheet shows 73 million of these as current liabilities reflecting mutual options to break during 2015.
Since the year end we have confirmed that no cash outflows will be required in respect of these breaks.
Noncontrolling interests at 31 December 2014 relate to our partners 40 per cent stake in intu Metrocentre and increased during the year due to its share of profit and additional investment in capital projects.
The net reduction in the overall noncontrolling interest balance reflects Parque Principado moving from being a subsidiary with a noncontrolling As detailed in the table above the Groups net rental income margin including share of joint ventures is in line with 2013 at 87 per cent with higher void costs offset by lower bad debts.
Property operating expense in the year ended 31 December 2014 includes 11 million 2013  10 million in respect of car park operating costs and the Groups contribution to shopping centre marketing of 8 million 2013  8 million.
The Groups ratio of total costs to income as calculated in accordance with EPRA guidelines remains low at 19 per cent.
Balance sheet The Groups net assets attributable to shareholders have increased by 1.0 billion to 4.5 billion at the end of 2014 due to equity raised in the year to fund the acquisition of the intu Merry Hill and intu Derby shopping centres and the retained profit for the year including the 648 million gain on the revaluation of the Groups properties.
As detailed in the table net assets diluted adjusted have increased by 1165 million from 31 December 2013 to 4969 million as at 31 December 2014.
Investment and development property has increased by 1338 million primarily due to the acquisition of intu Merry Hill intu Derby and Sprucefield valued at 866 million on acquisition and the 648 million valuation gain in the year .
Investments of 228 million as at 31 December 2014 principally comprise the Groups interests in the US and India.
The US investment of 11.4 million shares in a joint venture with Equity One a listed US REIT  is valued at 185 million 31 December 2014 31 December
Group balance sheet as presented Share of joint ventures
Investment and development property 8020 869 8889 7551 Investments 1079 851 228 191 Net external debt 3958 5 3963 3698 Derivative financial instruments 347  347 206 Other assets and liabilities 197 13 210 217 Net assets 4597  4597 3621 Noncontrolling interests 73  73 102 Attributable to shareholders 4524  4524 3519 Fair value of derivatives net of tax 333  333 198 Other adjustments 90  90 83 Effect of dilution 22  22 4 Net assets diluted adjusted 4969  4969 3804 Y ear ended 31 December Y ear ended 31 December Gross rental income 480 448 Head rent payable 23 24 Net service charge expense and void rates 21 16 Bad debt and lease incentive writeoffs 7 9 Property operating expense 32 29 Net rental income 397 370 Net rental income margin 87% 87% EPRA cost ratio including direct vacancy costs 19% 19% Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report interest to a joint venture.
See note 41 for further details.
The Group is exposed to foreign exchange movements on its overseas investments in Spain the US and India.
The Groups policy is to ensure that the net exposure to foreign currency is less than 10 per cent of the Groups equity attributable to owners of the Company .
At 31 December 2014 the exposure was 6 per cent lower than at 31 December 2013 because during the year the Groups Parque Principado joint venture borrowed Euro denominated debt secured on the centre.
The Groups acquisition of Puerto Venecia in January will increase the Groups exposure to
Rights issue Pro forma
Underlying earnings
Dividend paid 31 Dec tel11 Adjusted net assets per share bridge 20132014 The Groups ratio of total costs to income remains low at 19 per cent around 8 per cent after the mitigating impact of Euro denominated debt drawn to fund the acquisition.
Adjusted net assets per share As illustrated in the chart below  diluted adjusted net assets per share after the bonus factor adjustment were 346 pence at 31 December 2013.
T aking into account the full impact of the rights issue the pro forma opening position for 2014 was 335 pence per share.
The increase from the pro forma figure to the 31 December 2014 value of 379 pence per share was driven by the property valuation gain of 50 pence per share.
Strategic report
Financial review
Financing
Debt structure A large proportion of the Groups debt has been refinanced in the last two years as a result of which the Group has significantly diversified its sources of funding.
The range of debt instruments now includes CMBS and other secured bonds plus syndicated bank debt secured on individual or pools of assets with limited or nonrecourse from the borrowing entities to other Group companies outside of these arrangements.
Corporatelevel debt remains limited to the revolving credit facility and the 300 million convertible bond.
During the year there was a significant amount of financing activity  including in February the Group raised 110 million through the issuance of further notes under the intu T rafford Centre CMBS.
The bonds had an average maturity of nine years and an allin cost of 4.6 per cent in April the Groups partnership with CPPIB signed a 95 million fiveyear term loan secured on Parque Principado Spain in May debt was raised to partfund the acquisition of intu Merry Hill intu Derby and Sprucefield.
This involved three new two and a half year debt facilities secured on the intu Derby and Sprucefield properties and the equity interest in intu Merry Hill 203 million 30 million and 191 million respectively.
The debt secured on intu Derby was refinanced later in 2014 see below.
At intu Merry During 2014 the Group has recorded an increase in cash of 61 million.
Cash flow from operating activities of 56 million is 91 million better than 2013 primarily due to the lower level of exceptional swap termination costs compared to 2013.
Cash flow from investing activities reflects the cash outflows for the acquisition of intu Merry Hill intu Derby and Sprucefield of 855 million net of 175 million cash received on disposal of 80 per cent of intu Uxbridge.
Cash flow from financing activities includes an inflow of 492 million from the rights issue undertaken to partfund the acquisitions in May and an inflow from net borrowings drawn of 314 million.
This includes 424 million of facilities to partfund the acquisitions in the year and the repayment of 146 million as part of the disposal of 80 per cent of the Groups interest in intu Uxbridge.
Dividends paid in cash during the year were 90 million.
Net external debt including Groups share of joint ventures has increased by 265 million.
Cash including the Groups share of joint ventures has increased by 94 million which includes the Groups share of the proceeds from raising new finance on Parque Principado in August.
Debt has increased by 290 million reflecting the key transactions above.
Cash flow and net external debt Group cash flow as reported Cash flow from operating activities 56 35 Cash flow from investing activities 719 417 Cash flow from financing activities 724 423 Net increasedecrease in Group cash and cash equivalents 61 29 Net external debt including Groups share of joint ventures Cash including Groups share of joint ventures 260 166 Debt including Groups share of joint ventures 4223 3933 Shortterm investments  69 Net external debt including Groups share of joint ventures 3963 3698 Change in net external debt 265 194 Hill the intention is that the Group and our partner QIC will jointly refinance at the asset level when the QIC CMBS matures in 2016 in June the debt secured on intu Uxbridge of 146 million was repaid as part of the disposal process in August the facility in our St Davids Cardiff  joint venture was repaid and a new term loan of 120 million plus a revolving credit facility of 41 million was put in place secured against the Groups interest in the joint venture in October the Groups revolving credit facility was extended from 375 million to 600 million bringing in a further two banks and extending the maturity to 2019 with the ability to extend this by a further two years.
The margin has reduced by between 25 and 50 basis points.
The combination of this and a lower commitment fee means that we expect to pay a lower allin cost based on planned utilisation levels despite the larger facility size in November the debt on intu Derby and intu Chapelfield was refinanced and these assets were added into the Groups Secured Group Structure which issued 350 million 4.25 per cent bonds with maturity in 2030 Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Following the refinancing activity in the year the above chart illustrates that there is a minimal refinancing requirement in 2015 and no major refinancing due in 2016.
The table below summarises the Groups main debt measures all including the Groups share of joint ventures.
The debt to assets has reduced significantly from 2013 largely due to the property valuation gain in the year and remains below the Groups target maximum level of 50 per cent.
Interest cover of 1.82x has increased partly due to the favourable impact of lower interest rates following recent debt refinancing and remains above the Groups targeted minimum level of 1.60x.
The weighted average maturity has increased to 8.4 years with the benefit from the 350 million bonds issued in November  which mature in 2030 being partly offset by the shorter term debt related to the acquisition of intu Merry Hill.
The weighted average cost of gross debt has reduced to 4.7 per cent reflecting the lower rates achieved on refinancing activity in the year .
The Group uses interest rate swaps to fix interest obligations reducing cash flow volatility caused by changes in interest rates.
The proportion of debt with interest rate protection has reduced slightly in the year to 88 per cent within the Groups policy range of between 75 per cent and 100 per cent.
The reduction is due to the impact of the floating rate debt secured against intu Merry Hill and Sprucefield which has not been hedged as it is short term partly offset by a lower level of borrowing against the Groups revolving credit facility .
Cash and available facilities have increased to 671 million at 31 December 2014.
This comprises cash of 260 million in addition to undrawn facilities of 411 million.
The increase on 2013 primarily reflects the increase in the Groups revolving credit facility from 375 million to 600 million.
Covenants
Full details of the loan financial covenants are included in the Financial covenants section of this report.
The Group is in compliance with all of its covenants.
Headroom over the minimum levels of L TV covenants has generally increased in the year reflecting the strong valuation increases.
Capital commitments The Group has an aggregate cash commitment to capital projects of 81 million at 31 December 2014 including the Groups share of joint ventures.
In addition to the committed expenditure the Group has an identified uncommitted pipeline of active management projects and major extensions that may become committed over the next five years see Strategic review.
31 December 31 December Debt to assets 44.2% 48.5% Interest cover 1.82x 1.71x Weighted average debt maturity 8.4 years 8.0 years Weighted average cost of gross debt 4.7% 4.8% Proportion of gross debt with interest rate protection 88% 92% Cash and available facilities 671m 325m 1tel 2017 tel 128telDebt maturity prole m 2017 includes 191 million relating to intu Merry Hill which has an initial maturity of 20 September 2016 extendable at the Borrowers option to 20 September 2017.
It is anticipated that this option will be exercised at the earliest possible opportunity.
Intu Properties plc site Strategic report
Financial review
Other information Tax policy position As a Real Estate Investment T rust REIT tax on property operating profits is paid at shareholder level to the UK government rather than by Intu itself .
REIT status brings with it the requirement to operate within the rules of the REIT regime for further information see Glossary.
As a good corporate citizen we believe that paying and collecting taxes is an important part of our role as a business and our wider contribution to society .
Intu does not employ tax avoidance strategies or undertake transactions whose sole purpose is to abuse the tax system.
We are committed to acting with integrity and transparency in all tax matters and have an open up front and no surprises policy in dealing with
The Group seeks preclearance from HMRC in complex areas and actively engages in discussions on potential or proposed changes in the taxation system that might affect property tax and REIT legislation.
The Group pays tax directly on overseas earnings any UK nonproperty income under the REIT rules business rates and transaction taxes such as stamp duty land tax.
In the year ended 31 December 2014 the total of such payments to tax authorities was 26 million of which 25 million was in the UK 0.5 million in the US and 0.5 million in Spain.
In addition the Group also collects V A T employment taxes and withholding tax on dividends for HMRC and the Spanish tax authorities.
Business rates principally paid by tenants in respect of the Groups UK properties amounted to around 297 million in 2014.
Dividends
The Directors are recommending a final dividend of 9.1 pence per share bringing the amount paid and payable in respect of 2014 to 13.7 pence unchanged from 2013 as adjusted to reflect the 2014 rights issue see note 17.
A scrip dividend alternative will continue to be offered.
Details of the apportionment between the PID and non PID elements per share will be confirmed in due course.
Matthew Roberts Chief Financial Officer 27 February 2015 intu Chapelfield
Intu Properties plc site Strategic report ur brand means we look at development differently .
When we invest in our centres our perspective is all about our customers  how we can create a compelling shopping experience that delivers on our brand promise and will encourage customers to stay longer and visit more frequently .
For the 201314 redevelopment of the food court at intu Lakeside our vision was to create a setting that would bring in aspirational food operators and make the centre a more attractive leisure destination for a wider range and reach of customer .
With a 9 million investment we have transformed the food court recreating the space from floor to ceiling converting underused areas into stylish lounges and other spaces for a new type of retailer and a new type of customer .
It has been a great success winning the British Council of Shopping Centres Gold Award for Catering and Leisure Destination of 2014 and seeing new contemporary retailers lining up to take space including Five Guys T ortilla Patisserie V alerie Nandos W asabi Harpers Thai Express Rhythm Kitchen Olive Oil and Oregano and Ginos My Pasta Bar .
The result is a more clearly defined and repositioned catering offer which has elevated the overall food service proposition and provided new income streams.
It has contributed substantially to the overall customer experience and personality of intu Lakeside offering a dynamic dining experience that changes through the day and into the evening.
Footfall dwell time and spend have all increased and the development is forecast to generate a stabilised net rental uplift of approximately 1 million per annum.
Focus on intu Lakesides new food court A highly contemporary dining destinati o n Intu Properties plc site Strategic report Better together Why CR matters Corporate responsibility matters.
We want intu to be a longterm and sustainable business  and we can only ensure that if we care for the communities where our shopping centres are located and look after the environment that we all share.
Our corporate responsibility approach set out on page 10 is fundamental to the way we run our business securing our licence to operate helping to manage risk contributing to cost management protecting stakeholder value and safeguarding and enhancing our reputation.
But corporate responsibility is more than a business driver .
It is the right thing to do.
Intu owns some of the biggest and best shopping centres in the country .
So it is right that we make sure our impact as a business is as beneficial to local communities and the national economy as possible.
It is right that we give opportunities to the young people who live near our centres.
It is right to do as much as we can to negate the environmental effects of our business.
And it is right that we listen when our stakeholders employees retailers community partners and local authorities  tell us what they need.
It is right  and it is good for our business.
CR governance The Intu Board takes responsibility for determining policy and strategic direction on CR topics.
The strategic direction of our CR programme is led by the CR Board Committee while the CR Management Committee takes responsibility for progress against our operational objectives.
Both committees met three times in 2014.
External recognition We measure our sustainability performance against our peers through indices such as the Dow Jones Sustainability Indices and CDP .
This ensures that we remain focused on best practice and allows us to identify areas of strength and weakness.
We monitor the actions of our UK REIT competitors and work with them on important industry issues through membership of organisations such as the British Council of Shopping Centres BCSC and the Better Buildings Partnership.
Understanding our stakeholders views We believe it is important to engage with our stakeholders around our CR reporting.
In the autumn of 2014 we conducted our second stakeholder review to better understand the corporate responsibility issues that internal and external stakeholders believe are key to our business.
Further details can be found in the 2014 Corporate Responsibility Report.
Improvements and targets We work with our stakeholders to improve all areas of our CR performance and set relevant goals and targets that let us critically monitor progress.
For example our centres continue to roll out leading technology and energy management plans to optimise efficient energy use and explore new ways to bear down on our energy demands costs and our corporate carbon footprint.
Corporate responsibility We take our responsibilities seriously across all areas of our business and we are committed to being a responsible and sustainable Group Working together to create public art Above intu worked with CreateArts to bring mainstream students disabled students and young carers together to break down barriers through creative arts.
We see corporate responsibility not just as a business driver but as the right thing to do Creating green spaces Far right intu supports The Conservation Volunteers TCV in the development of four Green Gyms close to our centres.
Green Gyms create a community green space and provide volunteers with the opportunity to develop skills and improve fitness Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report What were doing In our joint community projects we work with local partners to help disadvantaged young people int o work.
During 2014 we work ed with nine community partners delivering 21 projects at our centres.
These projects have directly reached over 1200 people.
In 2014 we launched our volunteering policy which means all of our employees can take 15 hours out of working time to volunteer in the community .
While weve had a longrunning tradition of volunteering on the community projects close to our centres we hope this new policy will boost our employees involvement in their communities and help them to develop both personally and professionally .
Once again in 2014 we were accredited with the BitC CommunityMark one of only 52 UK companies to receive the award.
The CommunityMark is a national standard that publicly recognises leadership and excellence in the community .
Communities and economic contribution Why it matters Our shopping centres are integral to the communities they serve providing places for people to come together to meet eat drink and socialise as well as shop.
We rely on these communities as customers and as employees as well as for their acceptance of our business.
So as investors its important that we show our support for local communities and develop partnerships that give us opportunities to make a real impact in the local area.
As a major local player in every community we operate in we can make a substantial difference to people living nearby  and we believe it is our responsibility to do so.
Thats why one of our main focuses is on training and supporting young people and helping them into work.
Our focus on local issues means the community activities our centres undertake can make a real difference to local people our scale means we make a significant economic contribution to communities across the country .
3m Our community activities during 2014 were supported by total donations of 1.3m cash equivalent including facilitated donations What we plan to do incr ease empl o y ee v ol un t eering across intu further our use of the London Benchmarking Group framework and introduce this approach to our community partners expand our education programmes for young people Each year since 2011 weve commissioned Nathaniel Lichfield and Partners to analyse the economic contribution of our shopping centres.
We believe that recognising these impacts and outputs will enable us to better understand and respond to our community footprint.
Doing this will help to underpin our planning applications and give us the evidence we need to demonstrate to investors the strength of our position.
According to the report in 2014 Intu and its retailers nationally directly employed almost 89000 people and indirectly supported over 25000 jobs.
Intu Properties plc site Strategic report
Why it matters As longterm investors in our shopping centres it is important we demonstrate a sustainable approach to managing our operations.
Given the scale and nature of our business we recognise our responsibility to manage and minimise our environmental impact.
Saving energy and water and managing waste effectively minimises our impact on the environment reduces costs and mitigates against environmental risks all of which makes us a more attractive landlord for our retailers.
We are also committed to creating a sustainable built environment and consider environmental issues as part of all of our development work.
We share our good practice and learning with our retailers suppliers and visitors to our centres.
What were doing Our environmental initiatives typically focus on the areas of our shopping centres where we are most able to implement changes  mainly in the common parts that we manage including car parks.
In 2011 we set ourselves challenging targets to reduce our carbon emissions CO 2  by 30 per cent to divert 95 per cent of waste from landfill to recycle 75 per cent of waste and to reduce our water consumption by 10 per cent all by the end of 2014.
By the end of 2014 we had reduced our carbon emissions by 30 per cent compared with 2011 likeforlike portfolio adjusted for occupancy diverted over 97 per cent of waste away from landfill recycled 69 per cent of waste and had reduced water use by two per cent compared with 2011.
Further details of our progress against our targets can be found in the separate 2014 Corporate Responsibility Report.
Our efforts have been publicly recognised as well as the 2014 Carbon T rust Standard award for carbon reduction see opposite we have held the Carbon T rust Standard certification since 2011.
We have also received a gold ranking in the Mayor of Londons Business Energy Challenge for our two centres in Greater London and our head office.
Sustainable transport remains a key concern for our business given the reliance of customers and centre employees on public transport and private vehicles to reach our centres.
We have appointed transport champions with responsibility for creating and updating sustainable travel plans which we make available to all interested stakeholders.
What we plan to do reduce carbon emissions intensity by 50 per cent between 2010 and 2020 reduce water consumption intensity by 10 per cent between 2010 and 2020 divert 99 per cent of waste away from landfill by 2020 continue to update travel plans for all centres Corporate responsibility continued Greenhouse Gas emissions from intus directlymanaged shopping centres Emission type
CO2e emissions tonnes
CO2e per m net rental income 2014 Scope 1 4808 15 Scope 2 33tel Scope 1 5571 17 Scope 2 32814 102 Greenhouse Gas GHG emissions reported are for our head office and for those shopping centres and leisure facilities under direct management by intu as these are the operations where intu has the opportunity to directly influence emissions levels.
As such data from the following centres is excluded The Mall at Cribbs Causeway Manchester Arndale
Davids Cardiff and Parque Principado.
Emissions have been normalised by net rental income generated by those shopping centres under direct management control.
Centres acquired in 2014 have not been included.
GHG emissions are calculated based on Defras CO2e factors for 2013 and 2014.
Due to a change in factor 2013 data has been restated.
For further details see the 2014 CR Report.
2012 000
CO emissions thousand tonnes Absolute energy use and carbon emissions
2tel m l Water used m Waste used m million visits Water use at directly managed centres 2013 m visits 1tel l Waste recycled tonnes l Waste to landll tonnes l Waste to energy tonnes Waste diverted from landll % Waste disposal at directly managed centres 2013 tonnes % 5Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report e havent made a big thing about our work on carbon reduction because it s just the way we do business  but in 2014 our outstanding and sustained performance in energy efficiency was recognised by the Carbon Trust which awarded us the Best in continuing carbon reduction award at the Standard Bearers Awards.
The award recognises the challenging 30 per cent reduction target we set ourselves and the work we have done to achieve this since 2011.
As part of our ambitious carbon reduction programme we installed 60000 energy efficient LED light bulbs across our centres resulting in 2 million in electricity savings each year as well as significantly reduced lamp replacement costs.
This minimises our environmental impact and helps mitigate the risk of increasing energy costs for ourselves and our retailers.
We appointed an energy champion in every centre to focus on innovative and deliverable ways to reduce energy use at their centre and share best practice with other centre champions.
Our scale and single management means champions can ensure the best energysaving ideas are replicated across intu centres.
These ideas include savings that can be made without capital outlay  such as carefully scheduling lighting for nighttime cleaning and managing the lighting of car park areas more efficiently .
As a result of these changes and more Intu has reduced its carbon emissions CO by 30 per cent since 2011 on a likeforlike basis  equivalent to taking 7000 cars off the road for a year .
Focus on a great record of carbon reduction Outstanding performance in energy efficiency Intu Properties plc site Strategic report
To maintain our competitive edge we must understand what our customers are looking for in a perfect shopping experience from retailer mix to customer service expectations.
Retailers
Maintaining strong relationships and open dialogue with our retailers and other occupiers is a prime focus of our business.
We work to connect with them to ensure that we are providing the highquality service they need.
How we engaged in 2014 Carried out over 26000 customer surveys Received over 17000 responses to T ell intu
We are able to evaluate our customer strategy against customer opinion How we engaged in 2014 Active engagement with all investor enquiries including a number of enquiries from ethical funds Active participation in responsible investor indices and tools such as CDP climate change survey
Inclusion in FTSE4Good and the Dow Jones Sustainability Global Index Awarded Green Star by GRESB Increased our Carbon Disclosure Project CDP disclosure score for the fifth year running For an outline of our approach to managing relations with shareholders see page 62 How we engaged in 2014 Intu senior management met with key directors of many top retailers in 2014 Merchants association meetings Feedback from shopper engagement provided to all retailers
Corporately as well as at centre level we are well informed of retailer wants and needs and so are able to consider this in any planning Retailers are kept well informed of the opinions of shoppers in each of our centres
Constructive engagement with our shareholders and potential investors bankers and other organisations on socially responsible investment matters helps to raise awareness of how were managing material environmental and social risks.
Relationships
In order to provide a business that offers a great shopping experience we need loyal customers committed retailers informed investors passionate employees and wellsupported communities.
A key part of our corporate responsibility is managing and developing relationships with key stakeholders and engaging on relevant issues Corporate responsibility continued Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Strategic report How we engaged in 2014 We conduct government engagement through industrywide organisations General managers and others within the business maintain and develop links with local stakeholders Proactive engagement with constituency MPs Submissions t o Parliamen tar y Select Committees
A Groupwide database supports a coordinated programme of engagement on issues of relevance to our business such as business rates and nationalregional planning policy issues We publish details of our policy positions on our website Our views are taken into account when national policy is made Our people Our employees are fundamental to the success of our business and to the delivery of a highquality service.
We believe that employee engagement is key to maintaining a motivated workforce.
How we engaged in 2014 Comprehensive induction programme for new employees including specific CR module Feedback from 2013 employee survey provided and 2014 employee survey conducted Presentations of annual and interim results Annual CR presentation Employee recognition fund 92 per cent utilised
Increased understanding of employee views on workplace and Group issues Employees are kept informed of all key business developments For further details of our approach to our people see pages 32 to 37
It is imperative that we maintain good links with our communities and that we undertake significant community consultations as part of our process for any planned developments.
How we engaged in 2014 During 2014 we conducted formal community consultations regarding planned developments at one of our centres For further details of our approach to communities see page 49 and the separate 2014 Corporate Responsibility Report
We are able to include community feedback in our planning process We are one of only 52 UK companies to hold the BitC CommunityMark
We recognise the wide range of potential impacts arising from our supply chain and therefore the need to engage with our suppliers across a range of issues.
How we engaged in 2014 Included our metering providers and LED suppliers in our energy forum Included contractor employees based on our sites in our induction process Contractors working on our development pipeline attend brand immersion events including the World Class Service module
Able to work collaboratively with suppliers to promote best practice in environmental areas Key suppliers have strong understanding of our business and our values Local and national government It is important that we engage with national government around policies that impact on our business and local authorities over planning and other local issues.
Intu Properties plc site
David Fischel Chief Executive Age 56 Appointed to the Board Appointed Finance Director in 1988 Managing Director in 1992 and Chief Executive in March 2001 Career David Fischel qualified as a chartered accountant in 1983 at T ouche Ross and Co before joining the Group in 1985.
Skills and experience At T ouche Ross David worked in the corporate finance department with experience in acquisitions flotations and capital raisings.
During his 29year career with Intu David has gained significant executive experience in numerous aspects of the shopping centre industry including shopping centre acquisitions and developments.
He has also been closely involved with the Groups corporate development including equity and debt financings and a wide range of other corporate transactions including the 2010 demerger of Capital and Counties from Intu.
Other appointments NonExecutive Director of Equity One Inc and Prozone Intu Properties Limited.
Matthew Roberts Chief Financial Officer Age 51 Appointed to the Board Appointed as Finance Director on 3 June 2010 Career Matthew Roberts was previously the Finance Director of Debenhams plc from 1996 to 2003 and Chief Financial Officer of Gala subsequently Gala Coral Group Ltd from 2004 to 2008.
Skills and experience Matthew Roberts FCA joined Intu as Finance Director in May 2010 and was part of the team which acquired The T rafford Centre Manchester  in the UKs largest ever single property transaction.
In Spring 2013 he led the establishment of Intus Secured Group Structure with initial issue of 1.15 billion of bond and bank debt.
Since then he has led a series of further transactions which have raised over 2 billion of leverage.
Patrick Burgess MBE
Age 70 Appointed to the Board Appointed as a NonExecutive Director of the Group in 2001 and Chairman on 1 August 2008 Career Patrick Burgess qualified as a solicitor in 1972 and became a partner in Gouldens in 1974 serving as head of the Corporate Department for 14 years and as Senior Partner for six culminating with the merger of Gouldens with Jones Day in 2003 from which he retired in 2007.
He has also been active in a number of charitable and community organisations.
Skills and experience At Jones Day  Patrick specialised in mergers and acquisitions and corporate restructuring.
He has considerable experience in compliance regulatory and stock exchange matters.
Other appointments NonExecutive Director of Standard Bank PLC.
Chairman of the Capital Projects Committee Chairman of the Nomination and Review Committee Chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Committee John Whittaker Deputy Chairman Age 72 Appointed to the Board Appointed as Deputy Chairman and a Non Executive Director on 28 January 2011 Career John Whittaker is the Chairman of the Peel Group which he founded in 1971 and developed into a leading UK infrastructure transport and real estate enterprise.
Skills and experience John is a highly regarded real estate investor  and has overseen the growth of the Peel Group across many sectors such as land real estate ports airports renewable energy and media.
John is an experienced property developer and business leader illustrated by projects such as The T rafford Centre and MediacityUK.
His appointment to the Board followed the acquisition by Intu of The T rafford Centre from the Peel Group.
Other appointments Chairman of the Peel Group.
Board of Directors Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Nomination and Review Committee Executive Committee Corporate Responsibility Committee Capital Projects Committee Chairman Deputy Chairman and Executive Directors Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
Andrew Strang Age 62 Appointed to the Board Appointed as a NonExecutive Director on 8 July 2009 Career Andrew Strang started his career with Richard Ellis in 1975.
He served as Managing Director of Threadneedle Property Investments Limited for 17 years until January 2008.
He was Chairman of Hermes Real Estate Investment Management from 2009 to 2011.
He was a Director of the British Property Federation from 1994 to 2013 and is a current member of the Norges Bank Investment Management Real Estate Advisory Board and a member of the Investment and Governance Committees at AEW UK.
Skills and experience Andrew is a Chartered Surveyor and has substantially focused on property investment throughout his career .
Other appointments NonExecutive Director of Capital and Counties Properties PLC.
Louise Patten Age 61 Appointed to the Board Appointed as a NonExecutive Director on 22 September 2011 Career Louise Patten began her career at Citibank working mainly in retail financial services until she joined global strategy advisers Bain and Company Inc in 1993 where since 1997 she has been a Senior Adviser .
Skills and experience Louise has extensive board level experience at a number of retail and property companies including as Chairman of Brixton plc and Interim Chairman of Somerfield plc and nonexecutive roles at Marks and Spencer plc where she chaired the Remuneration Committee GUS plc Hilton Group plc Harveys Furnishings plc and Control Risks Group.
Neil Sachdev Age 56 Appointed to the Board Appointed as a NonExecutive Director in November 2006 Career Neil Sachdev joined T esco plc in 1978 where he was Property Director before joining J Sainsbury plc as Commercial Director in March 2007 and Property Director from June 2010 until March 2014.
Skills and experience Neil has an MBA from Stirling University and has gained significant experience in retail and property matters throughout his career .
Other appointments Neil was appointed as a Director to MedicoDental Holdings Ltd in September 2014.
He is also Deputy Chairman to the HSS Hire Group as at February 2015 and serves on the Joint Advisory Board of the Grantham Institute for Climate Change.
Since 2008 he has been a member of the BiTC Mayday leadership team focusing on the climate change sector and is also a member of the Business Innovation and Skills Board on Green Construction.
Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Andrew Huntley Age 76 Appointed to the Board Appointed as a NonExecutive Director on 8 July 2009 and Senior Independent Director with effect from 1 August 2013 Career Andrew Huntleys career commenced some 41 years ago with Richard Ellis where he served as Chairman from 1993 until 2002.
He was a NonExecutive Director of Pillar Property plc from 2000 to 2005 and a Non Executive Director of LondonMetric Property plc from 2010 until 2013.
Skills and experience Andrew is a Chartered Surveyor and an experienced property adviser .
Other appointments NonExecutive Director of Capital and Counties Properties PLC.
Richard Gordon Age 56 Appointed to the Board Appointed as a NonExecutive Director in May 2010 Career Richard Gordon previously served as a NonExecutive Director of Capital Shopping Centres PLC between 1996 and 2006 and was appointed as an alternate Director in respect of Graeme Gordons directorship of the Group in 2001.
Skills and experience Richard has also served on the boards of a number of companies within the Liberty Life group and various companies within the commercial and residential real estate sector  mainly in South Africa.
Adle Anderson Age 49 Appointed to the Board Appointed as a NonExecutive Director on 22 February 2013 Career Adle Anderson commenced her career at KPMG where she became a partner and held a number of senior roles including Chief Financial Officer .
She is currently Chairman of the Audit Committee of easyJet plc and Save the Children International.
Skills and experience Adle graduated from Kent University with BSc Hons in Mathematics and Computer Science.
She is a qualified ACA and has gained extensive financial experience throughout her career and has significant Audit Committee experience.
Other appointments NonExecutive Director of easyJet plc a member of the Board of T rustees of both Save the Children UK and Save the Children International.
Chairman of the Audit Committee NonExecutive Directors Intu Properties plc site
Executive management Executive Committee Kate Bowyer Director of Finance Joined the Group in 2000 as Group Financial Controller and managed the Groups investor relations from 2008 until 2014.
She was appointed Director of Finance in August 2014.
Kate qualified as a chartered accountant with Coopers and Lybrand now PricewaterhouseCoopers in 1995 working in their Canadian and corporate finance practices.
Martin Ellis Construction Director Appointed as a Director of Capital Shopping Centres PLC on 1 October 2005.
He joined the Group in 1990 and in 2008 was appointed Managing Director of Liberty International Construction and Development Limited.
Following the demerger of the Capital and Counties business in May 2010 Martin reverted to being Intus Construction Director responsible for development and construction projects.
Hugh Ford General Corporate Counsel Appointed General Corporate Counsel to the Group in 2003.
He was previously General Manager Legal at Virgin Atlantic Airways and before that a commercial lawyer with British Airways plc.
He qualified as a solicitor in 1992 with Freshfields.
Susan Marsden Group Company Secretary Joined the Group as Company Secretary in 2000.
A fellow of the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators Susan began her career at the London Stock Exchange and has been Company Secretary of two FTSE real estate sector companies before joining Intu.
T revor Pereira Digital and Commercial Director Joined the Group in 2007 as Commercial Director of Intu Shopping Centres plc.
He was appointed Group Commercial Director in October 2011 and Digital and Commercial Director in November 2013.
T revor worked for airport group BAA plc for 21 years most recently as Retail and Commercial Director for Heathrow Airport.
Dushyant Sangar Corporate Development Director Joined the Group in 2010 and was appointed Corporate Development Director in 2014.
Dushyant has been involved in all of the Groups major acquisitions and joint venture transactions since the demerger of the Capital and Counties business.
He previously worked in the corporate acquisitions team for MGP A a real estate private equity investment advisory business.
Before this he worked in the real estate investment banking team for UBS.
Executive management Biographies of the senior management team are available on our website atsitewhoweareourpeopleexecutivemanagement Additional members of the Executive Committee are the Chief Executive Chairman of the Committee and the Chief Financial Officer whose biographies are set out on page 54.
Mike Butterworth Chief Operating Officer Appointed as Chief Operating Officer on 3 October 2011.
A Fellow of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors Mike joined the Manchester Ship Canal Company  now part of the Peel Group in 1981 and became Property Director of Peel Holdings in 2002.
He has extensive experience in the shopping centre industry having served as Managing Director of The T rafford Centre Limited from 1996 responsible for the opening of the centre in 1998 until 2011 when The T rafford Centre was acquired by Intu.
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
Our approach to good governance continues to be robust and highly effective Patrick Burgess
Key matters discussed in 2014 Acquisition of Merry Hill and Derby in the UK and Sprucefield in Northern Ireland Driving the investment programme Joint venture to introduce an 80 per cent partner at intu Uxbridge Building the brand and rolling out the digital infrastructure Launch of 350m 16year bond T alent development across Intu International activity and purchase of Puerto Venecia Evaluation of Boards performance Areas of focus in 2015 The main areas of focus for next year are Succession planning Board communication
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to introduce Intus Corporate Governance report for 2014.
I would like to highlight the following key areas of focus during 2014 Risk management  As a result of the rapid changes to the business including especially the increased focus on digital services and the expansion of operations into Spain the Audit Committee has overseen an evolution of the Groups risk management methodology to ensure all risks are identified and prioritised appropriately .
A comprehensive formal appraisal of risk appetite introduced last year  was repeated in 2014.
All existing and new risks were analysed discussed and reviewed with the Board and Senior Management.
Each risk was assessed as to potential impact and probability and categorised accordingly .
Further information on the Groups risks can be found on pages 38 and 39.
UK Corporate Governance Code Compliance  The Audit Committee has confirmed to the Board that in its opinion the Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2014 taken as a whole is fair  balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders.
Please see page 64 of the Audit Committee Report where we discuss the external auditor and their tenure.
Our approach to good governance continues to be robust and we believe highly effective.
Our governance procedures are kept under close scrutiny by the Board and we react quickly  where appropriate to match best practice and regulation.
I am confident that our attitude and approach to good governance is embedded throughout the business and remains of the highest standard.
An amended version of the UK Governance Code was issued in September 2014 which is applicable to companies with a UK premium listing with financial years beginning on or after 1 October 2014 Intu will report on its compliance with the 2014 version of the Code in its 2015 Annual Report.
Patrick Burgess
27 February 2015
Compliance statement Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code The Company has throughout the year ended 31 December 2014 complied with all provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
Compliance with the Disclosure and Transparency Rules The disclosures required under DTR 7 .2 of the Disclosure and T ransparency Rules are contained in this report except for those required under DTR 7 .2.6 which are contained in the Directors report.
Intu Properties plc site
The Board
Adle Anderson
Neil Sachdev Andrew Strang Key responsibilities Monitors the integrity of financial statements internal controls and risk management process and reviews the effectiveness of the internal and external auditors.
More information Audit Committee report pages 63 to 67.
Audit Committee
Neil Sachdev
Louise Patten Adle Anderson Key responsibilities Sets remuneration policy for all Executive Directors and the Chairman and recommends and monitors the level and structure of remuneration for senior management.
More information Directors remuneration report  pages 71 to 83.
Remuneration Committee
Patrick Burgess
Andrew Huntley Neil Sachdev Louise Patten Key responsibilities Ensures that the Board is comprised of individuals with an appropriate balance of skills knowledge and experience.
More information Nomination and Review Committee Report pages 68 and 69.
Nomination and Review Committee
David Fischel
Matthew Roberts Kate Bowyer Mike Butterworth Martin Ellis Hugh Ford Susan Marsden Trevor Pereira Dushyant Sangar Key responsibilities Considers investment proposals reviews progress on projects and project expenditure in detail and receives updates on other business matters.
Has delegated authority within limits to authorise initiatives and expenditure.
Meets fortnightly
Patrick Burgess
David Fischel Neil Sachdev Alexander Nicoll CR Director Jennifer Sandars CR Manager Key responsibilities Oversees the management of the Groups Corporate Responsibility activities.
More information Corporate responsibility report  pages 48 to 53.
Executive Committee
Patrick Burgess
John Whittaker David Fischel Matthew Roberts Mike Butterworth Martin Ellis Andrew Huntley Neil Sachdev Key responsibilities Reviews new projects and project expenditure in detail and as appropriate comments on certain projects for the Board.
Has no power to approve proposals or authorise expenditure.
The Capital Projects Committee is not a formal committee of the Board.
Capital Projects Committee Corporate Responsibility Committee Terms of reference of the Audit Remuneration and Nomination and Review Committees are available on the Companys website.
The Board Led by the Chairman the Boards overarching objective is to provide effective leadership to the Group underpinning the business model described on pages 8 and 9 to ultimately deliver longterm growth and generate sustainable returns for its shareholders.
It does this by setting and implementing strategy ensuring that its employees are professional motivated and focused and establishing a balanced approach to risk within the framework of established controls.
Appropriate and effective corporate governance is taken extremely seriously and is intrinsic to all aspects of the Boards activities.
The Board is accountable to the Companys shareholders and other stakeholders for the good conduct of the Companys affairs.
It has therefore established a governance framework which underpins the culture of the Group.
This framework consists of committees with specific delegated responsibilities as shown in the diagram above and internal policies procedures and controls including delegated authority limits which are regularly reported on reviewed and updated by the Board and the relevant Board Committees.
The internal processes are communicated to all staff and are available at all times on the Groups intranet.
Delegated authority limits apply at all levels of the business and their application is incorporated into the standard procedures for the execution of all leases licences contracts and other relevant documentation by the Group.
The Board considers that the way in which both the Board and the Group function meets the highest standards of accountability and probity .
The Board Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
Matters reserved for the Board Responsibility for the daytoday management of the Group is delegated to certain Board Committees the Executive Directors with the support of the Chief Operating Officer and senior management.
These delegated powers are supported by delegated authority limits which are documented and kept under review by the Board.
Certain matters have been reserved for decision by the whole Board and a schedule setting out a list of these is reviewed regularly .
These include but are not limited to strategy the application of the Board protocol for dealing with relatedparty matters dividend policy major acquisitions and disposals other capital expenditure and controls
risk management
The Board also receives regular reports on the proceedings of its Committees and considers their recommendations.
It has been the Boards custom over many years to ensure that major decisions are taken after a reiterative process which involves examination and review at several levels.
In part this examination and review process is dealt with by the Board and other Committees mentioned below .
The Chairman and Chief Executive The roles of the Chairman Patrick Burgess and of the Chief Executive David Fischel are separate and have been defined by the Board.
In summary  the Chairmans responsibilities include leading the Board setting its agenda achieving clarity of decisionmaking and ensuring its effectiveness on all aspects of its role.
He also ensures that the Board maintains effective twoway communication with shareholders and management.
The Chief Executives key responsibilities include daytoday management of the Groups operations in the most effective way possible implementing the policies and strategies developed by the Board and developing the abilities and skills of the Groups personnel to their maximum potential.
NonExecutive Directors The NonExecutive Directors bring an external and independent view to the Boards discussions providing constructive challenge to executive management when appropriate.
Biographical details of each Director are set out on pages 54 and 55.
The Senior Independent Director Andrew Huntley was appointed as Senior Independent Director in August 2013.
In this role Andrew provides advice and additional support and experience to the Chairman as required and is available to act as an intermediary for the other Directors if necessary .
Andrew also leads the appraisal of the Chairmans performance annually in discussion with the other NonExecutive Directors and is available as an additional point of contact for shareholders should they feel that communication through the normal channels of the Chairman Chief Executive Secretariat or Investor Relations team has failed or is otherwise inappropriate.
Alternate Directors John Whittaker and Richard Gordon have appointed Steven Underwood and Raymond Fine respectively as their alternates under the terms of the Companys Articles of Association.
The Board has generally invited the alternate Directors to attend Board meetings.
The Companys approach to corporate responsibility is a key element of its overall governance culture.
We have consistently demonstrated a strong commitment to high standards of corporate responsibility  particularly focused on the local communities surrounding our shopping centres and details of our CR activities are set out in the CR report on pages 48 to 53 which we strongly recommend shareholders to read and on the Companys website.
Structure of the Board and independence Board structure Board structure Chairman 1 Executives 2 NonExecutives 7 Board independence excluding Chairman Executive 2 NonIndependent 2 Independent 5 Gender split Women 2 Men 8 Length of tenure of NonExecutive Directors 03 years 1 36 years 4 69 years 2 Intu Properties plc site
The attendance of Directors at all Board meetings held in 2014 is set out in the table below
Scheduled
4 meetings
4 meetings A B A B Patrick Burgess David Fischel Matthew Roberts John Whittaker Adle Anderson Richard Gordon Andrew Huntley Louise Patten Neil Sachdev Andrew Strang Maximum number of meetings the Director was eligible to attend.
B  Number of meetings actually attended.
Independent directors.
Board meetings The Board meets regularly during the course of the year  and met a total of nine times in 2014.
There were four scheduled meetings as well as a Directors Away Day focused on plans and strategy for 2015.
A further four unscheduled meetings were held both of which were necessarily convened at short notice to deal with matters arising between the scheduled meetings.
At each scheduled meeting the Executive Directors Chief Operating Officer and Company Secretary give reports on their key areas of responsibility .
In addition the chairmen of the Audit Remuneration and Nomination and Review Committees give an update on the discussions of those Committees highlighting any areas requiring escalation to or consideration by  the full Board.
Other matters for discussion are added to the agenda for scheduled Board meetings or discussed at additional Board meetings as required.
Key matters discussedapproved by the Board in 2014 acquisition of Merry Hill and Derby UK shopping centres and the Sprucefield retail park in Northern Ireland together with the associated rights issue and the sale of 80 per cent of intu Uxbridge driving forward the investment programme in existing assets continuing to build the public profile of the brand and the rollout of the new digital infrastructure across our centres progress of development projects including major extensions at intu W atford and intu Lakeside launch of a 350 million 16year bond following the transfer of intu Derby and intu Chapelfield into the Groups Secured Group Structure new 600 million revolving credit facility replacing the existing 375 million facility that was due to expire in November 2018 talent development across the organisation development of international activities including the acquisition of the Puerto V enecia Shopping Centre Zaragoza Spain Communication between Board meetings Directors are kept fully informed of progress on matters between formal meetings in particular by way of scheduled conference calls or less formal update meetings in every month when there is not a formal Board meeting ad hoc meetings working visits to centres and pursuing a policy of open communication.
The chairmen of the Audit Committee and Remuneration Committee communicate regularly with relevant staff and advisers including the Head of Risk and Internal Audit the Company Secretary and the Remuneration Consultants.
Effectiveness
Balance composition and culture The Nomination and Review Committee regularly reviews the balance including skills and experience and composition of the Board to ensure that it operates efficiently .
The Board has therefore determined that candidates for the role of NonExecutive Director should have relevant qualifications and experience notably in property  retail and finance areas that are well represented by the current NonExecutive Directors see biographies on page 55.
The Board continued Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
The Board reviews the independence of its NonExecutive Directors on an annual basis.
With the exception of John Whittaker and Richard Gordon both representatives of major shareholders the Board has concluded that all other NonExecutive Directors continue to demonstrate their independence.
The balance of the Board is illustrated on page 59.
Time commitment external activities and conflicts of interest NonExecutive Directors are generally appointed for a threeyear period and their continuing service thereafter is subject to review by the Board.
Their annual time commitment will vary according to their membership of Board Committees and the activities of the business in any given year .
The terms of appointment of the Non Executive Directors set out the minimum expectation of preparation for and attendance at all Board meetings Board Committee meetings where appropriate adhoc meetings and the annual Board away day .
NonExecutive Directors are required to confirm on accepting their appointment and annually following each accounting year end that they are able to allocate sufficient time to meet the expectations of the role.
The terms of appointment for each of the NonExecutive Directors are available for inspection at the Companys registered office or on written request from the Company Secretary .
Directors have a statutory duty to avoid situations in which they have or may have interests that conflict with those of Intu including when a Director takes up a position with another company  unless that conflict is first authorised by the Board.
The Board has adopted a formal procedure for the identification of conflicts under which Directors must notify the Chairman of any potential conflicts.
The Chairman then decides whether a conflict exists and recommends its authorisation by the Board where appropriate.
In certain circumstances the conflicted Director may be required to recuse himself from the Boards discussions on a matter in which he or she is conflicted.
Directors must also notify the Chairman when they take on any additional responsibilities or external appointments and it is their responsibility to ensure that such appointments will not prevent them from meeting the time commitments discussed above.
In addition the Board has implemented a Related Party Protocol for situations where a proposed transaction could be captured by the related party provisions of the Listing Rules or by the Companies Act 2006.
The appropriate balance of skills independence experience and knowledge does not in itself ensure the efficient operation of a Board.
T o this end the role of the Chairman is essential in creating an environment where the NonExecutive Directors are able to draw on their own experience to constructively challenge the views of the executive management.
The Chairman works closely with the Company Secretary to ensure that all Directors are provided with fully accurate and timely information to facilitate informed discussion at Board meetings.
The Chairman is particularly mindful that the views of all Directors should be taken into consideration and that the range of experience of our NonExecutive Directors must be drawn upon to provide insight and alternative perspectives to aid the Boards decisions on key strategic matters.
The role of the Chairman is essential in creating an environment where the NonExecutive Directors are able to draw on their own experience to constructively challenge the views of the executive management Intu Properties plc site
Key components of the investor relations programme One  on one mee tings with principal shareholders The Chairman is available to meet with key investors to answer their questions and to better understand their views particularly with regard to governance matters R esul tsr ela t ed mee tings Institutional shareholders are invited to a presentation with a question and answer session by the executive team on the day of announcement of final and interim results.
They can choose to attend in person by phone or join the webcast.
The Chairman and a number of the NonExecutives also attend these presentations R oa d sho w s In the few weeks following results announcements executive management conduct a series of onetoone and group meetings with institutional shareholders in the UK South Africa Europe and the US giving the opportunity to meet other fund managers as well as the sector specialist of each institution.
Unattributable feedback from these meetings collected by our brokers is provided to the Board Investor and analyst property visits Institutional shareholders are invited to attend at least one property visit each year with presentations on Intus business.
This gives an opportunity for formal and informal interaction with the executive team and the next tier of operational management.
In 2014 investors visited intu Merry Hill intu Derby  intu Victoria Centre intu Broadmarsh intu W atford and intu T rafford Centre to see recent changes and to hear about significant planned projects.
In v es t or c on f er enc es Several investment banks hold conferences for investors and companies in the real estate sector .
They are a good opportunity for the executive team to meet a large number of current and potential investors in a mixture of group and onetoone meetings and informally .
Intu attended nine such conferences in 2014 in the UK Europe and the US Gener a l mee tings The Annual General Meeting AGM usually held in May  gives the opportunity for all shareholders private and institutional to ask questions of the Board including the Chairmen of both the Audit and Remuneration
The entire Board is also available to talk to shareholders before and after the meeting.
The results of all shareholder votes are announced via the London and Johannesburg stock exchanges and are available on the Companys website Interaction with sell side analysts Many investors develop their understanding of the Company partly through discussions with independent analysts.
Intu engages with analysts from around 20 institutions in order to improve the accuracy and insight of their research.
The Board is kept informed of analyst commentary and recommendations.
Debt investors Representatives of Intus key relationship banks are invited to the biannual results presentations by the executive team and meet periodically with the Chief Financial Officer .
Institutional investors in certain of the Groups listed debt are invited to periodic updates on the Groups business and performance.
We welcome the moves by some credit side institutional investors towards more openness regarding holdings of debt instruments and road showstyle oneto one meetings Overall approach Intu places considerable emphasis on maintaining an open and frank dialogue with investors.
Our programme of investor relations activities is based around the financial reporting calendar and seeks to develop existing and potential investors understanding of Intus business strategy  operations performance and investment case provide to the Board and executive team an insight into the differing views of Intus shareholders With these objectives in mind the executive team including on occasion the Chairman met with representatives of 180 investment institutions during 2014 to keep them informed of our performance and plans to answer their specific questions and to understand their views.
In addition our website provides to all shareholders a great deal of immediate as well as general information and a feedback facility .
Regular visits to our properties enable investors to see our operations close up.
Relations with shareholders Intu places considerable emphasis on maintaining an open and frank dialogue with investors Investor visits Below In 2014 investors visited intu Merry Hill intu Derby intu Victoria Centre intu Broadmarsh intu Watford and intu Trafford Centre to see recent changes and to hear about significant planned projects Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
Dear Shareholder As the Chairman of the Audit Committee it is my role to present to you the Audit Committee report for 2014.
In addition to its core activities the Committee has this year continued to focus on risk management particularly in relation to the expanding digital environment and our entry into Spain.
For the second consecutive year  the Committee carried out a comprehensive risk review and assessment of risk appetite across the Group.
The results of the risk review were discussed by the full Board at its annual away day .
The Groups risk management framework is described in detail on pages 38 and 39.
The Board again asked the Audit Committee to advise it on whether the annual report is fair  balanced and understandable and allows shareholders to make an assessment of the Companys performance business model and strategy .
The annual report preparation process is set out on page 65 and together with opinions of key executives and the external auditor  has been designed to assist the Committee in reaching its view .
The Committee is satisfied that taken as a whole this Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable and has recommended as such to the Board.
Following our annual review of auditor quality and independence we have determined that it is not necessary to tender the audit contract for the time being and have recommended that PricewaterhouseCoopers PwC be reappointed for the 2015 audit.
Although we are awaiting final guidance on audit tendering we anticipate that a tender exercise will at the latest be carried out at the end of the current audit partners five year tenure i. ending 31 December 2018.
In 2015 we will continue to focus on the key risk areas of the Group.
This will include indepth reviews of the Groups developments international operations and the approach to our partners and joint ventures.
Adle Anderson Chairman of the Audit Committee 27 February 2015 Audit Committee Highlights of 2014 Accounting treatment for significant transactions in the year Financial integration and control of significant acquisitions in the year The impact of the adoption of IFRS11 Joint Arrangements The Groups cyber security plans Members in 2014
Adle Anderson Independent NonExecutive Director
Neil Sachdev Independent NonExecutive Director Andrew Strang Independent NonExecutive Director Areas of focus 2015
International operations Partners and joint ventures
Committee
4 meetings Meetings in 2014 A B Adle Anderson Chairman 4 4 Neil Sachdev 4 4 Andrew Strang 4 4 A  maximum number of meetings eligible to attend.
B  number of meetings actually attended.
The Audit Committee normally invites the Chairman Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer to attend meetings.
The Chairman attended three meetings of the Audit Committee in 2014 and the Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer attended all four .
Intu Properties plc site
Audit Committee continued
The Audit Committees key responsibilities are to monitor and review the integrity of the financial statements including a review of the significant financial reporting judgements and accounting policies the effectiveness of the Groups internal control and risk management the effectiveness of the internal audit function including the work programme undertaken by the function the Groups policy on whistleblowing the Groups overall approach to monitoring areas of risk the Companys relationship with the external auditor  including its independence External auditor The Audit Committee has assessed the effectiveness of the external auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC by a combination of direct meetings and review of independent reports Senior finance staff reviewed the detailed execution of the 2013 audit plan with the engagement team and identified specific improvements for the 2014 plan The report of the Financial Reporting Council FRCs May 2014 Audit Quality Inspection review of PwC was reviewed and found to be supportive of the firms overall systems of quality control The Chairman of the Audit Committee and the Chief Financial Officer each met privately with a senior partner of PwC unrelated to the engagement shortly after the publication of the Groups Annual Report to review the performance of the firm The FRCs Audit Quality Review team undertook a review of PwCs 2013 audit of the Company  reporting in November 2014.
The Audit Committee discussed the findings with the lead audit partner and was satisfied with the actions to be taken.
No significant changes to the audit approach were identified The EU Audit Regulation 5372014 and Audit Directive 201456EU become applicable from 17 June 2016 and must be implemented in the UK by the same date.
These limit the length of tenure an audit firm can serve and put in place requirements for the audit tender process.
PwC have been Intus audit firm for more than 20 years and it is anticipated that a tender process will at the latest be carried out at the end of the current audit partners five year tenure i. the year ending 31 December 2018.
A resolution to reappoint PwC for the 2015 audit will be proposed at the 2015 AGM.
The Committee will continue to review the effectiveness and independence of PwC each year .
Main activities during the year The Audit Committee considered the following key matters in 2014 the Groups investment property valuation process accounting treatment of the most significant transactions in the year including the acquisitions of interests in intu Merry Hill intu Derby and Sprucefield from Westfield and the associated rights issue along with the sale of 80 per cent of intu Uxbridge financial integration and control of acquisitions in the year changes to accounting standards and their potential impact on the Group including the adoption of IFRS 11 Joint Arrangements the 2014 Internal Audit Plan and Audit Charter discussion on the appropriateness of those items classified as exceptional in the year and therefore excluded from underlying earnings the results of a review of the carrying value of the Groups investment in Prozone due to the market value of the shares trading at a discount to the Groups carrying value based on share of net assets.
This included further enquiries by management to supplement their understanding of the Indian market including discussions with an independent expert.
The review concluded that no adjustment was required at this time the Groups cyber security plans Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
Key financial reporting and significant judgements During the year the Committee discussed the planning progress and final conclusions of the external audit process.
The audit plan was reviewed and approved at the July 2014 Committee meeting.
The significant risk areas identified were investment property valuations revenue recognition and management override of controls.
International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland identify these latter two risks as significant for all companies.
These issues were discussed by the Committee following finalisation of the audit.
The Committee takes into account the views of the external auditor in understanding and assessing whether suitable accounting policies have been adopted and whether management has made appropriate estimates and judgements and whether disclosures are balanced and fair .
The main issues discussed by the Committee in the current year were Valuation of investment properties For the interim results at 30 June the Audit Committee carried out a review of the investment property valuations.
The full Board carried out a review of the 31 December valuations included in this report.
Due to the overall importance of the valuations to the Groups results DTZ who undertake the largest proportion of the Groups valuations were invited to both the Audit Committee and the Board meetings to participate in the consideration of the valuations.
The Audit Committee review included discussion with management and the auditor of the key assumptions and results of the valuation process undertaken by the independent third party valuers.
This review also included understanding which general factors had influenced the valuers in concluding on appropriate yields to use in the valuations.
This involved factors affecting both the investment and occupier markets and recent comparable market transactions.
Particular emphasis was given to understanding the factors that had resulted in individual property valuations being either significantly above or below the average movement in the Groups valuations.
Presentation of information The Group has adopted IFRS 11 Joint Arrangements in 2014.
This new standard requires that all joint ventures which the Group previously chose to account for on a proportional consolidated basis are equity accounted.
Operating through joint ventures is a core part of Intus strategy .
Management both review and monitor the business including the Groups share of joint ventures on an individual line basis not on a posttax profit or net investment basis.
The figures and commentary presented in the Strategic report have therefore been presented consistently with this management approach.
Reconciliations to the presentation under IFRS 11 have been provided in note 48 to the financial statements and in the Other information section on pages 155 and 156.
The Committee has reviewed the prominence given to both statutory information and information on a management basis and concluded that the approach adopted provides the most useful analysis of the results for the year .
Going concern The Companys going concern review which is based on an 18month cash flow projection with particular focus on the next 12 months was discussed with management.
The projections cover the major trading cash flows being rental income interest expense and capital expenditure plans in the context of the latest debt maturity profile.
Stress tests of the projections were considered covering reductions in net rental income levels and the value of the Groups properties and what impact such changes may have on both the Groups liquidity and its ability to meet the financial covenants on its debt facilities.
The discussion also considered what actions were available to the Group to mitigate the impact of such reductions on the cash flow projections.
Fair  balanced and understandable At the request of the Board the Committee considered whether the 2014 Annual Report was fair  balanced and understandable and whether it provided the necessary information for shareholders to assess Intus performance business model and strategy .
As part of its considerations the Committee took into account the preparation process detailed below which together with opinions of key executives and the external auditor has been designed to assist the Audit Committee in reaching its view at an early stage a matrix is produced identifying key themes and the sections in which those themes should be reflected individual sections of the Annual Report are drafted by appropriate senior management with regular review meetings to ensure consistency across the whole document a verification process is undertaken to ensure that information contained is appropriately supported and factually accurate detailed reviews of drafts of the Annual Report are undertaken by members of the Executive Committee and other senior management drafts are discussed with the Groups legal advisors and brokers a final draft is reviewed by the Audit Committee and discussed with senior management prior to consideration by the Board As a result of its considerations the Committee is satisfied that taken as a whole the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable and has recommended as such to the Board.
Following discussions with management the Committee agreed with the conclusions reached and the treatments relating to the above issues adopted in these financial statements.
Intu Properties plc site
Audit Committee continued Details of the amounts paid to the external auditor for audit and nonaudit services are included in note 9 on page 107 to the financial statements.
The Company engaged PwC to carry out certain non audit work in 2014 including assurance services in respect of the Groups 2014 interim report reporting accountant work in respect of the rights issue to partfund the acquisition of intu Merry Hill intu Derby and Sprucefield and the debt issues for the Secured Group Structure and intu T rafford Centre and financial due diligence on the acquisition of intu Merry Hill intu Derby and Sprucefield.
The above safeguards were adhered to when awarding this nonaudit work and PwC were chosen for the reporting accountant work as it was considered to be sensible for the external auditor to be used and more efficient in terms of time and cost.
PwC were chosen to undertake the due diligence work on efficiency grounds given the overall assignment.
Fees paid to PwC in respect of nonaudit work represented 65 per cent of the total fees paid.
During 2014 the Group used accounting firms other than PwC for a number of assignments.
The EU Audit Regulation 5372014 and Audit Directive 201456EU which come into force on 17 June 2016 impose restrictions on certain nonaudit services.
A number of nonaudit services will be prohibited and others will require approval by the Audit Committee.
There will be an overall fee limit of 70 per cent of the average of audit fees charged in the past three years for permitted nonaudit services.
The UK regulator is currently consulting on the definition of nonaudit services and hence which services would be affected.
Although these restrictions do not come into force until 2016 the FRC has already imposed a ban on tax services by auditors where fees are payable on a contingent basis.
Intus current policy on nonaudit services set out above continues in force for the time being.
As soon as there is more clarity on the new regulations and in particular which services are impacted Intu will review its policy and make any necessary amendments to comply with the new rules.
Risk management and internal control The Board has overall responsibility to oversee the Groups system of internal control and to keep its effectiveness under review  as well as to determine the nature and extent of the risks it is willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives based on the balance of potential risks and reward.
The ongoing risk management process is described in detail on page 38 and is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can provide only a reasonable rather than absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Key elements of the Groups internal control system relating to financial reporting are as follows the Group has a comprehensive system for reporting financial results to the Board detailed regular financial reports with comparisons to historic performance and against budget and forecasts are provided to the Board.
The Board reviews these for the Group as a whole and takes action when appropriate the Group undertakes a detailed financial reporting process on a quarterly basis.
This process is carried out using the policies and practices that apply to the control environment on an ongoing basis and is largely undertaken by the Groups financial reporting team which comprises appropriately qualified finance professionals.
Detailed planning is undertaken prior to the period end.
As part of this process significant business risks and their potential impact on the financial reporting process and results are considered including the effect of any changes in the business activities or accounting standards and matters arising from the underlying information systems Nonaudit services The Group has a policy to ensure that the provision of any nonaudit services by the incumbent external auditor does not impair the external auditors independence or objectivity .
The Audit Committee has considered the option of putting material nonaudit work out to tender .
While recognising that the circumstances of a particular transaction may make it most sensible to use the incumbent external auditor for such work for example where the nature of the transaction would not allow a new firm sufficient time to assimilate the requisite knowledge of the Groups operations in order to carry out the nonaudit work the Audit Committee has recommended that nonaudit work should be undertaken by someone other than the external auditor wherever practical.
The Audit Committee has delegated to the Executive Directors the authority to contract for nonaudit services with the external auditor subject to observing certain guidelines including Executive Directors have the authority to commission the external auditor to undertake nonaudit work up to a specified value the Executive Directors must consider whether the proposed arrangements will maintain audit independence and the external auditor must satisfy the Company that it is acting independently .
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
The most significant areas reviewed in 2014 were shopping centre healthchecks or follow up reviews at six centres corporate responsibility reviews at four centres integration of the major assets acquired in the year intu Merry Hill and intu Derby a review of the transactional services operation including accounts payable expenses accounts receivable and cashiers review of intu Experiences commercialisation processes a review of cash exposures centre demise reviews data identification service charges payroll outsourced service provider review and a review of selfcertification at the centres and head office.
Additionally  annual assurance activities were performed including a review of gifts and hospitality and Executive expenses.
The Audit Committee regularly reviews the effectiveness of the risk and internal audit function and in particular ensures that the function remains sufficiently independent of the wider business to ensure it can carry out its work effectively .
An independent review of the risk and internal audit function is carried out every five years and was last performed at the end of 2013.
Whistleblowing policy The Audit Committee reviews the Groups arrangements by which staff can confidentially raise concerns about possible improprieties whether financial or otherwise within the
Any whistleblowing incidents are reported to the Audit Committee and fully investigated with procedures reviewed and improved where appropriate.
During 2014 we revised the existing whistleblowing policy to make it more user friendly communicate the role of the Audit Committee and emphasise the protection afforded to informants publicised the revised policy and process throughout the Group and improved accessibility to whistleblowing information and advice via the Groups intranet created an online process to register concerns There was one whistleblowing incident during 2014.
This was a nonfinancial matter which was fully investigated and found to be unsubstantiated.
The outcome was accepted by the complainant.
Audit Committee effectiveness As part of the Board evaluation process the Audit Committee reviewed its own effectiveness and the results were positive.
The Committee took the opportunity to streamline the agenda and papers submitted for its meetings to improve efficiency and decision making.
Adle Anderson Chairman of the Audit Committee 27 February 2015 the preparation of the consolidated financial results involves a number of review stages.
One of these stages includes a technical accounting review by an internal technical specialist who has primary responsibility for ensuring that financial accounting developments are appropriately dealt with in the Groups financial reporting process.
After various internal review stages draft financial reports with narrative commentary on new technical requirements or issues requiring a significant level of judgement are prepared for review and approval by the Audit Committee.
This review stage involves the Audit Committee discussing the consolidated financial results and significant judgements with senior management and where appropriate the external auditor The Board has conducted a review of the effectiveness on the basis of criteria set out in the 2005 Financial Reporting Councils internal control guidance for Directors of systems of internal financial control and risk management for the year ended 31 December 2014 and has confirmed that there have been no material developments affecting their review which have taken place since the year end.
Internal audit The Group has a risk and internal audit function which reports to the Audit
The risk and internal audit function reviews internal controls and reports to the Audit Committee on whether such controls are in place and are being operated effectively .
The function covers Intu Properties plc subsidiaries including intu Retail Services and joint ventures.
Intu Properties plc site
Dear Shareholder As the Chairman of the Committee it is my task to present to you the report of the Nomination and Review Committee for the year ended 31 December 2014.
The Committee is pleased with the progress of the newly implemented comprehensive succession planning and leadership development programme across the Group identifying appropriate internal succession paths and establishing a programme for talent development.
The Committee carried out a formal Board performance evaluation process the outcome of which is summarised opposite.
We continue to have 20 per cent female representation on the Board and will keep the target of 25 per cent in mind when an opportunity next arises for a Board appointment to be made.
Our statement on our diversity policy is set out below .
Responsibilities and how they were discharged in 2014 The principal role of the Nomination and Review Committee is to evaluate the skills available on the Board and to determine when appointments and retirements are appropriate.
In addition to its key responsibilities set out above the Committee is also responsible for carrying out the annual performance evaluation of the Board its Committees and individual Directors as well as making recommendations to the Board on appointments to the Board including the induction programme for newly appointed Directors and on succession planning.
The Committee met twice in 2014 with its main focus on the composition of the Board and succession planning.
Statement on diversity policy The Nomination and Review Committee and the Board recognises the importance of boardroom diversity  not just gender specific and the Committees policy is to seek to ensure that all available suitable candidates are taken into account when drawing up shortlists of candidates for possible appointments to the Board.
However  the priority of the Committee and the Board is to ensure that the Group continues to have the strongest and most effective Board possible and therefore all appointments to the Board are made on merit against objective criteria.
The Board is supportive of the Davies Report recommendations in relation to board diversity .
Board composition The Committees discussions regarding the composition of the Board continued to be framed by the Companys previously stated goal of reducing the overall size of the Board.
The Committee is satisfied that the balance of skills knowledge and experience on the Board and its Committees is appropriate and no further appointments are currently planned or envisaged.
The Committee has discussed the scheduled retirements of the SID and the Remuneration Committee Chairman due at the 2016 AGM.
The Committee is in the early stages of the search for two new NonExecutive Directors following the 2015 AGM.
Nomination and Review Committee The priority of the Committee is to ensure that the Group continues to have the strongest and most effective Board possible Patrick Burgess Chairman of the Board Highlights of 2014 Succession planning Performance evaluation Education and development Members in 2014
Patrick Burgess Chairman of the Board
Andrew Huntley Independent NonExecutive Director Louise Patten Independent NonExecutive Director Neil Sachdev Independent NonExecutive Director Areas of focus 2015 Appointment of two NonExecutive Directors Directors induction Board communication
Committee
2 meetings Meetings in 2014 A B Patrick Burgess Chairman 2 2 Andrew Huntley 2 2 Louise Patten 2 2 Neil Sachdev 2 2 A  Maximum number of meetings eligible to attend.
B  Number of meetings actually attended.
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
Board members senior management and external advisers as well as a high level review of all current projects Board strategy and an indepth review of the Groups assets.
Where required the Company Secretary provides guidance or facilitates the provision of training on Directors individual duties under the Companies Act 2006 and on legal regulatory and governance matters with which the Company  Board and individual Directors must comply .
Education and development The Chairman with the assistance of the Nomination and Review Committee regularly considers the need for Directors to update and expand their skills and knowledge.
T raining is provided for NonExecutive Directors in the form of presentations at Board meetings as well as attendance at relevant seminars and courses.
The Board also recognises the need for Directors to keep up to date with relevant legislative and regulatory developments as well as changes to corporate governance best practice and investor expectations.
The Company Secretary reports to each Board meeting on these matters drawing attention to any issues of particular relevance.
In addition the Company Secretary maintains an uptodate comprehensive schedule summarising legislative and regulatory developments relevant to the Company and rated according to riskimpact on the Group which is available to the Board and Senior Management.
Patrick Burgess
27 February 2015 Succession planning Succession planning and the development of talent in the business was a major preoccupation of the Committee during the year  and a comprehensive talent and leadership development programme including succession planning has been implemented across the entire Group from the Board down.
The Committee has monitored the progress of the programme at every meeting and is pleased with the progress made to date.
Renewal of NonExecutive appointments All Directors will submit themselves for reelection at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting in May 2015.
Induction for new Directors There is a comprehensive induction programme for new Directors which is tailored by the Chairman in consultation with the Chief Executive and Company Secretary  depending on the type of Performance evaluation Every year  the Board conducts an evaluation of its own performance and of the performance of the Chairman and each of the Board
In addition the Chairman reviews the performance of each individual Director and the Senior Independent Director oversees the review of the Chairmans performance.
The evaluation process conducted during 2013 generated three areas requiring attention during 2014 and progress against those areas is shown in the table below 2014 performance evaluation The 2014 performance evaluation was conducted by way of an internal questionnaire with external facilitation.
The key points identified formed the basis for recommendations which the Board used to establish an action plan for 2015.
The main areas covered by the action plan for attention in 2015 are Suc c ession planning  identification of appropriate profiles for candidates followed by the appointment of two new NonExecutive Directors to replace Andrew Huntley and Neil Sachdev  both to retire at 2016 AGM Board Communication  Board members encouraged to attend Board update session in person rather than by conference call where possible and create more opportunities for the Board to make working visits to our centres Risk  add as standard agenda item to Audit Committee agenda.
Incorporate a section on risk into Board presentations and capex proposals Area identified for attention in 2014 Action taken Revisions to Board and Committee timetable and sequencing of meetings Committee meetings held one week prior to Board meetings Committee meetings held sequentially on one day Additional meetings of Remuneration Committee to develop the new format Directors remuneration report Remuneration Committee met on two occasions in addition to scheduled meetings to develop the new format Directors remuneration report More exposure to senior management across the Group on topics of particular relevance Attendance at Board meetings by senior managers to present on specific topics Audit Committee agenda amended to allow for deep dives into particular topics at least twice per year External facilitation provided by Claire Howard who also carried out the formal external evaluation in 2013.
Ms Howard has no other connection with Intu.
Intu Properties plc site thinking about Spain in 2012.
We chose Spain because it offers a great investment opportunity with possibilities for growth good infrastructure an economy moving out of recession sophisticated retailers and consumers.
Most of all its prime regional shopping centre market has fragmented ownership and offers great opportunities for an imaginative owner to shake it up.
In 2013 a rare opportunity to acquire a quality asset came up  the 75000 sq. m.
Parque Principado shopping centre in Oviedo Asturias in northern Spain.
It is one of Spains top 10 shopping centres strategically located with over 9 million visitors a year .
In a bold move  six months earlier the Spanish economy looked fragile  Intu teamed up with the major property investor  Canada Pension Plan Investment Board CPPIB to acquire the centre in October 2013.
At the end of 2014 we are already seeing the rewards for our boldness which gives us confidence that were on the right path.
The centre was purchased for 162 million but is now valued at 212 million an increase in value of 28 per cent since acquisition.
It is 99 per cent occupied and new leases signed in 2014 averaged 18 per cent above ERV .
Sales and footfall are both significantly ahead of nationwide indices.
Parque Principado which will undergo a full intu rebrand as well as change its name to intu Asturias in 2015 was our first Spanish acquisition.
In December 2014 we announced the acquisition Spains shopping centre market has fragmented ownership and offers great opportunities for an imaginative new owner Focus on Spain Our Spanish enterprise of Puerto Venecia an awardwinning retail and leisure centre in Zaragoza which has substantially strengthened our market position in Spain.
With our partners Eurofund we have options on four development sites in Mlaga V alencia Palma and Vigo and are likely to embark on the Mlaga site to be intu Costa del in 2015.
Our timing has been good  Spain is out of recession with workplace reforms in place unemployment falling consumer confidence strengthening and household debt reducing.
The top 10 Spanish retail locations account for 80 per cent of retail expenditure.
Intu
Creating this leading platform in three years demonstrates our agility in executing new strategies.
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
Alignment with longterm success The Committee believes that our remuneration philosophy and incentive policy is aligned with the longterm success of the Company .
Our longterm incentive plan has time horizons extending to five years and 50 per cent of our annual bonus is deferred into shares.
Performance pay is linked to outperformance of T otal Shareholder Return against our peers delivering absolute total return for our shareholders annual EPS performance achievement of our strategic initiatives that will build value for the longer term Key areas of focus and decisions in 2014 and for 2015 The Chief Executives salary will be increased by 3.6 per cent from 545480 per annum to 565000 per annum with effect from 1 April 2015.
The Chief Financial Officers salary will be increased by 3.6 per cent from 430090 per annum to 445500 per annum with effect from 1 April 2015.
The annual bonus awarded to the Executive Directors for the year ended 31 December 2014 was 65.0 per cent to 65.3 per cent of maximum opportunity based on EPS performance against budget Directors remuneration report Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present Intus 2014 Directors remuneration report to you which has been prepared by the Remuneration Committee and approved by the Board.
Results and context of remuneration 2014 was another year of significant activity at Intu as described in the Chairmans statement on page 6.
Intu delivered a total shareholder return of nearly 25 per cent for the year .
The key strategic objectives achieved in the year included the performance of the Groups existing assets strong KPI outcomes broadening of the intu Digital offering strong performance in Spain and excellent progress on augmentation of financial headroom through successful refinancing of bank facilities bond issue and rights issue in the year .
In addition three top shopping centres were acquired intu Merry Hill and intu Derby in the UK and Puerto Venecia in Spain.
Remuneration Policy Last year we put our Directors remuneration policy to binding shareholder vote for the first time.
It was approved at the 2014 AGM with 99.77 per cent of votes cast in favour .
The Committee was delighted with the level of support shown by shareholders and we continue to welcome feedback.
We are not proposing to make any changes to our Directors remuneration policy this year .
In the interests of succinct reporting we have not reproduced the full policy report.
A summary table setting out an overview of remuneration elements and policy for 2015 is included in the body of the report.
The approved policy table is included at the end of this report for ease of reference.
The full policy report can be found on our website.
Members and meetings in 2014
Committee
6 meetings Meetings in 2014 A B Neil Sachdev Chairman Independent NonExecutive Director 6 6 Louise Patten Independent NonExecutive Director 6 6 Adle Anderson Independent NonExecutive Director 6 6 A  maximum number of meetings eligible to attend.
B  number of meetings actually attended.
The Committee normally invites the Chairman and the Chief Executive to attend the scheduled meetings.
The Chairman attended all of the scheduled meetings in 2014.
The Chief Executive attended five of the six scheduled meetings.
The Chief Financial Officer was invited to and attended one scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2014.
No individual is present when his or her remuneration is being determined. strategic objectives.
The 2012 Executive Share Option Scheme ESOS awards did not meet the threshold performance test and therefore no longterm share award will vest in respect of 2014.
No changes have been made to the performance measures for the annual bonus and performance share plan.
Performance share plan awards of 250 per cent of salary were made to each of the Executive Directors.
These will only vest subject to the achievement of stretching T otal Shareholder Return TSR and Absolute T otal Return TR performance conditions over three four and five years.
For incentive awards in respect of 2015 onwards we are introducing a clawback provision under which incentive amounts delivered to the Executive Directors may be reclaimed in certain circumstances.
Shareholder Annual General Meeting The Directors remuneration report will be put to the shareholder vote at our 2015 AGM and we look forward to receiving your views and support.
Neil Sachdev Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 27 February 2015 Compliance statement This is the Directors Remuneration Report of the Company which has been produced pursuant to and in accordance with the Listing Rules section 420 of the Companies Act 2006 and Schedule 8 to the Large and Medium sized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended 2013.
The Company also complies with the requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code .
This report contains both auditable and non auditable information.
The information subject to audit is set out in the Directors remuneration report in sections marked with .
A copy of our shareholder approved Directors Remuneration Policy can be found on the
Governance
Annual remuneration report This report sets out how the Directors remuneration policy of the Company has been applied in the year and details of how the Committee intends to apply the policy going forward.
In accordance with section 439 of the Companies Act 2006 an advisory shareholder resolution to approve this report will be proposed at the 2015 Annual General Meeting of the Company .
Subsections marked with  have been audited in accordance with the relevant statutory requirements.
Key responsibilities The principal role of the Remuneration Committee is to determine and then agree with the Board the framework and policy for the remuneration of the Chief Executive the Chief Financial Officer  the Chairman of the Company and such other members of the executive management as it is tasked to consider .
Key principles of remuneration policy The Companys remuneration policy aims to attract motivate and retain high calibre executives by rewarding them appropriately with competitive compensation and benefit packages.
The policy seeks to align the interests of Executive Directors with the performance of the Company and the interests of its shareholders.
Our incentive arrangements are designed to reward performance aligned to our key performance indicators.
Our aim is to focus management on delivering sustainable longterm performance and support the retention of critical talent.
Overview of Executive Director remuneration An overview of the key remuneration elements in place for Executive Directors is set out below .
After the strong support received from shareholders last year  we have not made any changes to the operation of our policy this year except for the introduction of clawback.
Summary of policy Details of policy for 2015 Base salary Salaries are reviewed annually and will take into account factors such as market pay levels for the role increases for the rest of the Group and individual and Company performance Salaries for 2015 are David Fischel Chief Executive 565000 Matthew Roberts Chief Financial Officer This is in line with increases to staff across the business Pension and benefits  The Company operates an approved defined contribution pension arrangement where the contribution is 24 per cent of basic salary .
The Chief Executive receives an extra six per cent in recognition of the benefit foregone on the closure of the defined benefit scheme Benefits include a car allowance up to 18000 private medical insurance life assurance and longterm sickness insurance Shortterm incentive  Maximum opportunity of 120 per cent of salary A proportion earned is deferred into Intu shares which vest over two and three years subject to continued employment At least two thirds of this award is based on Group financial measures or quantitative key performance measures For 2015 performance is based two thirds on EPS and one third on strategic and operational objectives.
This is the same framework which applied for 2014 50 per cent of the award deferred into shares Longterm incentives  The normal maximum grant size is 250 per cent of salary per annum however this may be increased to 375 per cent in exceptional circumstances Awards under the plan vest one third after each of three four and five years Awards of 250 per cent of salary For 2015 the awards will be based 50 per cent TSR relative to the top five listed REIT s 50 per cent total return NA V growth per share plus dividends T argets unchanged from 2014 Shareholding guidelines  Executive Directors must build up over a period of three to five years a holding with a value equivalent to 200 per cent of salary Chief Executive and 150 per cent of salary Chief Financial Officer The approved policy report rather than the summary above continues to be the policy under which the Company is bound.
The policy table from the policy report is provided at the end of this report for ease of reference.
Directors remuneration report continued Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
Clawback
For incentive awards in respect of 2015 onwards we are introducing a clawback provision under which incentive amounts delivered to the Executive Directors may be retained in certain circumstances.
Total remuneration in 2014 The table below sets out the total remuneration received by each Director for the year to 31 December 2014.
Salary or fees
Annual bonus cash and deferred shares
ESOS
Pension
Total remuneration
Executive
David Fischel   164 162 1154 1081 Matthew Roberts   Chairman Patrick Burgess       407 406 Independent NonExecutive Adle Anderson Andrew Huntley 77 62         77 62 Louise Patten 66 65         66 65 Neil Sachdev 89 85         89 85 Andrew Strang 61 62         61 62 Other NonExecutive Richard Gordon 56 57         56 57 John Whittaker Total 1797 1   267 261 2863 2697 John Whittaker did not receive any remuneration in 2014 or 2013 in connection with his position as Deputy Chairman and NonExecutive Director of the Company.
A management fee of 200000 per annum was paid to Peel Management Limited for the provision by Peel of management and advisory services as further described on page 81.
The figures have been calculated as follows Base salary amount earned for the year Benefits the taxable value of annual benefits received in the year .
The main benefits are life assurance longterm sickness insurance private healthcare and company car cash allowance.
The value of the company car cash allowance is 18000 Pension the value of the Companys contribution during the year 30 per cent salary supplement in lieu of contributions for the Chief Executive 24 per cent SIPP contribution part taken as a salary supplement in lieu of SIPP contributions for the Chief Financial Officer Annual bonus cash and deferred the value at grant of the annual incentive payable for performance over 2014 ESOS awards made in 2012 with vesting subject to EPS performance to 31 December 2014.
The actual adjusted EPS growth over the period to 31 December 2014 was below the threshold level.
As the performance condition has not been met the Remuneration Committee has determined that the 2012 ESOS awards will lapse in March 2015 Intu Properties plc site
Directors remuneration report continued Performance outturns and incentives Annual bonus The maximum award for both the Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer in 2014 was 120 per cent of salary  of which 50 per cent is deferred for two and three years.
This will remain unchanged for 2015.
Annual bonus payments are based on predetermined performance measures.
Two thirds is based on adjusted EPS performance in the year  split evenly between performance versus budget and prior year figures.
The remaining third is based on achievement of strategic and operational objectives against a scorecard of measures.
The Remuneration Committee considers the objectives carefully each year to align with Intus strategic objectives and include quantitatively assessed financial and operational measures and milestones.
Each objective relates directly to the strategic plan.
Under the scorecard approach the weightings of each objective vary between Executive Directors to reflect their roles and responsibilities.
For 2015 the scorecard will include objectives in the following key areas Optimising performance of assets Key capital expenditure projects Building the Intu brand and delivering customer experience Maximising the growth opportunities internationally Financia l fl e xibility T alent development and staff engagement Annual bonus  2014 outturn Performance against the targets for the 2014 shortterm incentive arrangements is given below Performance element Weighting T arget performance
Adjusted EPS vs.
Adjusted EPS vs.
Scorecard of strategic and operational measures David Fischel Matthew Roberts 33% See details of scorecard achievements 95% 96% Total 65.0% 65.3% The strategic objectives in the annual bonus are a key part of the remuneration framework for incentivising and rewarding the achievements and milestones which are the foundation for value creation in the future.
The Committee follows a rigorous process in the setting and monitoring of scorecard objectives.
This includes determination of objectives by reference to the approved board strategy quarterly reviews of quantitative and qualitative data and an end of year full review with supporting evidence to ensure a robust assessment of performance against the objectives.
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
For 2014 the scorecard weightings and outturns were as follows
Weighting Summary achievement against objectives Including specific objectives under each area of focus
Fischel
Matthew
Roberts
Optimising performance of existing assets 30% 20% Continued improvement in retailer demand against a difficult economic background Strong valuation uplifts and KPI outcomes footfall occupancy  lettings Active management and development projects at every centre including significant progress regarding planned major extensions and completion of projects including intu Lakeside food court intu Eldon Square mall upgrade on site at intu Potteries cinema and restaurants and intu Victoria Centre restaurants and reconfigurations Upper end performance Branding and customer relationships 20% 20% Broadening of digital offering including launch of new mobileresponsive website receiving strong website traffic levels and launch of wifi in key shopping centres Launch of Net Promoter Score as a customer service measure Recognised a 30 per cent likeforlike reduction in carbon emissions since 2011 winning Best in continuing carbon reduction in the Carbon T rust Standard Bearers Awards Upper end performance Financial achievements 20% 30% Excellent progress on augmentation of financial headroom including successful refinancing of bank facilities successful bond issue and rights issue in the year Maximum achievement Corporate development 20% 20% Successful acquisition of Westfield Derby and Merry Hill shopping centres and Sprucefield retail park Strong performance from Parque Principado in Spain Maximum achievement T alent development 10% 10% Successful launch of leadership development program Continued integration of intu Retail Services with all HR strategies Engagement index from staff survey increased for third successive year based on 84% response rate Maximum achievement The Directors consider that more granular details of the strategic objectives are commercially sensitive.
The resulting total shortterm incentive payouts for David Fischel and Matthew Roberts in respect of 2014 were 78.0 per cent and 78.4 per cent of salary 65.0 per cent and 65.3 per cent of maximum opportunity respectively .
Deferral into shares 50 per cent of the 2014 shortterm incentive for both David Fischel and Matthew Roberts was deferred into shares of the Company .
Executive Directors must remain in employment with the Company for a period of two years half of award and three years half of award after the date of award before such shares are released.
Longterm incentives Awards with performance periods ending in the year  Executive Share Option Scheme ESOS The L TIP awards shown in the single figure relate to 2012 ESOS awards which were due to vest in March 2015.
The performance condition was as follows Vesting based on threeyear EPS growth ranging from 4 per cent p. to 6 per cent p.
100 per cent vests for growth of 6 per cent p. or higher 33 per cent vests for growth of 4 per cent p. awards vest on a straightline basis for performance between these levels.
Awards lapse for growth of less than 4 per cent p.
Actual adjusted EPS growth over the period to 31 December 2014 was below the threshold level.
As the performance condition has not been met the Remuneration Committee has determined that the 2012 ESOS awards will lapse in March 2015 The ESOS does not form part of the forward looking policy for Executive Directors and in 2013 the Company adopted the Performance Share Plan.
Intu Properties plc site
Directors remuneration report continued Awards granted during the year  Performance Share Plan and Deferred Bonus Award This table summarises awards granted in the year Individual Type of interest Face value of 2014 award % vesting at threshold Performance period end % of salary 3 years 4 years 5 years David Fischel
1363000 250% 25% 31 December 31 December 31 December Matthew Roberts 1049000 250% 25% 31 December 31 December 31 December David Fischel Deferred Bonus Award restricted shares 179024 33% Matthew Roberts 143417 34% Face value calculated using share price at date of grant of 2.92 for the PSP and the Deferred Bonus Award.
Vesting of awards is based 50 per cent on relative TSR and 50 per cent on Absolute Total Return NAV growth per share plus dividends performance with targets equivalent to the 2015 award.
Awards for 2015  Performance Share Plan Awards for 2015 will be 250 per cent of salary .
Awards under the plan vest one third after each of three four and five years.
A summary of the applicable targets are as follows
Absolute total return NA V growth per share plus dividends 50% of award T otal shareholder return relative to topfive UKlisted REITS 50% of award Minimum vesting 25% of element vesting 6 per cent per annum TSR in line with the thirdranked company Full vesting 100% of element vesting 10 per cent per annum TSR in line with the topranked company Straight line vesting between points Straight line vesting between points.
Subject to a Committeeoperated discretionary assessment of underlying financial performance The combination of absolute return and relative return measures ensures a balanced assessment of Company performance and alignment to shareholders.
In particular  both relative and absolute outperformance would be required for full vesting to be achieved.
Malus and clawback Shares awarded under the Deferred Bonus Plan and the Performance Share Plan are subject to malus provisions.
The Committee may apply malus at its discretion in circumstances including but not limited to a material misstatement of the Companys audited financial results a material failure of risk management by the Company  any Group company or business unit a material breach of any applicable health and safety or environmental regulations by the Company  any Group company or business unit serious reputational damage to the Company  any Group company or business unit serious misconduct of the individual The annual bonus and the Performance Share Plan are also subject to clawback provisions.
The Committee may at its discretion seek to apply clawback in circumstances of a material misstatement of the Companys audited financial results where the individual is responsible or accountable and where Executive Directors would always be deemed to have management responsibility serious misconduct of the individual Clawback provisions may be applied up to two years following the determination of the annual incentive and up to one further year following vesting for awards under the Performance Share Plan.
T aking into account the three four and five year vesting timescales this means that Performance Share Plan awards may be reclaimed for up to four  five and six years respectively  from the date of award.
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
Other share schemes The Company operates an Employee Share Ownership Plan ESOP which has in the past used funds provided to purchase shares required under the annual bonus scheme.
The Company operates a Share Incentive Plan SIP for all eligible employees including Executive Directors who may receive up to 3600 worth of shares as part of their annual bonus arrangements.
As part of the SIP arrangements the Company offers eligible employees the opportunity to participate in a Partnership share scheme the terms of which are governed by HM Revenue and Customs regulations.
Season ticket loan All employees of the Group are entitled to an interestfree travel season ticket loan which is repaid over the year via deductions from salary .
Neither David Fischel nor Matthew Roberts received a season ticket or other loan from the Group during 2014.
Chief Executive pay increase in relation to all employees The table below sets out details of the percentage change in salary  benefits and annual bonus for the Chief Executive and the wider employee comparator group.
For these purposes head office employees who have been in employment over both periods have been used as a comparator group as this is considered to be a reasonable practical subset of the allemployee population.
Percentage change in remuneration from 31122013 to 31122014 Percentage change in base salary Percentage change in benefits Percentage change in annual bonus Chief Executive 0% 0.5% 18.8% Head office employees 5% 3.3% 20.8% Shareholding and share interests Executive Directors must build up over a period of three to five years a holding of shares in the Company with a value equivalent to 200 per cent of salary David Fischel and 150 per cent of salary Matthew Roberts.
This requirement has been effective from 1 January 2013.
The graph below illustrates the shareholdings of the Executive Directors as a percentage of salary .
Note that only actual holdings count towards the shareholding requirements.
Shares subject to deferral andor performance conditions have also been shown for reference.
David Fischel Matthew Roberts l Actual shareholding l Deferred shares l Unexercised share options vested l Shares subject to performance conditions Shareholding requirement Shareholding of Intu ordinary shares as at 31 December 2014 % of salary Value of shareholding calculated based on 12 month average share price to 31 December 2014.
400 Intu Properties plc site
Directors remuneration report continued As shown above David Fischels shareholding clearly exceeds his shareholding requirement.
Matthew Roberts will have until January 2018 to build up the required shareholding.
The table below sets out the Directors interests in shares as at 31 December 2014.
Number of shares owned including connected persons Unvested awards Vested awards Conditional shares not subject to performance conditions
Options
Unexercised unapproved options
Options
Own
Held in SIP trust for 5 years
Shares
Held in SIP trust for 5 years
David Fischel 965646 5176 204399 8677 1097598 340061 1469021 12906 0 Matthew Roberts 154506 0 158705 6210 844302 261924 511339 11203 0 1 PSP awards held as fixedvalue zerocost options and jointly owned shares.
2 Held as jointly owned shares.
Includes 2012 ESOS awards which will lapse in March 2015.
3 Partially held as jointly owned shares.
4 Outstanding share awards were adjusted as a result of the 25 April 2014 rights issue.
5 No changes in the interests of Directors have occurred between 31 December 2014 and 19 February 2015.
Vested
2009 ESOS awards Awards of market value share options with an exercise price of 232.41 pence.
These awards became exercisable on 28022013 and may be exercised until 28052019.
2010 ESOS awards Awards of market value share options with an exercise price of 267.75 pence.
These awards became exercisable on 26052013 and may be exercised until 26052020.
Unvested
2012 ESOS award Awards of market value share options granted in March 2012 with an exercise price of 287.43 pence.
Vesting was based on threeyear EPS growth to 31 December 2014 ranging from 4 per cent p. cent p.
The 2012 ESOS awards did not meet the threshold performance test and therefore will lapse in March 2015.
2013 PSP award Awards of performance shares granted on 21 May 2013.
Vesting is based on TSR relative to the top five UK listed REITS  and absolute total return performance ranging from 6 per cent p. to 10 per cent p. equal tranches over three four and five years.
Any awards that vest will be exercisable to 21 May 2023.
2014 PSP award Awards of performance shares granted on 12 May 2014.
Vesting is based on TSR relative to the top five UK listed REITS and absolute total return performance ranging from 6 per cent p. to 10 per cent p. equal tranches over three four and five years.
Any awards that vest will be exercisable to 12 May 2024.
Sixyear T otal Shareholder Return chart The following graph shows the T otal Shareholder Return TSR for Intu Properties plc over the sixyear period ended 31 December 2014 compared with our closest comparator group for this purpose the FTSE 350 Real Estate.
TSR is defined as share price growth plus reinvested dividends.
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
5telSixyear total shareholder return TSR performanceteltel 2013 l Intu Properties plc l FTSE 350 Real Estate UK real estate is a cyclical sector .
Since 2009 a key driver for growth in value within the UK real estate market has been exposure to central London properties.
As a result of the demerger of Capital and Counties from Liberty International now intu Properties plc in 2010 Intus portfolio does not include properties in central London and Intu has therefore not benefited from the recent uplift experienced by those property companies with exposure to London.
However  given the cyclical nature of the property sector  we would not expect this trend to endure over the longterm cycle.
Chief Executive historic remuneration The table below sets out details of historic Chief Executive pay .
CEO single figure of total remuneration 1044k 1350k 1275k 1810k 1081k 1152k Annual bonus payout % maximum 50% 100% 83% 70% 55% 65% Longterm incentive plan vesting in year % maximum 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% Shareholder context The table below shows the binding vote on the 2013 Policy Report and the advisory vote on the 2013 Directors remuneration report at the 2014 AGM.
It is the Committees policy to consult with major shareholders prior to any major changes and to maintain an ongoing dialogue on executive remuneration matters.
For Against Abstentions 2013 Policy Report 99.77% 0.23% 10.6m 2013 Directors remuneration report 99.71% 0.29% 21.8m Additional disclosures Other directorships Executive Directors are not generally encouraged to hold external directorships unless the Chairman determines that such appointment is in the Groups interest and does not cause any conflict of interest.
Where such appointments are approved and held it is a matter for the Chairman to agree whether fees paid in respect of the appointment are retained by the individual or paid to the Company .
David Fischel currently holds three external directorships.
In two cases he receives and retains the fees.
His principal external appointment is as a NonExecutive Director of US company Equity One Inc in which Intu retains an investment through units held in a US venture controlled by Equity One convertible into Equity One shares.
David Fischel also holds another external appointment as a NonExecutive Director of Marlowe Investments Kent Limited a UK private company which relates to his family affairs and does not require any significant time commitment and does not conflict in any way with his role as Chief Executive of Intu.
David Fischel is also a NonExecutive Director of Prozone Intu Properties Limited an Indian shopping centre owner and developer in which the Group has a 33 per cent interest.
He does not receive a fee in respect of this appointment.
During 2014 David Fischel received a fee of 64000 in respect of his directorship of Equity One Inc.
He retained the fees paid in respect of his appointment with the Boards consent.
In addition to his fee restricted stock in Equity One Inc. vested during the year with a value on vesting of 87108.
He also received and retained a fee of 5000 in respect of his nonexecutive directorship of Marlowe Investments Kent Limited.
Intu Properties plc site
Directors remuneration report continued Payments to former Directors A Life Presidency fee of 150000 per annum 2013  150000 was paid to Sir Donald Gordon the Groups Life President and former Chairman who founded the Company in 1980.
The Life Presidency fee was agreed by the Board at the time of his retirement in June 2005 in recognition of his outstanding contribution to the Group.
The payment is payable for the remainder of Sir Donalds life and is secured by Deed.
Payments for loss of office There were no payments for loss of office made to Directors in the year .
Alternate Directors Steven Underwood and Raymond Fine serve as Alternate Directors to John Whittaker and Richard Gordon respectively .
Neither Steven Underwood nor Raymond Fine received any fees in 2014 in respect of their appointment as Alternate Directors.
Raymond Fine received a fee of 159250 in respect of consultancy services provided to the Company in connection with South African tax and shareholder issues particularly in respect of South African dividends tax liaison with the Gordon Family and other related matters.
Service contracts Executive Directors and the Chairman have rolling service contracts which are terminable on 12 months notice on either side.
All NonExecutive Directors have been appointed on fixed terms of two or three years subject to renewal thereafter .
Richard Gordon is deemed to have served for more than nine years and is now subject to a oneyear term.
All are subject to annual reelection by shareholders.
Notice Period David Fischel 12 months Matthew Roberts 12 months Patrick Burgess 12 months Contract term expires Adle Anderson 2016 AGM Richard Gordon 2015 AGM Andrew Huntley 2016 AGM Louise Patten 2017 AGM Neil Sachdev 2016 AGM Andrew Strang 2015 AGM John Whittaker 2017 AGM Distribution statement The table below shows the percentage change in underlying earnings dividends and total employee compensation spend from the financial year ended 31 December 2013 to the financial year ended 31 December 2014.
Dividend m 10% 40tel Increase due to increased issued share capital.
Dividend per share was 0.14 2013  0.14 adjusted as as a result of the 25 April 2014 rights issue.
Total employee pay expenditure m 63% 40tel 2014 includes full year impact of Intu Retail Services.
Average increase in sta salaries for 2014 was 2.48%.
Underlying earnings m 15% 40tel The Group employed a total of 2459 staff as at 31 December 2014 2013  2027.
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
Chairman and NonExecutive Director fees for 2015 The Chairmans fee will be increased from 400000 per annum to 410000 per annum with effect from 1 April 2015.
The basic NonExecutive Director fee will be increased from 56375 per annum to 59000 per annum with effect from 1 April 2015.
The Senior Independent Director receives an additional fee of 10000 per annum.
Committee chairmen receive 15000 per annum and Committee members receive 5000 per annum.
Fees for additional Committee responsibilities remain unchanged from 2014.
John Whittaker does not receive a fee in respect of his position as Deputy Chairman and NonExecutive Director .
The Board has authorised the payment of a management fee of 210000 per annum 2014  200000 to Peel Management Limited for the provision by Peel of a NonExecutive Director and an Alternate Director  and other management and advisory services together with reasonable costs and out of pocket expenses.
It is anticipated that the agreement will be renewed annually thereafter by agreement between the parties.
This payment is disclosed in the related party transactions note on page 139.
Remuneration Committee membership in 2014 The principal responsibilities of the Committee which take full account of the recommendations contained within the Code include Determining the remuneration policy for the Companys Executive Directors and senior executives Determining individual remuneration packages for the Chairman Executive Directors and senior executives Setting appropriately stretching and achievable targets for the Companys incentive schemes in order to motivate executives to deliver high levels of performance in the interests of our shareholders customers and employees Overseeing any significant changes to remuneration policy for the wider employee population The full duties and responsibilities are set out in the terms of reference of the Committee which are available on the Companys website.
The Remuneration Committee currently comprises three independent NonExecutive Directors.
Throughout the year the Committee consisted of Neil Sachdev Chairman Louise Patten and Adle Anderson.
The Chairman Chief Executive Company Secretary  HR Director and on occasion the Chief Financial Officer are invited to attend Committee meetings to contribute to the Committee in its deliberations.
However  no individual is present when his or her remuneration is being determined.
The Remuneration Committee met a total of six times in 2014 including four scheduled meetings and two additional drafting meetings.
A summary of attendance at each scheduled meeting is set out on page 71.
Advisers to the Committee Deloitte LLP were appointed by the Committee as its independent remuneration advisers in October 2013 following a competitive tender process.
During the year  Deloitte provided advice on new reporting regulations market data and other remuneration matters that materially assisted the Committee.
The fees paid to Deloitte in respect of this work in 2014 totalled 51450 calculated on a time and material basis.
Deloitte also provided tax advisory services to the Group in relation to the jointventure in Spain tax planning advisory services in relation to the T rafford Centre and the Midsummer Place acquisition share scheme advice and financial modelling assistance.
Deloitte are a founding member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and adhere to its code of conduct.
Deloitte were appointed directly by the Committee and the Committee is satisfied that the advice received was objective and independent.
The Committee also makes use of various published surveys to help determine appropriate remuneration levels.
On behalf of the Board Neil Sachdev Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 27 February 2015 Intu Properties plc site
Directors remuneration report continued Appendix Policy table extract from the Directors remuneration policy approved by shareholders on 8 May 2014.
A full copy of our Directors remuneration policy can be found on the Companys websitesitewhowearegovernancecorporatepolicies.
Element and link to strategy Operation Maximum potential value Performance metrics Executive Directors Base Salary T o provide an appropriately competitive level of base pay to attract and retain talent.
Reviewed annually .
Salary levels take account of Size and nature of the responsibilities of each role Market pay levels for the role Increases for the rest of the Group The executives experience Changes to the size and complexity of the Group Implications for total remuneration Overall affordability Individual and Company performance The Committee may award an outofcycle increase if it considers it appropriate.
Salaries for 2014 are David Fischel 545480 Matthew Roberts 430090 Base salary increases may be applied taking into account the factors considered as part of the annual review .
There is no maximum increase or opportunity .
For new appointments salaries may be set at a lower level.
In such cases there may be scope for higher than usual salary increases in the first three years as the individual progresses in the role.
None.
Pension
T o help provide for an appropriate retirement benefit.
The Company operates an approved defined contribution pension arrangement.
A cash alternative may be offered in certain circumstances for example where HMRC statutory limits have been reached.
Company pension contribution is 24 per cent of base salary .
The Chief Executive receives an additional 6 per cent of salary in recognition of the additional value of the benefit foregone on the closure of the defined benefit scheme.
This amount was actuarially determined to be costneutral to the Company .
None.
Other benefits T o provide an appropriately competitive level of benefits.
Benefits include a car allowance private medical insurance life assurance and longterm sickness insurance.
Other benefits may be provided if the Committee considers it appropriate.
In the event that an Executive Director is required by the Group to relocate benefits may include but are not limited to relocation allowance and housing allowance.
Car allowance of up to 18000 per annum.
The cost of insurance benefits may vary from year to year depending on the individuals circumstances.
There is no overall maximum benefit value but the Committee aims to ensure that the total value of benefits remains proportionate.
None.
Shortterm incentive T o align annual reward with annual performance and to support retention and alignment with shareholders interests through significant deferral of bonus into shares.
Intu operates a shortterm incentive arrangement with a maximum individual opportunity .
A proportion of any earned bonus is normally deferred in Intu shares vesting over two years and three years subject to continued employment.
The Committee awards dividend equivalents in respect of dividends over the deferral period which may assume reinvestment on a cumulative basis.
The Committee has discretion to apply malus to unvested deferred bonus awards in certain circumstances including if there is a material misstatement in the annual financial statements or a material failure of risk management.
Maximum annual opportunity of 120 per cent of salary .
Executives performance is measured relative to targets in key financial operational and strategic objectives in the year .
The measures selected and their weightings vary each year according to the strategic priorities however at least two thirds will be based on Group financial measures or quantitative reported key performance indicators.
Entry award level for financial measures is normally between 0 and 25 per cent of maximum.
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
Element and link to strategy Operation Maximum potential value Performance metrics Executive Directors continued Longterm incentives T o reward good longterm decisions which help grow the value of Intu over a three to fiveyear horizon and support the retention of key executives Intu operates a Performance Share Plan PSP which was approved by shareholders at the 2013 AGM.
Grants are made to eligible employees at the discretion of the Committee.
Awards can be made as performance shares nilcost options or jointly owned equity  and vest one third onethird one third after three four and five years respectively .
The Committee awards dividend equivalents in respect of dividends over the vesting period which may assume reinvestment on a cumulative basis.
The Committee has discretion to apply malus to unvested awards in certain circumstances including if there is a material misstatement in the annual financial statements or a material failure of risk management by the Company .
Normal maximum grant size of 250 per cent of salary per annum.
In exceptional circumstances opportunity of up to 375 per cent of salary .
T o ensure that participants were not unduly disadvantaged as a result of the move towards longer time horizons the first award under the plan had an opportunity of 375 per cent.
Longterm incentive performance conditions are reviewed on an annual basis and are chosen to be aligned with the longterm success of the business.
The intention is that measures will be one or more of TSR total return NA V growth EPS growth relative total property return or return on capital.
For 2014 awards will be based 50 per cent on relative TSR 50 per cent on total return NA V growth plus dividends If the Committee considers that the level of vesting based on the extent to which the performance conditions have been satisfied is not a fair reflection of underlying financial performance the Committee may adjust the level of vesting upwards or downwards accordingly .
For the current performance measures this applies to the TSR portion only .
Entry vesting is 25 per cent of maximum.
All employee share plans T o align interests of employees with Company performance.
Executive Directors may participate in the HMRC approved Share Incentive Plan on the same basis as all employees.
Participants can contribute up to the relevant HMRC limit.
None.
Non Executive Directors
T o remunerate NonExecutive
Independent NonExecutive Directors The Chairmans fees are determined by the Remuneration Committee.
The NonExecutive Directors fees are determined by the Board.
The level of fees takes into account the time commitment responsibilities market levels and the skills and experience required.
NonExecutive Directors normally receive a basic fee and an additional fee for specific Board responsibilities including membership and chairmanship of committees.
The Chairman is entitled to receive certain benefits in addition to fees.
Additional fees may be paid to NonExecutive Directors on a per diem basis to reflect increased time commitment in certain limited circumstances.
Expenses incurred in the performance of nonexecutive duties for the Company may be reimbursed or paid for directly by the Company  as appropriate including any tax due on the expenses.
None.
Other NonExecutive Directors In addition to the above in certain circumstances NonExecutive Directors. to consultancy services including Alternate Directors.
Such fees may be provided directly to the Director or  in certain circumstances paid to a third party company under a consultancy services agreement.
Such agreements may provide for the payment of an annual fee and reimbursement of expenses.
Such an agreement is currently in place with the Peel Group for the provision of NonExecutive Director services including Alternative Director services.
None.
Intu Properties plc site
The Directors present their Annual Report and the audited financial statements of the Group and Company for the year ended 31 December 2014.
Pages 2 to 86 inclusive of this Annual Report comprise the Directors report that has been drawn up and presented in accordance with English Company Law and the liabilities of the Directors in connection with that report will be subject to the limitations and restrictions provided by such law .
Use of Financial Instruments The Financial review on pages 40 to 46 accounting policies on pages 102 to 105 and note 35 on pages 127 to 132 contain information on the use of financial instruments.
Dividends
The Directors declared an interim ordinary dividend of 4.6 pence 2013  4.6 pence as adjusted for the rights issue bonus factor per share on 31 July 2014 which was paid on 25 November 2014 and have recommended a final ordinary dividend of 9.1 pence per share 2013  9.1 pence as adjusted for the rights issue bonus factor.
Share capital and control of the
Details of the Companys share capital including changes during the year in the issued share capital and details of the rights attaching to the Companys ordinary shares are set out in note 37 on pages 133 and 134.
No shareholder holds securities carrying special rights with regards to control of the Company .
Shares held by the Companys Employee Share Ownership Plan rank pari passu with the shares in issue and have no special rights but voting rights and rights of acceptance of any offer relating to the shares rest with the Plans T rustee and are not exercisable by the employees.
There are no restrictions on voting rights or any arrangements by which with the Companys cooperation financial rights are held by a person other than the shareholder  or any agreements between shareholders known to the Company which may result in restrictions on the transfer of shares or on voting rights.
Going concern After making enquiries the Directors have reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Shareholders attention is drawn to the going concern disclosure contained in the notes to the accounts on page 101.
Internal control The statement on corporate governance on pages 57 to 69 includes the Boards assessment following a review of internal controls and consideration of the 2005 Financial Reporting Councils internal control guidance for Directors.
Directors
The Directors of Intu who held office during the year were as follows
Patrick Burgess Deputy Chairman John Whittaker
David Fischel Matthew Roberts
Adle Anderson Richard Gordon Andrew Huntley Louise Patten Neil Sachdev Andrew Strang John Whittaker and Richard Gordon have appointed Steven Underwood and Raymond Fine respectively as their alternates under the terms of the Companys Articles of Association.
In accordance with provision B.7.1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code all Directors are subject to reelection at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Pursuant to the Articles of Association of the Company  the Company has indemnified the Directors to the full extent allowed by law .
The Company maintains Directors and Officers insurance which is reviewed annually .
Directors report Under a 600 million Revolving Facility agreement dated 25 February 2009 as amended by amendment agreements dated 2 October 200919 February 2010 and 18 November 2011 and further amended and restated on 30 October 2011 between amongst others the Company and HSBC Bank PLC as  Agent on a change of control if directed by a lender  the Agent may by notice to the Company cancel the commitment of that lender and declare the participation of that lender in all outstanding loans together with accrued interest and all other amounts accrued and owing to that lender under the finance documents immediately due and payable.
Under the terms and conditions of the 300 million 2.5 per cent Guaranteed Convertible Bonds issued on 4 October 2012 by Intu Jersey Limited the Issuer and guaranteed by the Company  on a change of control of the Company bondholders would have a right for a limited period of 60 days to exercise their exchange rights at an enhanced exchange price i. exchange price.
In addition bondholders would become entitled for a limited period of 60 days to require the Issuer to redeem their bonds at their principal amount together with accrued and unpaid interest.
The Company is not party to any other significant agreements that would take effect alter or terminate following a change of control of the Company .
The Company does not have any agreements with any Executive Director or employee that would provide compensation for loss of office or employment resulting from a takeover except that provisions of the Company share schemes may cause options and awards outstanding under such schemes to vest on a takeover .
The terms of appointment of the NonExecutive Directors currently provide that in the event of change of control the Directors will be compensated for any additional time commitment in certain limited circumstances to be calculated on a per diem basis.
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
The Company recognises the importance of minimising the adverse impact on the environment of its operations and the obligation to carefully manage energy and water consumption and waste recycling.
The Company strives continuously to improve its environmental performance.
The Environmental Management System and associated Environmental Policy and Guide are regularly reviewed to ensure that the Company maintains its commitment to environmental matters.
Additional disclosures For the purpose of LR 9.8.4CR the only information required to be disclosed by LR 9.8.4R relates to subsection 1 thereof interest capitalised where the amount is nil see note 10 to the accounts.
All other subsections of LR 9.8.4R are not applicable.
Directors disclosure of information to the auditors So far as the Directors are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the auditors are unaware and each Director has taken all reasonable steps to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the auditors are aware of that information.
Auditors
The auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP  have indicated their willingness to continue in office and a resolution seeking to reappoint them will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Annual General Meeting The notice convening the 2015 Annual General Meeting of the Company will be published separately and will be available on the Companys website and distributed to those shareholders who have elected to receive hard copies of shareholder information.
By order of the Board Susan Marsden
27 February 2015 The annual bonus arrangements help develop employees interest in the Companys performance full details of these arrangements are given in the Directors remuneration report on pages Note 49 on pages 145 to 149 contains details of conditional awards of shares under the annual bonus scheme and bonus shares currently outstanding.
Intu operates a nondiscriminatory employment policy and full and fair consideration is given to applications for employment from people with disabilities or other protected characteristics under the Equality Act where they have the appropriate skills and abilities and to the continued employment of staff who become disabled.
Intu encourages the continuous development and training of its employees and the provision of equal opportunities for the training and career development of disabled employees and those with protected characteristics.
Further information relating to employees is given on pages 32 to 37 and in note 8 on page 107.
The Group provides retirement benefits for the majority of its employees.
Details of the Group pension arrangements are set out in note 50 on page 149.
The environment We have a corporate responsibility CR strategy and details of our policies and the Groups aims alongside the latest full version of our annual CR report are to be found on the Companys website.
An overview of the Groups CR activity which includes disclosures relating to greenhouse gas emissions is printed on pages 48 to 53 and a summary booklet is also available for download from the website or on request from the Company Secretarys office.
Additional information relating to the Directors can be found in note 52 on pages 149 and 150 on Directors interests in the Governance section on pages 57 to 69 and in the Directors remuneration report on pages 71 to 83.
The powers of the Directors are determined by UK legislation and the Articles of Association of the Company together with any specific authorities that may be given to the Directors by shareholders from time to time such as the power to allot shares and the power to make market purchases of the Companys shares which are described in note 37 on page 134.
Articles of Association The rules governing the appointment and replacement of Directors are contained in the Companys Articles of Association.
Changes to the Articles of Association must be approved by shareholders in accordance with the legislation in force from time to time.
Substantial shareholdings The table at the foot of the page shows the holdings of major shareholders in Intus issued ordinary shares as at 31 December 2014 and 20 February 2015.
Employees
Intu actively encourages employee involvement and consultation and places emphasis on keeping its employees informed of the Groups activities and financial performance by such means as employee briefings and publication to all staff of relevant information and corporate announcements.
In 2014 Intu conducted one all employee survey covering a range of topics.
More details are provided in the Our people section on page 33.
Substantial shareholders At 31 December 2014 At 20 February 2015
Number of shares notified % interest in share capital Number of shares notified % interest in share capital The Peel Group 288608899 21.92 288608899 21.92 Coronation Asset Management Pty Limited 201971184 15.34 186845054 14.19 The family interests of Sir Donald Gordon 109097936 8.28 109097936 8.28 Black Rock Inc.
79143838 6.01 80060534 6.08 Public Investment Corporation 95619365 7.26 95691533 7.27 Intu Properties plc site
The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report the Directors remuneration report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year .
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group and Company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and Company for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and the Group and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the Directors remuneration report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
Statement of Directors responsibilities The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the financial and corporate governance information as provided on the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair  balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys and the Groups performance business model and strategy .
Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed in the Governance section on pages 54 and 55 confirm that to the best of their knowledge the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group the Directors report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces Signed on behalf of the Board on 27 February 2015 David Fischel Matthew Roberts Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
Accounts
Independent auditors report 88 Consolidated income statement 94 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 95 Balance sheets 96 Statements of changes in equity 97 Statements of cash flows 100 Notes to the accounts 101 Accounts Intu Properties plc site Report on the financial statements Our opinion In our opinion Intu Properties plcs Group financial statements and Company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Companys affairs as at 31 December 2014 and of the Groups profit and the Groups and the Companys cash flows for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
What we have audited Intu Properties plcs financial statements comprise the Group and Company balance sheets as at 31 December 2014 the Group consolidated income statement and consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year then ended the Group and Company statements of changes in equity for the year then ended the Group and Company statements of cash flows for the year then ended and the notes to the accounts which include a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory information.
Certain required disclosures have been presented elsewhere in the Annual Report rather than in the notes to the financial statements.
These are crossreferenced from the financial statements and are identified as audited.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the financial statements is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the Company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit approach
Materiality  Overall Group materiality 96 million which represents 1% of total assets.
Audit scope  The Group and Company financial statements are produced by the Groups central finance department using a single consolidated general ledger  and the whole business was subject to the same audit scope.
Areas of focus  Valuation of Investment Properties Business combinations entered into during the year Application of new accounting standards The scope of our audit and our areas of focus We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland ISAs UK and Ireland.
We designed our audit by determining materiality and assessing the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular  we looked at where the Directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the Directors that may represent a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
The risks of material misstatement that had the greatest effect on our audit including the allocation of our resources and effort are identified as areas of focus in the table below.
We have also set out how we tailored our audit to address these specific areas in order to provide an opinion on the financial statements as a whole and any comments we make on the results of our procedures should be read in this context.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Independent auditors report to the members of Intu Properties plc Accounts Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Area of focus How our audit addressed the area of focus Valuation of Investment Properties Refer to page 65 Audit Committee report page 103 Accounting policies page 101 Critical accounting estimates and assumptions and note 19 to the financial statements.
The existence of significant estimation uncertainty coupled with the fact that only a small percentage difference in individual property valuations when aggregated could result in a material change warrants specific audit focus in this area.
The Groups Investment Properties are all shopping centres and comprise the majority of the assets in the Consolidated balance sheet their carrying value amounting to 8.0bn.
The valuation of the Groups property portfolio is inherently subjective due to among other factors the individual nature of each property its location and the expected future rental revenues for that particular property.
The valuations were carried out by third party valuers CBRE DTZ Knight Frank Jones Lang LaSalle and Cushman and Wakefield the Valuers.
The Valuers were engaged by the Directors and performed their work in accordance with the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors RICS Valuation  Professional
The Valuers used by the Group are wellknown firms with considerable experience of the market in which the Group operates.
In determining a propertys valuation the Valuers take into account property specific current information such as the current tenancy agreements and rental income attached to the asset.
They then apply assumptions as regards yield and current market rent which are influenced by prevailing market yields and comparable market transactions to arrive at the final valuation.
Due to the unique nature of each shopping centre the assumptions to be applied are determined having regard to the individual property characteristics at a granular  unit by unit level as well as considering the qualities of the shopping centre as a whole.
During 2014 significant transactions took place in the market involving shopping centres.
The prices paid indicated that the value of the shopping centres which make up the Groups portfolio had increased compared to the valuation reflected in the Groups 31 December 201 3 balance sheet.
We read the valuation reports for all properties and attended meetings with each of the Valuers.
We confirmed that the valuation approach for each was in accordance with RICS and suitable for use in determining the carrying value in the Consolidated balance sheet.
We assessed the Valuers qualifications and expertise and read their terms of engagement with the Group to determine whether there were any matters that might have affected their objectivity or may have imposed scope limitations upon their work.
We also considered other engagements which might exist between the Group and the Valuers.
We found no evidence to suggest that the objectivity of any Valuer in their performance of the valuations was compromised.
We carried out procedures on a sample basis to test whether property specific current information supplied to the Valuers by management reflected the underlying property records held by the Group and which had been tested during our audit.
We found them to be consistent.
Our work focused on the largest properties in the portfolio and those properties where the assumptions used and  or year on year capital value movement suggested a possible outlier versus market data for the shopping centre sector .
We compared the investment yields used by the Valuers to an estimated range of expected yields determined via reference to published benchmarks.
We also considered the reasonableness of other assumptions that are not so readily comparable to published benchmarks such as Estimated Rental Value void rates and rent free periods.
Finally we evaluated year on year movements in capital value with reference to published benchmarks.
Where assumptions were outside the expected range or otherwise deemed unusual andor valuations appeared to experience unexpected movements we undertook further investigations and when necessary held further discussions with the Valuers.
In this way professional scepticism was exercised in our evaluation of whether assumptions were appropriate in light of the evidence provided by significant transactions which had taken place in the market during the year .
It was evident from our interaction with management and the Valuers and our review of the valuation reports that close attention had been paid to each propertys individual characteristics at a granular  unit by unit level as well as considering the overall quality geographic location and desirability of the asset as a whole.
The evaluation of what were the right assumptions to apply to any given property included determining the level of impact that recent significant market transactions should have on each individual propertys valuation given its unique characteristics.
We saw evidence that alternative assumptions had been considered and evaluated by management and the Valuers before determining the final valuation.
We concluded that the assumptions used in the valuations were supportable in light of available and comparable market evidence.
Accounts
Intu Properties plc site Independent auditors report to the members of Intu Properties plc continued Area of focus How our audit addressed the area of focus Business combinations entered into during the year Refer to page 64 Audit Committee report page 105 Accounting policies and note 40 to the financial statements.
On 1 May 2014 the Group acquired 100% interests in shopping centres at Derby and Sprucefield and a 50% joint venture interest in the Merry Hill shopping centre from Westfield.
The consideration paid was 854.9m.
The acquisition has been accounted for as a single business combination with a gain on acquisition of 1.6m calculated by reference to the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired.
The consolidated financial statements include disclosures relating to the business combination required by IFRS 3 Business combinations.
Following acquisition the tenancy details and general ledger balances for each of the entities acquired were migrated onto the Groups systems.
Prior to migration balances were mapped to the Groups own general ledger account lines with adjustments made as required to ensure that the balances entering the system were in line with the Groups accounting policies.
Due to the volume of data being integrated onto the Groups systems the adjustments required and the level of manual processing there exists a risk that the financial information in relation to entities acquired during the year may not have been migrated on to the Group accounting systems accurately and completely resulting in a risk of material misstatement.
As a result the migration of financial data relating to the entities acquired onto the Groups systems as well as the accounting for the business combination was an area of focus in our audit.
We inspected the purchase agreements and assessed managements determination of the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired.
We focused on the fair value of the acquired properties including the valuation methodology applied and the assumptions within the acquisition date valuation.
We considered the reasons for the movements in the valuation between the acquisition date and the 30 June 2014 valuation point in order to assess whether there was information which came to light within the two month period which should have impacted on the 1 May 2014 valuations.
We also reviewed the disclosures in respect of the acquisitions from Westfield which were included in the 31 December 2014 financial statements.
Our assessment included consideration of whether the acquisition of the 50% share in Merry Hill formed part of the single business acquired.
We noted that the acquisitions were acquired from one vendor and announced as one transaction on the same day.
We concluded that the accounting and disclosures were in accordance with applicable accounting standards.
The 31 December 2014 year end is the first for which we have been required to audit the Merry Hill joint venture intu Derby and Sprucefield both for the purposes of the Group audit and for the purposes of the audits of the individual subsidiary entities which were acquired.
We therefore performed first year audit procedures which focused on Evaluation and testing of the controls over the transfer of accounting records onto the Groups general ledger and lease data onto the Groups lease system and Assessment of adjustments posted during the transfer process in order to bring the numbers in line with the Groups accounting policies.
There were no concerns arising from our work over the migration of data onto the Groups systems.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Area of focus How our audit addressed the area of focus Application of new accounting standards Refer to page 64 Audit Committee report page 101 Accounting convention and basis of preparation and notes 22 and 48 to the financial statements.
The consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 December 201 4 are the first to be prepared in accordance with the requirements of new standards on accounting for joint ventures and joint operations IFRS 10 1 1  1 2 and the revised IAS 27 and 28.
As a result the Groups investments in joint ventures are subject to equity accounting for the first time as opposed to being proportionally accounted for in the income statement and balance sheet of the Group.
The adoption of the new standards involves the representation of prior period amounts for balances related to joint ventures.
Joint ventures entered into during the year ended 31 December 201 4 are also required to be equity accounted for .
The standard requires disclosure of how the 201 4 Group financial statements would have been presented prior to the representation as a result of IFRS 1 1.
The comparatives have been represented for the changes in classification and further details are provided in note 48.
An additional balance sheet showing the represented 1 January 201 3 position has also been given.
Due to the judgement involved in determining the appropriate classification of an investments as a joint venture or joint operation and due to the size and number of balances being re presented the application of the new accounting standards was an area of focus in our audit.
We performed an assessment as to whether the requirements of IFRS 10 1 1 1 2 and the revised IAS 27  28 had been appropriately reflected in the consolidated financial statements.
This included assessing whether balances related to joint ventures which have moved from proportional consolidation to the equity method of accounting had been correctly represented in accordance with IFRS 1 2.
We also assessed whether the numbers which show how the 2014 Group financial statements would have been presented prior to the representation were in line with the requirements of the accounting standard.
Our procedures covered all joint ventures as at 31 December 2014 including the intu Uxbridge Parque Principado and intu Merry Hill joint ventures entered into during the year .
We concluded that the accounting treatment adopted and disclosures included in the financial statements are in accordance with the new standards.
For those joint ventures entered into during the year we assessed the classification as a joint venture with a particular focus on intu Uxbridge where the Groups share is 20%.
We concluded that the classification in each case is supported by the Groups ability to exercise joint control.
How we tailored the audit scope In establishing the overall approach to our audit we assessed the risk of material misstatement taking into account the nature likelihood and potential magnitude of any misstatement.
Following this assessment we applied professional judgement to determine the extent of testing required over each balance in the financial statements.
We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the geographic structure of the Group the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which the Group operates.
Although the Group has some interests in shopping centre operations outside the UK the Group is structured as a single reporting unit with a centralised accounting function therefore the whole business was subject to the same audit scope.
The Group and Company financial statements are produced using numbers which are maintained on a single consolidated trial balance by the Groups finance department.
The majority of the underlying accounting records are maintained on the Groups single general ledger .
The intu Derby intu Merry Hill and Sprucefield centres were in scope for the first time this year  having been purchased during 2014.
For Manchester Arndale Cribbs Causeway Centaurus Retail Park Parque Principado and St Davids Cardiff rental income and property expense numbers are submitted quarterly by external property managers to the Groups finance department who then review and enter the numbers onto the Groups general ledger .
We performed auditing procedures over the numbers within those quarterly submissions and on the process by which they are entered onto the Groups general ledger .
The quarterly submissions for Parque Principado were in scope for the first time this year .
Materiality
The scope of our audit is influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures and to evaluate the effect of misstatements both individually and on the financial statements as a whole.
Accounts
Intu Properties plc site Independent auditors report to the members of Intu Properties plc continued Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Overall Group materiality 96 million 201 3 82 million.
How we determined it 1% of total assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied In arriving at this judgement we have had regard to the carrying value of the Groups assets acknowledging that the primary measurement attribute of the Group is the carrying value of investment property.
This represents a consistent yearonyear basis for determining materiality.
In addition we set a specific materiality level of 8 million 201 3 7 million for rental income and expenses.
In arriving at this judgement we have had regard to underlying operating profit acknowledging that this is a secondary measurement attribute of the
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 8 million 201 3 8 million as well as misstatements below that amount that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the Directors statement set out on page 101 in relation to going concern.
We have nothing to report having performed our review.
As noted in the Directors statement the Directors have concluded that it is appropriate to prepare the financial statements using the going concern basis of accounting.
The going concern basis presumes that the Group and Company have adequate resources to remain in operation and that the Directors intend them to do so for at least one year from the date the financial statements were signed.
As part of our audit we have concluded that the Directors use of the going concern basis is appropriate.
However  because not all future events or conditions can be predicted these statements are not a guarantee as to the Groups and Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
Other required reporting Consistency of other in formation Companies Act 2006 opinions In our opinion the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements.
ISAs UK and Ireland reporting Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion Information in the Annual Report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited financial statements or apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group and company acquired in the course of performing our audit or is otherwise misleading.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility. the statement given by the Directors on page 57  in accordance with provision C.
1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair  balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for members to assess the Groups and companys performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group and company acquired in the course of performing our audit.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility. by us to the Audit Committee.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Adequacy of accounting records and information and explanations received Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Directors remuneration Directors remuneration report  Companies Act 2006 opinion In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Other Companies Act 2006 reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Corporate governance statement Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the part of the Corporate Governance Statement relating to the companys compliance with 10 provisions of the UK Corporate Governance
We have nothing to report having performed our review.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Our responsibilities and those of the directors As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities set out on page 86 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and ISAs UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
What an audit of financial statements involves An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error .
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups and the companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
We primarily focus our work in these areas by assessing the Directors judgements against available evidence forming our own judgements and evaluating the disclosures in the financial statements.
We test and examine information using sampling and other auditing techniques to the extent we consider necessary to provide a reasonable basis for us to draw conclusions.
We obtain audit evidence through testing the effectiveness of controls substantive procedures or a combination of both.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Ranjan Sriskandan Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
27 February 201 5
The maintenance and integrity of the Intu Properties plc website is the responsibility of the Directors the work carried out by the auditors does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditors accept no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Accounts
Intu Properties plc site
Represented
Revenue 4 536.4 511.6 Net rental income 4 362.6 356.2 Net other income 5 4.8 3.7 Revaluation of investment and development property 19 567.8 109.9 Gain on acquisition of businesses 40 1.6 Gain on disposal of subsidiaries 41 0.6 Administration expenses  ongoing 30.8 27.6 Administration expenses  exceptional 6 13.8 21.2 Operating profit 892.8 421.0 Finance costs 10 197.1 192.6 Finance income 11 11.9 0.6 Other finance costs 12 56.8 164.5 Change in fair value of financial instruments 13 157.6 272.3 Net finance costs 399.6 84.2 Profit before tax joint ventures and associates 493.2 336.8 Share of posttax profit of joint ventures 22 99.7 26.1 Share of posttax profit of associates 24 0.8 0.5 Profit before tax 593.7 363.4 Current tax 14 0.5 0.8 Deferred tax 14 6.6 1.4 Taxation 14 6.1 0.6 Profit for the year 599.8 364.0 Attributable to Owners of Intu Properties plc 586.2 359.8 Noncontrolling interests 13.6 4.2 Basic earnings per share 17 48.0p 34.5p Diluted earnings per share 17 46.3p 32.0p Details of underlying earnings are presented in the underlying profit statement on page 1 57 .
Underlying earnings per share are shown in note 1 7c.
Consolidated income statement for the year ended 31 December 2014 Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information
Intu Properties plc site
Profit for the year 599.8 364.0 Other comprehensive income Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Revaluation of other investments 25 21.1 8.1 Exchange differences 7.0 8.1 T ax relating to components of other comprehensive income 14 6.6 1.6 T otal items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss 21.5 1.6 Other comprehensive income for the year 21.5 1.6 T otal comprehensive income for the year 621.3 362.4 Attributable to Owners of Intu Properties plc 608.1 359.2 Noncontrolling interests 13.2 3.2 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 December 2014 Accounts Intu Properties plc site Balance sheets as at 31 December 2014
Group
Represented
Group
Represented
Group
Company
Company
Noncurrent assets Investment and development property 19 8019.6 7278.7 6734.2 Plant and equipment 20 5.1 5.5 5.6 3.9 4.2 Investment in group companies 21    2704.7 2511.0 Investment in joint ventures 22 851.5 209.5 191.9 Investment in associates 24 38.0 35.8 40.9 Other investments 25 189.7 154.9 148.8 Goodwill 26 4.0 8.2 4.0 Deferred tax 36    0.4 Derivative financial instruments 29 9.0 25.1 21.2 Trade and other receivables 27 99.7 99.2 92.5 9216.6 7816.9 7239.1 2709.0 2515.2 Current assets Trading property  0.2 0.2 Trade and other receivables 27 114.7 78.1 63.3 1286.8 1129.4 Derivative financial instruments 29 0.7 0.7 0.7 Shortterm investments  69.3 Cash and cash equivalents 28 230.0 156.7 182.4 1.0 0.3 T otal assets 9562.0 8121.9 7485.7 3996.8 3644.9 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 30 251.5 238.1 211.3 394.1 555.9 Current tax liabilities 0.6 0.9 0.4 0.4 Borrowings 31 21.3 70.9 94.1 Derivative financial instruments 29 80.7 10.1 19.1 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 31 4332.7 3944.0 3659.1 230.0 285.0 Derivative financial instruments 29 275.8 220.5 492.3 25.6 12.8 Other payables 2.6 4.3 3.2 Deferred tax 36  12.0 4611.1 4180.8 4154.6 255.6 297.8 T otal liabilities 4965.2 4500.8 4479.5 650.1 853.7 Net assets 4596.8 3621.1 3006.2 3346.7 2791.2
Share premium 37 1222.0 695.6 577.4 1222.0 695.6 Treasury shares 39 45.1 48.2 43.9 45.1 48.2 Convertible bonds 33  143.7 143.7  143.7 Retained earnings 2330.7 1740.3 1528.9 1450.0 1287.4 Attributable to owners of Intu Properties plc 4524.0 3518.8 2977.0 3346.7 2791.2 Noncontrolling interests 72.8 102.3 29.2 T otal equity 4596.8 3621.1 3006.2 3346.7 2791.2 These consolidated financial statements have been approved for issue by the Board of Directors on 27 February 201 5.
David Fischel Matthew Roberts
Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer
The notes on pages 101 to 1 50 form part of these consolidated financial statements.
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information
Intu Properties plc site Statements of changes in equity for the year ended 31 December 2014 Attributable to owners of Intu Properties plc
Share capital
Treasury shares
Other
Retained earnings
Non controlling interests
At 1 January 2014 486.9 695.6 48.2 143.7 500.5 1740.3 3518.8 102.3 3621.1 Profit for the year      586.2 586.2 13.6 599.8 Other comprehensive income Revaluation of other investments note 25     21.1  21.1  21.1 Exchange differences     7.4  7.4 0.4 7.0 T ax relating to components of other comprehensive income T otal comprehensive income Conversion of bond note 33 21.2 122.5  143.7 Other ordinary shares issued 150.3 403.9     554.2  554.2 Dividends note 16      155.9 155.9  155.9 Interest on convertible bonds Sharebased payments Acquisition of treasury shares   1.0    1.0  1.0 Disposal of treasury shares   4.1   3.9 0.2  0.2 Noncontrolling interest additions        27.2 27.2 Distribution to noncontrolling interest        1.2 1.2 Disposal of subsidiaries Realisation of merger reserve At 31 December 2014 658.4 1222.0 45.1  358.0 2330.7 4524.0 72.8 4596.8 Accounts Intu Properties plc site Statements of changes in equity for the year ended 31 December 2014 continued Attributable to owners of Intu Properties plc
Share capital
Treasury shares
Other
Retained earnings
Non controlling interests
At 1 January 2013 434.2 577.4 43.9 143.7 336.7 1528.9 2977.0 29.2 3006.2 Profit for the year      359.8 359.8 4.2 364.0 Other comprehensive income Revaluation of other investments note 25     8.1  8.1  8.1 Exchange differences     7.1  7.1 1.0 8.1 T ax relating to components of other comprehensive income T otal comprehensive income Ordinary shares issued 52.7 118.2   164.4  335.3  335.3 Dividends note 16      142.1 142.1  142.1 Interest on convertible bonds note 33      5.8 5.8  5.8 Sharebased payments Acquisition of treasury shares   7.0    7.0  7.0 Disposal of treasury shares   2.7   2.5 0.2  0.2 Noncontrolling interest additions note 40        71.1 71.1 Distribution to noncontrolling interest        1.2 1.2 At 31 December 2013 486.9 695.6 48.2 143.7 500.5 1740.3 3518.8 102.3 3621.1 Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information
Intu Properties plc site Statements of changes in equity for the year ended 31 December 2014 Attributable to owners of Intu Properties plc
Share capital
Treasury shares
Other
Retained earnings
At 1 January 2014 486.9 695.6 48.2 143.7 225.8 1287.4 2791.2 Profit for the year      158.4 158.4 T otal comprehensive income for the year      158.4 158.4 Conversion of bond note 33 21.2 122.5  143.7 Other ordinary shares issued 150.3 403.9     554.2 Dividends note 16      155.9 155.9 Interest on convertible bonds note 33      2.9 2.9 Sharebased payments note 49      2.5 2.5 Acquisition of treasury shares   1.0    1.0 Disposal of treasury shares   4.1   3.9 0.2 Realisation of merger reserve note 38     164.4 164.4 At 31 December 2014 658.4 1222.0 45.1  61.4 1450.0 3346.7 Attributable to owners of Intu Properties plc
Share capital
Treasury shares
Other
Retained earnings
At 1 January 2013 434.2 577.4 43.9 143.7 61.4 1383.0 2555.8 Profit for the year      52.8 52.8 T otal comprehensive income for the year      52.8 52.8 Ordinary shares issued 52.7 118.2   164.4  335.3 Dividends note 16      142.1 142.1 Interest on convertible bonds note 33      5.8 5.8 Sharebased payments note 49      2.0 2.0 Acquisition of treasury shares   7.0    7.0 Disposal of treasury shares   2.7   2.5 0.2 At 31 December 2013 486.9 695.6 48.2 143.7 225.8 1287.4 2791.2 Accounts Intu Properties plc site Statements of cash flows for the year ended 31 December 2014
Group
Represented
Group
Company
Company
Cash generated from operations 44 292.7 300.6 349.5 254.5 Interest paid 244.6 335.2 6.3 7.9 Interest received 8.8 0.6 Taxation 0.4 0.7 Cash flows from operating activities 56.5 34.7 355.8 262.4 Cash flows from investing activities Purchase and development of property  plant and equipment 69.7 44.1 1.4 1.0 Sale of property  0.1 Acquisition of businesses net of cash acquired 40 851.3 382.1 Acquisitions of other investments 3.8 Investment in subsidiaries 21   182.8 197.2 Redemption of preference shares 21   197.2 Realisation of shortterm investments 69.3 Cash received on part disposal of intu Uxbridge net of cash sold with business 41 174.1 Parque Principado cash received net of cash reclassified 41 11.6 Investments in joint ventures 22 0.4 0.5 Repayment of capital by joint venture 22 14.3 Loan advances to joint ventures 22 97.6 0.4 Loan repayments by joint ventures 22 52.7 9.4 Distributions from joint ventures 22 4.9 Cash flows from investing activities 719.1 417.6 13.0 198.2 Cash flows from financing activities Issue of ordinary shares 492.0 273.0 492.0 273.0 Acquisition of treasury shares 1.0 0.9 1.0 0.9 Sale of treasury shares 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Noncontrolling interest funding received 27.2 71.1 Cash transferred to restricted accounts 15.9 Borrowings drawn 989.4 2051.6 55.0 285.0 Borrowings repaid 675.1 1875.3 Interest on convertible bonds 33 2.9 5.8 2.9 5.8 Equity dividends paid 89.8 90.9 89.8 90.9 Cash flows from financing activities 724.1 423.0 343.5 460.6 Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 0.1 0.1 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 61.4 29.4 0.7 Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 28 151.1 180.5 0.3 0.3 Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 28 212.5 151.1 1.0 0.3 Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information
Intu Properties plc site 1 Accounting convention and basis of preparation These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRS IFRIC interpretations and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The Directors have taken advantage of the exemption offered by Section 408 of the Companies Act not to present a separate income statement or statement of comprehensive income for the Company.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by the revaluation of property availableforsale investments and certain other financial assets and liabilities.
A summary of the more important Group accounting policies is set out in note 2.
The accounting policies used are consistent with those applied in the last annual financial statements as amended to reflect the adoption of new standards amendments and interpretations which became effective in the year .
During 2014 the following relevant standards amendments and interpretations endorsed by the EU became effective for the first time for the Groups 31 December 2014 financial statements IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statements IFRS 1 1 Joint Arrangements IFRS 1 2 Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities IAS 27 Separate Financial Statements revised IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures revised IAS 32 Financial Instruments Presentation amendment IAS 36 Impairment of Assets amendment and Amendments to IFRS 10 IFRS 1 1 and IFRS 1 2 transition guidance.
IFRS 1 1 removes the choice of accounting treatments previously available under IAS 31 Interests in Joint Ventures.
This has impacted the Groups accounting policy in respect of joint ventures but has had no impact for joint operations.
The Groups interests in joint ventures are now accounted for using the equity method with the income statement and balance sheet showing a single line for the Groups share of profit and the net investment in joint ventures respectively rather than proportionally consolidating the Groups share of assets liabilities income and expenses on a linebyline basis.
The Groups interest in joint operations is accounted for by including its interest in assets liabilities income and expenses on a linebyline basis.
This change in accounting policy has had no impact on net assets or profit for the year ended 31 December 201 3.
The comparatives have been represented for the changes in classification and further details are provided in note 48.
An additional balance sheet showing the represented 31 December 201 2 position which also reflects the position at 1 January 201 3 has also been given.
Other pronouncements have not had a material impact on the financial statements but have resulted in changes to presentation or disclosure.
A number of standards have been issued but are not yet adopted by the EU and so are not available for early adoption.
The most significant of these are IFRS 9 Financial Instruments along with related amendments to other IFRSs and IFRS 1 5 Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
Based on the Groups current circumstances these standards are not expected to have a material impact on the financial statements.
Use of estimates and assumptions The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the reporting period.
Although these estimates are based on managements best knowledge of the amount event or actions actual results ultimately may differ from those estimates.
In particular  significant judgement is required in the use of estimates and assumptions in the valuation and accounting for investment and development property and derivative financial instruments.
Additional detail on these two areas is provided in the relevant accounting policy in note 2 and in other notes to the financial statements such as investment properties and derivatives.
Going concern The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Strategic review on pages 18 to 25.
The financial position of the Group its cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the Financial review on pages 40 to 46.
In addition note 35 includes the Groups risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and hedging activities its exposures to liquidity risk and details of its capital structure.
The Group prepares regular forecasts and projections which include sensitivity analysis taking into account a number of downside risks to the forecast including reasonably possible changes in trading performance and asset values and assesses the potential impact of these on the Groups liquidity position and available resources.
In preparing the most recent projections factors taken into account include 260 million of cash including the Groups share of cash in joint ventures of 30 million and 4 1 1 million of undrawn facilities at 31 December 2014.
The refinancing of debt completed in the year  extending the Groups debt maturity profile to 8.4 years along with the relatively longterm and stable nature of the cash flows receivable under tenant leases were also factored into the forecasts.
After reviewing the most recent projections and the sensitivity analysis the Directors have concluded that there is a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Thus we continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the Groups financial statements.
Notes to the accounts Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 2 Accounting policies  Group and Company Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial information includes the Company and its subsidiaries and their interests in joint arrangements and associates.
All intragroup transactions balances and unrealised gains on transactions between Group companies are eliminated on consolidation.
A subsidiary is an entity which the Company controls that is when it is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group and are deconsolidated from the date that control ceases.
The Companys investment in Group companies is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
A joint arrangement is an arrangement of which two or more parties have joint control.
Joint control is the contractually agreed sharing of control of an arrangement where decisions about the relevant activities require the unanimous consent of the parties sharing joint control.
A joint operation is a joint arrangement where the parties that have joint control of the arrangement have rights to the assets and obligations for the liabilities relating to the arrangement.
The Groups interest in a joint operation is accounted for by consolidating the Groups share of the assets liabilities income and expenses on a linebyline basis.
A joint venture is a joint arrangement where the parties that have joint control of the arrangement have rights to the net assets of the arrangement.
The Groups interest in a joint venture is accounted for using the equity method as described below.
An associate is an entity over which the Company either directly or indirectly is in a position to exercise significant influence.
Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and operating policies of the entity but is not control or joint control of those policies.
The Groups interest in an associate is accounted for using the equity method as described below.
Under the equity method of accounting interests in joint ventures and associates are initially recognised at cost and adjusted thereafter to recognise the Groups share of the postacquisition profits or losses and movements in other comprehensive income.
Loan balances relating to longterm funding from Group companies to joint ventures and associates are presented on the face of the balance sheet as part of the investment.
A noncontrolling interest is the equity in a subsidiary not attributable directly or indirectly to the Company.
Non controlling interests are presented within equity separately from the amounts attributable to owners of the Company.
Profit or loss and each component of other comprehensive income is attributed to owners of the Company and to noncontrolling interests in the appropriate proportions.
Foreign currencies Items included in the financial statements of each of the Groups entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which it operates.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in pounds sterling which is the Groups presentation currency.
The assets and liabilities of foreign entities are translated into pounds sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the reporting date and their income statement and cash flows are translated at the average rate for the period.
Exchange differences arising are dealt with in other comprehensive income.
At entity level transactions in currencies other than an entitys functional currency are recorded at the exchange rate prevailing at the transaction dates.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from settlement of these transactions and from retranslation of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the income statement except where these relate to loans to foreign subsidiary entities considered to be part of the net investment in those entities in which case these amounts as recorded through other comprehensive income.
Revenue recognition The Group recognises revenue when the amount of revenue can be reliably measured and it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the Group.
Rental income receivable is recognised on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Directly attributable lease incentives are recognised within rental income on the same basis.
Contingent rents being those lease payments that are not fixed at the inception of a lease for example increases arising on rent reviews or rents linked to tenant revenues are recorded as income in the periods in which they are earned.
Rent reviews are recognised as income from the date of the rent review based on managements estimates.
Estimates are derived from knowledge of market rents for comparable properties determined on an individual property basis and updated for progress of negotiations.
Service charge income is recognised on an accruals basis in line with the service being provided.
Revenue on the sale of trading property is recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the buyer .
This will normally take place on exchange of contracts.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 2 Accounting policies  Group and Company continued Interest income Interest income is accrued on a time basis by reference to the principal outstanding and the effective interest rate.
Dividend income Dividend income is recognised when the right to receive payment has been established.
Sharebased payments The cost of granting share options and other sharebased remuneration is recognised through the income statement with reference to the fair value of the equity instrument assessed at the date of grant.
This cost is charged to the income statement over the vesting period of the awards.
All awards are accounted for as equity settled with the credit entry being taken directly to equity.
For awards with nonmarket related criteria the charge is reversed if it appears probable that the performance criteria will not be met.
For share options an option pricing model is used applying assumptions around expected yields forfeiture rates exercise price and volatility.
Where the share awards have nonmarket related performance criteria the Group has used the Black Scholes option valuation model to establish the relevant fair values.
Where the share awards have a TSR market related performance criteria the Group has used the MonteCarlo simulation valuation model to establish the relevant fair values.
Investments held in the Companys own shares in connection with employee share plans and other sharebased payment arrangements are accounted for as treasury shares see accounting policy below.
Exceptional items Exceptional items are those items that in the Directors view are required to be separately disclosed by virtue of their size nature or incidence to enable a full understanding of the Groups financial performance.
Taxation
Current tax is the amount payable on the taxable income for the year and any adjustment in respect of prior years.
It is calculated using rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is provided using the balance sheet liability method in respect of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the balance sheet and their tax bases.
T emporary differences are not provided on the initial recognition of assets or liabilities that affect neither accounting nor taxable profit and differences relating to investments in subsidiaries to the extent that they will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax is determined using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date and are expected to apply when the related deferred tax asset is realised or the deferred tax liability is settled.
Deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that management believe it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset only when they relate to taxes levied by the same authority and the Group intends to settle them on a net basis.
T ax is included in the income statement except when it relates to items recognised directly in other comprehensive income or equity in which case the related tax is also recognised directly in other comprehensive income or equity.
Investment and development property Investment and development property is owned or leased by the Group and held for longterm rental income and capital appreciation.
The Group has elected to use the fair value model.
Properties are initially recognised at cost and subsequently revalued at the balance sheet date to fair value as determined by professionally qualified external valuers on the basis of market value.
Valuations conform with the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors RICS Valuation  Professional Standards 2014.
The main estimates and judgements underlying the valuations are described in note 19.
Properties held under leases are stated gross of the recognised finance lease liability.
The cost of investment and development property includes capitalised interest and other directly attributable outgoings incurred during development.
Interest is capitalised on the basis of the average rate of interest paid on the relevant debt outstanding.
Interest ceases to be capitalised on the date of practical completion.
Gains or losses arising from changes in the fair value of investment and development property are recognised in the income statement.
Depreciation is not provided in respect of investment and development property.
Gains or losses arising on the sale of investment and development property are recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the buyer .
The gain or loss recognised is the proceeds received less the carrying value of the property and costs directly associated with the sale.
Leases
Leases are classified according to the substance of the transaction.
A lease that transfers substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee is classified as a finance lease.
All other leases are normally classified as operating leases.
Group as lessee Finance leases of investment property are accounted for as finance leases and recognised as an asset and an obligation to pay future minimum lease payments.
The investment property asset is included in the balance sheet at fair value gross of the recognised finance lease liability.
Contingent rents are recognised as they accrue.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 2 Accounting policies  Group and Company continued Other finance lease assets are capitalised at the lower of the fair value of the leased asset or the present value of the minimum lease payments and depreciated over the shorter of the lease term and the useful life of the asset.
Lease payments are allocated between the liability and finance charges so as to achieve a constant financing rate.
Rentals payable under operating leases are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Group as lessor Investment properties are leased to tenants under operating leases with rental income being recognised on a straightline basis over the lease term.
For more detail see the revenue recognition accounting policy.
Plant and equipment Plant and equipment consists of vehicles fixtures fittings and other equipment.
Plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Depreciation is charged to the income statement on a straight line basis over an assets estimated useful life up to a maximum of five years.
Other investments Availableforsale investments being investments intended to be held for an indefinite period are initially and subsequently measured at fair value.
For listed investments fair value is the current bid market value at the reporting date.
For unlisted investments where there is no active market fair value is assessed using an appropriate methodology as described in note 25.
Gains or losses arising from changes in fair value are included in other comprehensive income except to the extent that losses are considered to represent a permanent impairment in which case they are recognised in the income statement.
Upon disposal accumulated fair value adjustments are reclassified from reserves to the income statement.
Goodwill
Goodwill arising on business combinations is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Goodwill is assessed for impairment on an annual basis.
Impairment of assets The Groups assets are reviewed at each balance sheet date to determine whether events or changes in circumstances exist that indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable.
If such an indication exists the assets recoverable amount is estimated.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs to sell and its value in use.
An impairment loss is recognised in the income statement for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows.
At each balance sheet date the Group reviews whether there is any indication that an impairment loss recognised in previous periods may have decreased.
If such an indication exists the assets recoverable amount is estimated.
An impairment loss recognised in prior periods is reversed if and only if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the assets recoverable amount.
In this case the assets carrying amount is increased to its recoverable amount but not exceeding the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised.
The reversal of an impairment loss is recognised in the income statement.
No impairment reversals are permitted to be recognised on goodwill.
Trading property T rading property comprises those properties either intended for sale or in the process of construction for sale.
T rading property is carried at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Trade receivables T rade receivables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost.
The Directors exercise judgement as to the collectability of trade receivables and determine if it is appropriate to impair these assets.
Factors such as days past due credit status of the counterparty and historical evidence of collection are considered.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand deposits with banks whether restricted or unrestricted and other shortterm liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.
Trade payables T rade payables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost.
Pensions
The costs of defined contribution schemes and contributions to personal plans are charged to the income statement in the year in which they are incurred.
The Group has no defined benefit scheme.
Borrowings
Borrowings are recognised initially at their net proceeds on issue and subsequently carried at amortised cost with the exception of certain convertible bonds as detailed in note 33.
Any transaction costs and premiums or discounts are recognised over the contractual life using the effective interest method.
In the event of early repayment all unamortised transaction costs are recognised immediately in the income statement.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 2 Accounting policies  Group and Company continued Derivative financial instruments The Group uses derivative financial instruments to manage exposure to interest rate and foreign exchange risk.
They are initially recognised on the trade date at fair value and subsequently remeasured at fair value.
In assessing fair value the Group uses its judgement to select suitable valuation techniques and make assumptions which are mainly based on market conditions existing at the balance sheet date.
The fair value of interest rate swaps is calculated by discounting estimated future cash flows based on the terms and maturity of each contract and using market interest rates for similar instruments at the measurement date.
These values are tested for reasonableness based upon broker or counterparty quotes.
Amounts paid under derivative financial instruments currently for the Group this relates to interest rate swaps both on obligations as they fall due and on early settlement are recognised in the income statement as finance costs.
Fair value movements on revaluation of derivative financial instruments are shown in the income statement through changes in fair value of financial instruments.
The Group does not currently apply hedge accounting to its interest rate swaps.
Share capital Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new ordinary shares are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds.
Dividends
Dividends are recognised when they become legally payable.
In the case of interim dividends to owners this is the date of payment.
In the case of final dividends this is when declared by shareholders at the AGM.
Convertible bonds Convertible bonds are assessed on issue as to whether they should be classified as a financial liability as equity or as a compound financial instrument with both debt and equity components.
This assessment is based on the terms of the bond and in accordance with IAS 32.
Each bond is assessed separately and the detailed accounting treatment of each is given in note 33.
Treasury shares Investments held in the Companys own shares are deducted from equity at cost.
Where such shares are subsequently sold any consideration received is recognised directly in equity.
Currentnoncurrent classification Current assets include assets held primarily for trading purposes cash and cash equivalents and assets expected to be realised in or intended for sale or consumption in the course of the Groups operating cycle.
All other assets are classified as non current assets.
Current liabilities include liabilities held primarily for trading purposes liabilities expected to be settled in the course of the Groups operating cycle and those liabilities due within one year from the reporting date.
All other liabilities are classified as non current liabilities.
Business combinations Business combinations are accounted for in accordance with IFRS 3 Business Combinations using the acquisition method of accounting.
The consideration transferred for the acquisition of a subsidiary is the fair values of the assets transferred the liabilities incurred and the equity interests issued by the Group.
The consideration transferred includes the fair value of any asset or liability resulting from a contingent consideration arrangement.
Costs associated with the acquisition are expensed as incurred.
Identifiable assets and liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured initially at their fair values at the acquisition date.
Goodwill arising on an acquisition comprises the excess of the consideration over the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities acquired.
Where the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities acquired exceeds the consideration this difference is recognised in the income statement at the date of the acquisition.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 3 Segmental reporting Operating segments are determined based on the internal reporting and operational management of the Group.
The Group is primarily a UK shopping centre focused business and has one reportable operating segment.
The principal profit indicator used to measure performance is net rental income.
An analysis of net rental income is given in note 4.
The Groups geographical segments are set out below.
This represents where the Groups assets reside and where revenues are generated.
In the case of investments this reflects where the investee is located.
Revenue Noncurrent assets
Represented
United Kingdom 532.7 508.2 8934.4 7453.2 United States   184.7 153.9 India   38.8 36.8 536.4 511.6 9207.6 7791.8 1 Noncurrent assets excluding financial instruments.
4 Net rental income
Rent receivable 441.1 430.3 Service charge income 88.2 81.3 Facilities management income from joint ventures 7.1 Revenue 536.4 511.6 Rent payable 22.2 22.4 Service charge costs 98.7 91.8 Facilities management costs recharged to joint ventures 7.1 Other nonrecoverable costs 45.8 41.2 Net rental income 362.6 356.2 5 Net other income
Dividends received from other investments 6.1 6.3 Management fees 1.6 intu Digital 2.9 2.6 Net other income 4.8 3.7 6 Administration expenses  exceptional Exceptional administration expenses in the year totalled 1 3.8 million 201 3  21.2 million.
This includes costs relating to corporate transactions principally the acquisition of intu Merry Hill intu Derby and Sprucefield 1 1.8 million including 3.8 million of stamp duty.
See note 2 for definition.
7 Operating profit Operating profit is arrived at after charging Staff costs note 8 72.3 44.3 Depreciation 2.1 1.8 Remuneration paid to the Companys auditors note 9 1.6 0.9 Accounts Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 8 Employees information
Group
Wages and salaries 61.3 36.5 Social security costs 5.8 3.9 Other pension costs 2.7 1.9 Sharebased payments note 49 2.5 2.0 At 31 December 2014 the number of persons employed by the Group was 2459 201 3  2027.
The Company had no employees during the year 201 3  nil.
The monthly average number of persons employed by the Group during the year was
Number
Head office 261 203 Shopping centres 1916 1077 2177 1280 The Groups staff costs and numbers increased in 201 3 following the creation of Intu Retail Services Limited a subsidiary whose role is to deliver facilities management to all intu branded shopping centres across the UK.
These services were previously provided by external service providers.
As a result 1 1 1 2 staff joined the Group on 1 July 201 3 and a further 163 staff joined on 1 October 201 3.
The Groups staff costs and numbers for 2014 include a full years impact of this change and the impact of acquisitions in the year .
9 Auditors remuneration Fees payable to the Companys auditors and their associates for The audit of the Companys annual accounts 214 197 Other services to the Group  statutory audit of the Companys subsidiaries 352 173 Fees related to the audit of the Company and its subsidiaries 566 370 Auditrelated assurance services T otal fees for audit and audit related services 606 410 Other assurance services 1034 533 T otal nonaudit related services 1034 533 T otal fees 1640 943 Fees payable to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC and their associates for nonaudit services to the Company are not required to be disclosed separately as they are included on a consolidated basis.
The Group also used accounting firms other than PwC for a number of assignments.
1 Relates to review of the Groups Interim Report.
2014 included 916000 in respect of reporting accountant work associated with the rights issue and raising debt on intu Trafford Centre and within the Secured Group Structure SGS.
The role of the reporting accountant requires detailed knowledge of the entities involved.
If a firm other than the audit firm were to undertake this work then they would have to spend a significant amount of additional time becoming familiar with those entities.
PwC were therefore chosen to undertake this work as it was considered to be sensible and more efficient both in terms of time and costs.
For the same reasons certain elements of the SGS work were undertaken by another firm that had performed the most recent audit for those entities.
2014 also included 118000 in respect of financial due diligence related to the acquisition of intu Merry Hill intu Derby and Sprucefield.
PwC were chosen to undertake this work on efficiency grounds given the overall assignment including reporting accountant work on the rights issue.
Additionally as for all nonaudit work consideration was given as to whether PwCs independence could be affected by undertaking this work.
It was concluded that this would not be the case.
2013 principally related to reporting accountant work associated with the Group raising debt within the SGS and on intu Metrocentre.
The reasons for using PwC were the same as above.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 10 Finance costs
On bank loans and overdrafts 186.0 181.7 On convertible bonds note 33 7.5 7.5 On obligations under finance leases 3.6 3.4 Finance costs 197.1 192.6 No finance costs were capitalised in the year ended 31 December 2014 201 3  nil.
11 Finance income
Interest receivable on loans to joint ventures 10.7 Other finance income 1.2 0.6 Finance income 11.9 0.6 12 Other finance costs Amortisation of Metrocentre compound financial instrument 6.1 6.5 Cost of termination of derivative financial instruments and other costs Foreign currency movements Other finance costs 56.8 164.5 Amounts totalling 50.7 million in the year ended 31 December 2014 are treated as exceptional items as defined in note 2 2013  158.0 million.
These finance costs include termination of interest rate swaps on repayment of debt payments on unallocated swaps and other fees.
13 Change in fair value of financial instruments
Lossgain on derivative financial instruments 144.8 274.1 Loss on convertible bonds designated as at fair value through profit or loss note 33 12.8 1.8 Change in fair value of financial instruments 157.6 272.3 Included within the change in fair value of derivative financial instruments are gains totalling 70.3 million resulting from the payment of obligations under derivative financial instruments during the year .
Of these 1 7 .
1 million relate to the termination of swaps in the year and 27 .0 million to unallocated swaps see note 1 2.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 14 Taxation T axation for the year Overseas taxation 0.5 0.8 Current tax 0.5 0.8 Deferred tax On investment and development property  0.2 On other investments 0.9 1.9 On derivative financial instruments 5.6 3.2 On other temporary differences 0.1 2.9 Deferred tax 6.6 1.4 T otal tax credit 6.1 0.6 The tax credits for 2014 and 201 3 are lower than the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK.
The differences are explained below
Profit before tax joint ventures and associates 493.2 336.8 Profit before tax multiplied by the standard rate in the UK of 21.5% 2013  23.25% 106.0 78.3 Additions and disposals of property and investments 0.8 4.0 REIT exemption  corporation tax 32.7 8.3 REIT exemption  deferred tax 109.5 78.6 Nondeductable and other items 1.5 1.5 Overseas taxation 0.5 0.7 Unprovided deferred tax 28.9 1.8 T otal tax credit 6.1 0.6 T ax relating to components of other comprehensive income is analysed as Deferred tax On other investments 6.6 1.6 T ax relating to components of other comprehensive income 6.6 1.6 15 Profit for the year attributable to owners of Intu Properties plc Profits of 1 58.4 million are recorded in the accounts of the Company in respect of the year 201 3  52.8 million.
No income statement or statement of comprehensive income is presented for the Company as permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 16 Dividends Ordinary shares Prior year final dividend paid of 9.1 pence per share 2013  9.1 pence per share 96.2 94.4 Interim dividend paid of 4.6 pence per share 2013  4.6 pence per share 59.7 47.7 Dividends declared 155.9 142.1 Proposed final dividend of 9.1 pence per share 119.8 1 Adjusted for the rights issue bonus factor see note 17.
In 2014 the Company offered shareholders the option to receive ordinary shares instead of cash for the 201 3 final and 2014 interim dividends of 9.
1 pence as adjusted by the bonus factor and 4.6 pence respectively under the Scrip Dividend Scheme.
As a result of elections made by shareholders 16442684 new ordinary shares of 50 pence each were issued on 20 May 2014 and 5257 861 new ordinary shares of 50 pence each were issued on 25 November 2014 in lieu of dividends otherwise payable.
This resulted in 62.2 million of cash being retained in the business.
In 201 3 the Scrip Dividend Scheme resulted in 56.2 million of cash being retained in the business.
Details of the shares in issue and dividends waived are given in notes 37 and 39.
17 Earnings per share On 22 April 2014 the Company issued 27824 1628 new ordinary shares of 50 pence each through a rights issue.
Further details of the rights issue are provided in note 37 .
T o reflect the rights issue the number of shares previously used to calculate basic diluted headline and underlying earnings per share have been amended in the table shown below.
An adjustment factor of 1.098 has been applied based on the ratio of an adjusted exdividend closing share price of 301.
1 pence per share on 28 March 2014 the business day before the shares started trading exrights and the theoretical exrights price at that date of 27 4.2 pence per share.
The adjusted share price has been calculated based on the Companys share price of 31 1.
1 pence per share on 28 March 2014 less the 201 3 final dividend of 10 pence per share which the rights issue shares were not entitled to.
Basic and diluted earnings per share as calculated in accordance with IAS 33 Earnings per Share
Earnings
Shares million Pence per share
Shares million Pence per share Profit for the year attributable to owners of Intu Properties plc 586.2 359.8 Interest on convertible bonds recognised direct to equity note 33 2.9 5.8 Basic earnings per share Dilutive convertible bonds share options and share awards 23.2 96.4 13.3 122.4 Diluted earnings per share 606.5 1311.0 46.3p 367.3 1149.5 32.0p 1 The weighted average number of shares used for the calculation of basic earnings per share has been adjusted to remove shares held in the ESOP.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 17 Earnings per share continued b Headline earnings per share Headline earnings per share has been calculated and presented as required by the Johannesburg Stock Exchange listing requirements.
Represented
Gross
Net
Gross
Net
Basic earnings 583.3 354.0
Revaluation of investment and development property 567.8 552.9 109.9 108.8 Gain on acquisition of businesses 1.6 1.6 Gain on disposal of subsidiaries 0.6 0.6 Share of joint ventures items 80.4 80.4 15.9 15.9 Share of associates items 0.8 0.8 0.5 0.5 Headline lossearnings 53.0 228.8
Diluted headline lossearnings 29.8 242.1 Weighted average number of shares 1214.6 1027.1
Diluted weighted average number of shares 1311.0 1149.5 Headline lossearnings per share pence 4.4p 22.3p Diluted headline lossearnings per share pence 2.3p 21.1p 1 Net of tax and noncontrolling interests.
2 The dilution impact is required to be included as calculated in note 17a even where this is not dilutive for headline earnings per share.
Underlying earnings per share is a nonGAAP measure but has been included as it is considered to be a key measure of the Groups performance and an indication of the extent to which dividend payments are supported by underlying earnings see underlying profit statement on page 1 57.
Represented
Earnings
Shares million Pence per share
Shares million Pence per share Basic earnings per share per note 17a 583.3 1214.6 48.0p 354.0 1027.1 34.5p
Revaluation of investment and development property note 19 567.8 46.7p 109.9 10.7p Gain on acquisition of businesses 1.6 0.1p Gain on disposal of subsidiaries 0.6 Exceptional administration expenses note 6 13.8 1.1p 21.2 2.0p Exceptional finance costs note 12 50.7 4.2p 158.0 15.4p Change in fair value of financial instruments note 13 157.6 13.0p 272.3 26.5p T ax on the above 6.7 0.6p 1.5 0.1p Share of joint ventures adjusting items 81.1 6.7p 17.4 1.7p Share of associates adjusting items 0.8 0.1p 0.5 Noncontrolling interests in respect of the above 14.9 1.2p 8.6 0.8p Underlying earnings per share 161.7 1214.6 13.3p 140.2 1027.1 13.7p Dilutive convertible bonds share options and share awards 10.4 96.4 13.3 122.4 Underlying diluted earnings per share 172.1 1311.0 13.1p 153.5 1149.5 13.4p Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 18 Net asset value per share As for earnings per share the comparative number of shares used to calculate each measure of net assets per share has been adjusted by the bonus factor of 1.098 to reflect the rights issue.
See note 1 7 for more details.
NAV per share diluted adjusted is a nonGAAP measure but has been included as it is considered to be a key measure of the Groups performance.
Represented
Net assets
NAV per share pence
Shares million NAV per share pence NAV per share attributable to owners of Intu Properties plc 4524.0 1303.7 347p 3518.8 1055.5 333p Dilutive convertible bonds share options and awards 22.2 8.6 3.8 45.1 Diluted NAV per share 4546.2 1312.3 347p 3522.6 1100.6 320p
Fair value of derivative financial instruments net of tax 333.2 26p 196.8 18p Deferred tax on investment and development property and other investments 14.1 1p 20.4 2p Goodwill resulting from recognition of deferred tax liabilities   4.2 Share of joint ventures adjusting items 4.1  1.3 Noncontrolling interests in respect of the above   3.8
Noncontrolling interest recoverable balance not recognised 71.3 5p 71.3 6p NAV per share diluted adjusted 4968.9 1312.3 379p 3804.4 1100.6 346p 1 The number of shares used has been adjusted to remove shares held in the ESOP.
Restated NAV per share diluted adjusted for 31 December 201 3 is 346 pence per share.
Adjusting the previously reported 31 December 201 3 figures for the cash raised and the shares issued in the rights issue gives a pro forma NAV per share diluted adjusted of 335 pence per share.
NNNAV per share diluted adjusted is a nonGAAP measure but has been included as it is considered to be an industry standard comparable measure.
Represented
Net assets
NAV per share pence
Shares million NAV per share pence NAV per share diluted adjusted 4968.9 1312.3 379p 3804.4 1100.6 346p Fair value of derivative financial instruments net of tax 333.2 26p 196.8 18p Excess of fair value of debt over book value 310.2 24p 56.9 5p Deferred tax on investment and development property and other investments 14.1 1p 20.4 2p Share of joint ventures adjusting items 6.0  1.3 Noncontrolling interests in respect of the above 17.0 1p 6.3 NNNAV per share diluted adjusted 4322.4 1312.3 329p 3535.3 1100.6 321p Accounts Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 19 Investment and development property
Leasehold
Total
At 1 January 2013  represented 4508.2 2226.0 6734.2 Midsummer Place acquisition note 40 250.5  250.5 Parque Principado acquisition note 40 144.7  144.7 Additions  represented 24.1 17.9 42.0 Disposals  represented  0.1 0.1 Surplus on revaluation  represented 113.1 3.2 109.9 Foreign exchange movements  represented 2.5  2.5 At 31 December 2013  represented 5038.1 2240.6 7278.7 Acquisition of intu Derby and Sprucefield note 40 458.4  458.4 Additions 48.5 17.5 66.0 Disposal of subsidiaries Surplus on revaluation 468.9 98.9 567.8 Foreign exchange movements 0.9  0.9 At 31 December 2014 5662.6 2357.0 8019.6 1 Disposal of subsidiaries relates to Parque Principado 142.2 million and intu Uxbridge 208.2 million.
See note 41.
A reconciliation to market value is given in the table below
Balance sheet carrying value of investment and development property 8019.6 7278.7 T enant incentives included within trade and other receivables note 27 96.9 96.4 Head leases included within finance leases in borrowings note 31 34.9 36.0 Market value of investment and development property 8081.6 7339.1 All investment properties measured at fair value in the consolidated balance sheet are categorised as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy see note 35 for definition as one or more inputs to the valuation are partly based on unobservable market data.
T ransfers into and transfers out of the fair value hierarchy levels are recognised on the date of the event or change in circumstances that caused the transfer .
There were no transfers in or out of Level 3 for investment properties during the year .
The market value of investment and development property at 31 December 2014 includes 7 4.4 million 31 December 201 3 29.3 million in respect of property considered to be developments.
These are accounted for as investment property and are valued using the same methodology as other investment property.
The Group has only one class of investment and development property asset.
All the Groups significant investment and development property relates to prime shopping centres which are of a similar nature and share characteristics and risks.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 19 Investment and development property continued Valuation process It is the Groups policy to engage independent external valuers to determine the market value of its investment and development property at both 30 June and 31 December .
The Group provides information to the valuers including current lease and tenant data along with asset specific business plans.
The valuers use this and other inputs including market transactions for similar properties to produce valuations see valuation methodology below.
These valuations and the assumptions they have made are then discussed and reviewed with the Groups asset management team and Directors.
The Group engages a number of independent valuation experts to undertake the Groups property valuations.
A summary of the valuers and the value of property assets they have been engaged to value is given below
DTZ 4623.5 4100.5 Cushman and Wakefield 2200.0 1900.0 CBRE 1248.1 1188.6 Jones Lang LaSalle  143.1 Others 10.0 6.9 8081.6 7339.1 In addition to the above investment properties in the Groups joint ventures were valued by Knight Frank Jones Lang LaSalle and DTZ.
Valuation fees are a fixed amount agreed between the Group and the valuers in advance of the valuation and are not linked to the valuation output.
Valuation methodology The fair value of the Groups investment and development property as at 31 December 2014 was determined by independent external valuers at that date.
The valuations are in accordance with the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors RICS Valuation Professional Standards 2014 and were arrived at by reference to market transactions for similar properties.
Fair values for investment properties are calculated using the present value income approach.
The main assumptions underlying the valuations are in relation to rent profile and yields as discussed below.
The key driver of the property valuations is the terms of the leases in place at the valuation date.
These determine the majority of the cash flow profile of the property for a number of years and therefore form the base of the valuation.
The valuation assumes adjustments from these rental values to current market rent at the time of the next rent review where a typical lease allows only for upward adjustment and as leases expire and are replaced by new leases.
The current market level of rent is assessed based on evidence provided by the most recent relevant leasing transactions and negotiations.
This is based on evidence available at the date of valuation and does not assume future increases in market rent.
The nominal equivalent yield is applied as a discount rate to the rental cash flows which after taking into account other input assumptions such as vacancies and costs generates the market value of the property.
The nominal equivalent yield applied is assessed by reference to market transactions for similar properties and takes into account amongst other things any risks associated with the rent uplift assumptions.
Annual property income as disclosed in the table below reflects current annualised gross income.
The net initial yield is calculated as the current net income over the gross market value of the asset and is used as a sense check and to compare against market transactions for similar properties.
Full definitions of nominal equivalent yield annual property income and net initial yield are provided in the Glossary.
The valuation output inputs and assumptions are reviewed to ensure that they are in line with those of market participants.
A significant change in the nominal equivalent yield in isolation would result in a significant change in the value of investment and development property.
A decrease in nominal equivalent yield of 50 basis points would result in an increase in the total market value of 87 4 million 31 December 201 3  718 million represented while a 50 basis point increase would result in a decrease in the total market value of 718 million 31 December 201 3  61 1 million represented.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 19 Investment and development property continued The tables below provide details of the assumptions used in the valuation and key unobservable inputs Market value Net initial yield EPRA
Annual property income intu Trafford Centre 2200.0 3.9% 4.5% 86.9 intu Lakeside 1255.0 4.2% 5.0% 59.7 intu Metrocentre 928.1 4.3% 5.4% 46.8 intu Braehead 599.3 3.7% 5.9% 25.5 Manchester Arndale 430.2 4.6% 5.2% 21.7 intu Derby 420.0 6.3% 6.2% 28.4 intu Watford 335.0 4.5% 6.3% 17.3 intu Victoria Centre 314.0 4.0% 6.2% 16.9 intu Milton Keynes 277.5 4.5% 4.9% 13.8 intu Eldon Square 272.6 4.1% 6.1% 14.0 intu Chapelfield 261.0 5.0% 6.0% 15.1 Cribbs Causeway 242.9 4.1% 5.5% 12.6 intu Bromley 170.7 5.3% 7.1% 10.5 intu Potteries 164.5 5.3% 7.5% 10.5 Market value Net initial yield EPRA
Annual property income intu Trafford Centre 1900.0 4.2% 5.1% 86.0 intu Lakeside 1124.5 4.8% 5.5% 58.6 intu Metrocentre 885.2 5.0% 5.8% 48.2 intu Braehead 602.3 4.4% 5.9% 29.1 Manchester Arndale 399.0 5.0% 5.5% 21.8 intu Watford 323.0 4.7% 6.5% 17.0 intu Victoria Centre 306.0 4.7% 6.6% 17.6 intu Milton Keynes 251.0 5.1% 5.5% 13.9 intu Eldon Square 250.2 4.8% 6.6% 14.6 intu Chapelfield 245.5 5.7% 6.4% 15.3 Cribbs Causeway 241.5 4.2% 5.8% 12.4 intu Uxbridge 213.9 5.4% 6.4% 12.3 intu Potteries 162.6 6.1% 7.6% 10.7 intu Bromley 159.2 5.5% 7.5% 9.9 Parque Principado 143.1 6.9% 7.2% 11.5 Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 20 Plant and equipment
2014 2013
Accumulated depreciation
Cost
Accumulated depreciation
Additions 1.7  1.7 1.7  1.7 Charge for the year  2.1 2.1  1.8 1.8
2014 2013
Accumulated depreciation
Cost
Accumulated depreciation
At 1 January 9.0 4.8 4.2 8.0 3.3 4.7 Additions 1.4  1.4 1.0  1.0 Charge for the year  1.7 1.7  1.5 1.5 At 31 December 10.4 6.5 3.9 9.0 4.8 4.2 Plant and equipment consists of vehicles fixtures fittings and other office equipment.
21 Investment in group companies
2014 2013
Accumulated impairment
Cost
Accumulated impairment
At 1 January 3328.1 817.1 2511.0 3130.9 905.4 2225.5 Redemption of preference shares 197.2  197.2 Impairment reversed in the year  208.1 208.1  88.3 88.3 At 31 December 3313.7 609.0 2704.7 3328.1 817.1 2511.0 Details of principal subsidiary undertakings are provided in note 45.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 22 Joint ventures The Groups principal investments in joint ventures own and manage investment properties.
St Davids
Hill
Parque
Principado
Other
Total
At 1 January 2014  represented 194.6   14.9 209.5 Acquisition of intu Merry Hill note 40  403.8   403.8 intu Uxbridge note 41    43.0 43.0 Parque Principado note 41   71.3  71.3 Other additions    0.4 0.4 Share of underlying profit 11.3 5.1 0.4 1.8 18.6 Share of other net profit 38.8 26.8 13.9 1.6 81.1 Share of profit 50.1 31.9 14.3 3.4 99.7 Distributions  2.7  2.2 4.9 Repayment of capital   14.3  14.3 Loan advances 79.7  17.1 0.8 97.6 Loan repayments 13.5  39.2  52.7 Foreign exchange movements   1.9  1.9 At 31 December 2014 310.9 433.0 47.3 60.3 851.5 Represented by Loans to joint venture 128.6 386.2 31.6 1.9 548.3
St Davids
Other
Total
At 1 January 2013 179.0 12.9 191.9 Share of underlying profit 7.9 0.8 8.7 Share of other net profit 17.1 0.3 17.4 Share of profit 25.0 1.1 26.1 Investment in share capital  0.5 0.5 Loan advances  0.4 0.4 Loan repayments 9.4  9.4 At 31 December 2013 194.6 14.9 209.5 Represented by Loans to joint venture 62.4 0.6 63.0 At 31 December 2014 the Boards of joint ventures had approved 0.5 million 201 3  nil of future expenditure for the purchase construction development and enhancement of investment property.
Of this 0.
1 million is contractually committed.
These amounts represent the Groups share.
It is intended that the exemption conferred by regulation 7 of The Partnerships Accounts Regulations 2008 from needing to prepare and file accounts will be taken in respect of the following limited partnerships which are dealt with on a consolidated basis in these financial statements MH No.
1  Limited Partnership MH No.
2 Limited Partnership MH No.
3 Limited Partnership MH No.
Limited Partnership MH No.
5 Limited Partnership MH No.
6 Limited Partnership MH No.
7 Limited Partnership and MH No.
Limited Partnership.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 22 Joint ventures continued Set out below is the summarised information of the Groups joint ventures with financial information presented at 100 per cent.
The summarised income statements are presented for the period from acquisition or becoming a joint venture St Davids
Hill
Parque
Principado
Other
Total
Summary information Groups interest 50% 50% 50% Principal place of business Wales England Spain Summarised income statement Net rental income 27.2 29.6 6.8 8.7 72.3 Net other income 1.2    1.2 Revaluation of investment and development property 75.5 53.7 28.8 1.5 159.5 Administration expenses 0.1 0.7 0.7 0.8 2.3 Net finance costs 3.6 18.7 6.2  28.5 Profit for the year 100.2 63.9 28.7 9.4 202.2 Groups share of profit for the year 50.1 31.9 14.3 3.4 99.7 Summarised balance sheet Investment and development property 594.1 868.9 164.4 245.1 1872.5 Other noncurrent assets 20.6 0.5 4.4 2.3 27.8 Current assets excluding cash and cash equivalents 7.5 5.9 1.6 1.9 16.9 Cash and cash equivalents 13.1 30.0 12.1 9.0 64.2 Current financial liabilities 0.3 17.8 3.8 1.6 23.5 Other current liabilities 13.3 21.4 0.9 5.3 40.9 Noncurrent financial liabilities   72.0  72.0 Other noncurrent liabilities   11.2  11.2 Partners loans 257.2 772.5 63.2 1.4 1094.3 Groups share of net assets 182.3 46.8 15.7 58.4 303.2 Accounts Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 22 Joint ventures continued
St Davids Cardiff m
Total
Summary information Groups interest 50% Principal place of business Wales Summarised income statement Revenue 41.4 10.8 52.2 Net rental income 25.0 1.6 26.6 Revaluation of investment and development property 31.2 0.6 31.8 Net finance costs 6.2  6.2 Profit for the year 50.0 2.2 52.2 Groups share of profit for the year 25.0 1.1 26.1 Summarised balance sheet Investment and development property 520.4 25.0 545.4 Other noncurrent assets 22.6 1.4 24.0 Current assets excluding cash and cash equivalents 8.0 1.8 9.8 Cash and cash equivalents 13.6 4.2 17.8 Current financial liabilities 172.6 2.5 175.1 Other current liabilities  0.1 0.1 Noncurrent financial liabilities 2.8 1.2 4.0 Partners loans 124.8  124.8 Net assets 264.4 28.6 293.0 Groups share of net assets 132.2 14.3 146.5 Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 23 Joint operations The Groups interests in Cribbs Causeway and Manchester Arndale are accounted for as joint operations.
The Group holds 50 per cent beneficial interests in the relevant freehold or leasehold of these properties.
Each joint arrangement is governed by a T rust Deed giving each party rights to income and obligations for expenses in respect of their beneficial interest in the property.
The management of the property is established under the T rust Deed as being undertaken by an entity jointly controlled by the beneficial owners of the property.
This entity does not have the right to a share of the income or expenditure from the property other than the receipt of a management fee.
Therefore these interests are accounted for as joint operations.
The principal place of business of the joint operations is England.
24 Investment in associates
Group
At 1 January 35.8 40.9 Share of profit of associates 0.8 0.5 Foreign exchange movements 1.4 5.6 At 31 December 38.0 35.8 Investment in associates comprises a 32.4 per cent holding in the ordinary shares of Prozone Intu Properties Limited formerly Prozone Capital Shopping Centres Limited Prozone incorporated in India.
As required by IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures the equity method of accounting is applied in accounting for the Groups investment in Prozone.
The results of Prozone for the year to 30 September have been used as 31 December information is not available in time for these financial statements.
Those results are adjusted to be in line with the Groups accounting policies and include the most recent property valuations as at 30 September 2014 determined by independent professionally qualified external valuers in line with the valuation methodology described in note 19.
The market price per share at 31 December 2014 was INR26 31 December 201 3  INR18 valuing the Groups interest at 1 3.0 million 31 December 201 3  8.8 million.
Following a review it was concluded no adjustment was required at this time.
Set out below is the summarised financial information of Prozone at 100% Summarised income statement Revenue 4.6 2.8 Profit for the year Summarised balance sheet Investment and development property 185.5 171.2 Other noncurrent assets 3.3 3.3 Current assets 20.3 17.0 Current liabilities 8.7 6.2 Noncurrent liabilities 20.9 15.6 Noncontrolling interests 62.2 58.9 Net assets 117.3 110.8 Groups 32.4 per cent share of net assets 38.0 35.8 1 Included within profit for the year is revaluation of investment and development property of 2.3 million 2013  1.5 million.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 25 Other investments
Group
At 1 January 154.9 148.8 Additions 3.8 Revaluation 21.1 8.1 Foreign exchange movements 9.9 2.0 At 31 December 189.7 154.9 All these investments are availableforsale investments and are analysed by type of investment as follows
Group
Listed securities  equity 5.0 1.0 Unlisted securities  equity 184.7 153.9 Listed investments are accounted for at fair value using the bid market value at the reporting date.
The Groups unlisted securities all relate to the 1 1.4 million units in a US venture controlled by Equity One convertible into Equity One shares and therefore the fair value of the investment is measured by reference to the Equity One share price.
26 Goodwill
Group
At 1 January 8.2 4.0 Additions  4.2 Disposal of subsidiaries note 41 4.2 At 31 December 4.0 8.2 27 Trade and other receivables
Represented
Group
Company
Company
Current
Trade receivables 24.6 16.0 Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings   1284.4 1126.4 Amounts owed by joint ventures 20.5 0.5 Other receivables 16.8 18.8 0.9 1.0 Prepayments and accrued income 52.8 42.8 1.5 2.0 Trade and other receivables  current 114.7 78.1 1286.8 1129.4
Other receivables 11.4 8.9 Prepayments and accrued income 88.3 90.3 Trade and other receivables  noncurrent 99.7 99.2 Included within prepayments and accrued income for the Group of 14 1.
1 million 201 3  1 33.
1 million are tenant lease incentives of 96.9 million 201 3  96.4 million.
Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings are unsecured and repayable on demand.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 28 Cash and cash equivalents
Represented
Group
Company
Company
Unrestricted cash 212.5 151.1 1.0 0.3 Restricted cash 17.5 5.6 Cash and cash equivalents 230.0 156.7 1.0 0.3 In 2014 restricted cash is the deposit paid in relation to the acquisition of Puerto Venecia Zaragoza.
In 201 3 restricted cash primarily reflected amounts held to match the 2014 loan notes shown within borrowings and cash deposited against a Spanish local property tax included within trade and other payables.
A number of the Groups borrowing arrangements place certain restrictions on the rent received each quarter .
These do not prevent access to or use of this funding within the borrowing entities however they do place certain restrictions on moving those funds around the wider group typically requiring debt servicing costs to be paid before restrictions are lifted.
29 Derivative financial instruments All derivative financial instruments held by the Group relate to interest rate swaps which are classified as held for trading see note 35.
The derivative financial instrument held by the Company relates to the Bondholder option see note 33 and is classified as held for trading.
30 Trade and other payables
Represented
Group
Company
Company
Current
Rents received in advance 97.2 95.3 Trade payables 2.7 5.0 Amounts owed to joint ventures 2.7 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings   376.8 544.6 Accruals and deferred income 110.7 97.8 10.6 8.1 Other payables 11.6 17.7 0.4 Other taxes and social security 26.6 22.3 6.3 3.2 Trade and other payables 251.5 238.1 394.1 555.9 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings are unsecured and repayable on demand.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 31 Borrowings
Carrying value
Unsecured
Fixed rate
Fair value
Bank loans and overdrafts 1.7 1.7   1.7 1.7 Commercial mortgage backed securities CMBS notes 16.5 16.5  13.3 3.2 19.1 Current borrowings excluding finance leases 18.2 18.2  13.3 4.9 20.8 Finance lease obligations 3.1 3.1  3.1  3.1
Revolving credit facility 2019 230.0 230.0   230.0 230.0 CMBS notes 2019 19.5 19.5  19.5  20.3 CMBS notes 2022 51.2 51.2  51.2  62.8 CMBS notes 2024 87.4 87.4  87.4  95.4 CMBS notes 2029 88.6 88.6  88.6  101.9 CMBS notes 2033 351.8 351.8  351.8  429.5 CMBS notes 2035 186.2 186.2   186.2 208.4 Bank loans 2016 330.8 330.8   330.8 330.8 Bank loan 2017 166.5 166.5   166.5 166.5 Bank loan 2018 347.9 347.9   347.9 347.9 Bank loan 2021 120.3 120.3   120.3 120.3 3.875% bonds 2023 440.2 440.2  440.2  474.1 4.125% bonds 2023 475.8 475.8  475.8  518.4 4.625% bonds 2028 340.6 340.6  340.6  392.7 4.250% bonds 2030 344.5 344.5  344.5  376.8 Debenture 2027 227.9 227.9  227.9  241.0 2.5% convertible bonds 2018 note 33 325.6  325.6 325.6  325.6 Noncurrent borrowings excluding finance leases and Metrocentre compound financial instrument 4134.8 3809.2 325.6 2753.1 1381.7 4442.4 Metrocentre compound financial instrument 166.1  166.1 166.1  166.1 Finance lease obligations 31.8 31.8  31.8  31.8 4332.7 3841.0 491.7 2951.0 1381.7 4640.3 T otal borrowings 4354.0 3862.3 491.7 2967.4 1386.6 4664.2 Cash and cash equivalents 230.0 Net debt 4124.0 Details of the Groups net external debt are provided in the Other information section.
The fair values have been established using the market value where available.
For those instruments without a market value a discounted cash flow approach has been used.
The Group substantially eliminates its interest rate exposure to floating rate debt through interest rate swaps as described in note 35.
The market value of assets secured as collateral against borrowings at 31 December 2014 is 8818.6 million.
There are certain restrictions on the realisability of investment property where a credit facility secured on that property is in place.
In most circumstances the Group can realise up to 50 per cent without restriction providing the Group continues to manage the asset.
Realising an amount in excess of this would trigger a change of control and mandatory repayment of the facility.
The Company had noncurrent borrowings of 230.0 million at 31 December 2014 consisting of a revolving credit facility expiring in 2019 201 3  285.0 million.
This debt is floating rate secured and its fair value is equal to book value.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 31 Borrowings continued
Group
Carrying value
Unsecured
Fixed rate
Fair value
Bank loans and overdrafts 49.3 49.3   49.3 49.3 Commercial mortgage backed securities Loan notes 2014 1.6  1.6 1.6  1.6 Current borrowings excluding finance leases 67.4 65.8 1.6 13.9 53.5 68.5 Finance lease obligations 3.5 3.5  3.5  3.5
Revolving credit facility 2017 285.0 285.0   285.0 285.0 CMBS notes 2015 3.1 3.1   3.1 3.2 CMBS notes 2022 51.6 51.6  51.6  59.2 CMBS notes 2029 93.2 93.2  93.2  99.8 CMBS notes 2033 364.1 364.1  364.1  401.7 CMBS notes 2035 184.0 184.0   184.0 189.7 Bank loans 2016 586.9 586.9   586.9 586.9 Bank loan 2017 41.9 41.9   41.9 41.9 Bank loan 2018 346.6 346.6   346.6 346.6 3.875% bonds 2023 439.4 439.4  439.4  438.3 4.125% bonds 2023 475.2 475.2  475.2  476.2 4.625% bonds 2028 340.1 340.1  340.1  349.7 Debenture 2027 227.6 227.6  227.6  216.3 2.5% convertible bonds 2018 note 33 312.8  312.8 312.8  312.8 Noncurrent borrowings excluding finance leases and Metrocentre compound financial instrument 3751.5 3438.7 312.8 2304.0 1447.5 3807.3 Metrocentre compound financial instrument 160.0  160.0 160.0  160.0 Finance lease obligations 32.5 32.5  32.5  32.5 3944.0 3471.2 472.8 2496.5 1447.5 3999.8 T otal borrowings 4014.9 3540.5 474.4 2513.9 1501.0 4071.8 Cash and cash equivalents 156.7 Net debt 3858.2 The maturity profile of debt excluding finance leases is as follows
Represented
Group
Repayable within one year 18.2 67.4 Repayable in more than one year but not more than two years 328.4 14.4 Repayable in more than two years but not more than five years 1148.1 1601.3 Repayable in more than five years 2824.4 2295.8 4319.1 3978.9 Certain borrowing agreements contain financial and other conditions that if contravened could alter the repayment profile.
During the year there were no breaches of these conditions see Financial covenants section on pages 1 53 and 1 54.
As at 31 December 201 4 the Group had committed borrowing facilities of 640.7 million 600.0 million expiring in 201 9 and 40.7 million expiring in 2021.
At 31 December 201 4 4 10.7 million was undrawn 201 3  facilities 375.0 million undrawn 90.0 million.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 31 Borrowings continued Finance lease disclosures
Group
Minimum lease payments under finance leases fall due Not later than one year 4.2 4.7 Later than one year and not later than five years 17.0 17.0 Later than five years 64.3 66.2 Future finance charges on finance leases 50.6 51.9 Present value of finance lease liabilities 34.9 36.0 Present value of finance lease liabilities Not later than one year 3.1 3.5 Later than one year and not later than five years 13.5 13.0 Later than five years 18.3 19.5 Finance lease liabilities are in respect of head leases on investment property.
A number of these leases provide for payment of contingent rent usually a proportion of net rental income in addition to the rents above.
32 Movement in net debt
Cash and cash equivalents
Non current borrowings
Balance at 1 January 2014 156.7 70.9 3944.0 3858.2 Acquisition of businesses 851.3   851.3 Cash received on part disposal of intu Uxbridge net of cash sold with business 174.1   174.1 Parque Principado cash received net of cash reclassified 11.6   11.6 Borrowings drawn down 989.4  989.4 Borrowings repaid 675.1 1.4 672.7 1.0 Issue of ordinary shares 492.0   492.0 Cash flows with joint ventures 26.1   26.1 Other net cash movements 18.1   18.1 Other noncash movements  48.2 72.0 23.8 Balance at 31 December 2014 230.0 21.3 4332.7 4124.0
Group
Cash and cash equivalents
Non current borrowings
Balance at 1 January 2013 182.4 94.1 3659.1 3570.8 Acquisition of businesses 382.1   382.1 Borrowings drawn down 2051.6  2051.6 Borrowings repaid 1875.3 74.4 1731.6 69.3 Issue of ordinary shares 273.0   273.0 Loan repayments from joint ventures 9.4   9.4 Other net cash movements 102.3   102.3 Other noncash movements  51.2 35.1 16.1 Balance at 31 December 2013 156.7 70.9 3944.0 3858.2 Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 33 Convertible bonds 2.5 per cent convertible bonds the 2.5 per cent bonds On 4 October 201 2 Intu Jersey Limited the Issuer issued 300.0 million 2.5 per cent Guaranteed Convertible Bonds due 2018 at par all of which remain outstanding at 31 December 2014.
At 31 December 2014 the exchange price was 3.5759 per ordinary share.
The Company has unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed the due and punctual performance by the Issuer of all of its obligations including payments in respect of the 2.5 per cent bonds and the obligations of the Company as Guarantor  constitute direct unsubordinated and unsecured obligations of the Company.
Subject to certain conditions the 2.5 per cent bonds are convertible into preference shares of the Issuer which are automatically transferred to the Company in exchange for ordinary shares in the Company or at the Companys election any combination of ordinary shares and cash.
The 2.5 per cent bonds can be converted at any time from 14 November 201 2 up to the 20th dealing day before the maturity date.
The initial exchange price was 4.3752 per ordinary share a conversion rate of approximately 22856 ordinary shares for every 100000 nominal of the 2.5 per cent bonds.
Under the terms of the 2.5 per cent bonds the exchange price is adjusted upon certain events including the rights issue on 22 April 2014 and the payment of dividends by the Company.
The 2.5 per cent bonds may be redeemed at par at the Companys option subject to the Companys ordinary share price having traded at 30 per cent above the conversion price for a specified period or at any time once 85 per cent by nominal value of the 2.5 per cent bonds originally issued have been converted or cancelled.
If not previously converted redeemed or purchased and cancelled the 2.5 per cent bonds will be redeemed at par on 4 October 2018.
The 2.5 per cent bonds are designated as at fair value through profit or loss and so are presented on the balance sheet at fair value with all gains and losses taken to the income statement through the changes in fair value of financial instruments line.
At 31 December 2014 the fair value of the 2.5 per cent bonds was 325.6 million 201 3  31 2.8 million with the change in fair value reflected in note 1 3.
The 2.5 per cent bonds are listed on the Professional Securities Market of the London Stock Exchange.
During the year interest of 7 .5 million 201 3  7 .5 million in respect of these bonds has been recognised within finance costs.
In the Companys balance sheet the bondholder option is held at its fair value of 25.6 million on a derivative financial instrument.
3.75 per cent convertible bonds the 3.75 per cent bonds In 201 1 the Company issued 1 54.3 million 3.75 per cent perpetual subordinated convertible bonds with a conversion price of 4.00 per ordinary share in connection with the acquisition of intu T rafford Centre.
These were accounted for as equity at their fair value on issue which totalled 143.7 million.
Following the rights issue on 22 April 2014 the conversion price was adjusted to 3.64 per ordinary share.
On 2 July 2014 a conversion notice was issued for all the bonds resulting in 42394779 new ordinary shares being issued.
During the year interest of 2.9 million 201 3  5.8 million has been recognised on these bonds directly in equity.
This is deducted in arriving at earnings per share see note 1 7.
34 Operating leases The Group earns rental income by leasing its investment properties to tenants under operating leases.
In the UK the standard shopping centre lease is for a term of 10 to 1 5 years.
Standard lease provisions include service charge payments recovery of other direct costs and review every five years to market rent.
Standard turnover based leases have a turnover percentage agreed with each lessee which is applied to a retail units annual sales and any excess between the resulting turnover rent and the minimum rent is receivable by the Group.
The future minimum lease amounts receivable under noncancellable operating leases for continuing operations are as follows
Not later than one year 416.9 411.1 Later than one year and not later than five years 1263.3 1274.9 Later than five years 1423.2 1433.8 3103.4 3119.8 The income statement includes 3.6 million 201 3  3.
1 million recognised in respect of expected increased rent resulting from outstanding reviews where the actual rent will only be determined on settlement of the rent review.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 35 Financial risk management The Group is exposed to a variety of financial risks arising from the Groups operations being principally market risk including interest rate risk and foreign exchange risk liquidity risk and credit risk.
The majority of the Groups financial risk management is carried out by the Group treasury department and the policies for managing each of these risks and the principal effects of these policies on the results for the year are summarised below.
Market risk a Interest rate risk Interest rate risk comprises of both cash flow and fair value risks.
Cash flow interest rate risk is the risk that the future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate due to changes in market interest rates.
Fair value interest rate risk is the risk that the fair value of financial instruments will fluctuate as a result of changes in market interest rates.
The Groups interest rate risk arises from borrowings issued at variable rates that expose the Group to cash flow interest rate risk whereas borrowings issued at fixed interest rates expose the Group to fair value interest rate risk.
Bank debt is typically issued at floating rates linked to LIBOR.
Bond debt and other capital market debt are generally issued at fixed rates.
It is Group policy and often a requirement of the Groups lenders to eliminate substantially all exposure to interest rate fluctuations in order to establish certainty over cash flows by using floating to fixed interest rate swaps.
Such swaps have the economic effect of converting borrowings from floating to fixed rates.
As a consequence the Group is exposed to market price risk in respect of the fair value of its fixed rate interest rate swaps as discussed in the Financial review on pages 40 to 46.
The table below shows the effects of interest rate swaps on the borrowings profile of the Group
Floating
Fixed
Represented
Floating
Borrowings
2738.4 1448.6 2292.8 1561.9 Derivative impact nominal value of interest rate swaps 943.9 943.9 1207.4 1207.4 Net borrowings profile 3682.3 504.7 3500.2 354.5 Interest rate protection 87.9% 90.8% 1 Borrowings are stated at nominal value and excludes the Metrocentre compound financial instruments and finance leases.
At 31 December 2014 they include the 230.0 million 2013  285.0 million drawn under the revolving credit facility which incurs interest at a variable rate.
Excluding the revolving credit facility borrowing interest rate protection is 93.1 per cent 2013  98.1 per cent.
Group policy is to target interest rate protection within the range of 75 per cent to 100 per cent.
The weighted average rate for interest rate swaps currently effective is 2.24 per cent 201 3  2.71 per cent.
Unallocated and forward starting swaps are excluded from the above calculation.
The nominal value of these swaps is 7 46.7 million of which 1 25.0 million are forward starting.
Their fair value of 242.5 million is included as a liability in the balance sheet.
The approximate impact of a 50 basis point shift upwards in the level of interest rates would be a positive movement of 83.6 million 201 3  73.7 million in the fair value of derivatives.
The approximate impact of a 50 basis point shift downwards in the level of interest rates would be a negative movement of 90.2 million 201 3  78.7 million in the fair value of derivatives.
In practice a parallel shift in the yield curve is highly unlikely.
However  the above sensitivity analysis is a reasonable illustration of the possible effect from the changes in slope and shifts in the yield curve that may actually occur .
Where the fixed rate derivative financial instruments are matched by floating rate debt the overall effect on Group cash flow of such a movement would be very small.
Foreign exchange risk arises when future commercial transactions or recognised assets or liabilities are denominated in a functional currency other than sterling.
The Groups policy is to ensure the Groups net exposure to foreign currency is less than 10 per cent of the Groups equity attributable to owners of the Company.
At 31 December 2014 the Groups exposure amounted to 6.4 per cent of equity attributable to owners of the Company 31 December 201 3  7 .6 per cent.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 35 Financial risk management continued The table summarises the Groups exposure to foreign currency risk
INRm
USm
USm
Net exposure 87.0 90.2 3819.3 3766.2 288.0 254.9 The following foreign exchange rates apply to the Groups foreign exchange risk
INRm
USm
USm
Foreign exchange rate 1.2886 1.2020 98.4238 102.4470 1.5593 1.6563 The approximate impact of a 10 per cent appreciation in foreign exchange rates would be positive movement of 32.3 million 201 3  29.5 million to equity attributable to owners of the Company.
The approximate impact of a 10 per cent depreciation in foreign exchange rates would be a negative movement of 26.5 million 201 3  24.2 million to equity attributable to owners of the Company.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is managed to ensure that the Group is able to meet future payment obligations when financial liabilities fall due.
Liquidity analysis is conducted to ensure that sufficient headroom is available to meet the Groups operational requirements and committed investments.
The Group treasury policy aims to meet this objective through maintaining adequate cash marketable securities and committed facilities to meet these requirements.
Undrawn borrowing facilities are detailed in note 31.
The Groups policy is to seek to optimise its exposure to liquidity risk by balancing its exposure to interest rate risk and to refinancing risk.
In effect the Group seeks to borrow for as long as possible at the lowest acceptable cost.
Group policy is to maintain a weighted average debt maturity of over five years.
As at 31 December 2014 the maturity profile of Group debt showed an average maturity of eight years 201 3  eight years.
The Group regularly reviews the maturity profile of its borrowings and seeks to avoid bunching of maturities through the regular replacement of facilities and by arranging a selection of maturity dates.
Refinancing risk may be reduced by re borrowing prior to the contracted maturity date effectively switching liquidity risk for market risk.
The tables below set out the maturity analysis of the Groups financial liabilities based on the undiscounted contractual obligations to make payments of interest and to repay principal.
Where interest payment obligations are based on a floating rate the rates used are those implied by the par yield curve for the relevant currency.
Where payment obligations are in foreign currencies the spot exchange rate ruling at the balance sheet date is used.
Group
Within 1 year 12 years 25 years Over 5 years
Borrowings including interest 180.2 514.6 1574.9 3607.3 5877.0 Finance lease obligations 4.2 4.2 12.7 64.4 85.5 Other financial liabilities 17.0 2.5   19.5 Derivative payments 121.6 61.7 143.5 198.7 525.5 Derivative receipts 17.0 15.7 34.0 90.1 156.8 306.0 567.3 1697.1 3780.3 6350.7
Group
Within 1 year 12 years 25 years Over 5 years
Borrowings including interest 221.8 180.6 2056.3 3045.5 5504.2 Finance lease obligations 4.7 4.3 12.7 66.2 87.9 Other financial liabilities 22.6 3.8   26.4 Derivative payments 69.6 71.6 141.8 518.0 801.0 Derivative receipts 19.3 29.6 96.5 417.0 562.4 299.4 230.7 2114.3 3212.7 5857.1 Accounts Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 35 Financial risk management continued
Within 1 year 12 years 25 years Over 5 years
Borrowings including interest 7.9 7.5 545.0  560.4 Other financial liabilities 0.2    0.2 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings 376.8    376.8
Within 1 year 12 years 25 years Over 5 years
Borrowings including interest 11.2 11.2 307.3  329.7 Other financial liabilities 0.2    0.2 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings 544.5    544.5 Credit risk Credit risk is the risk of financial loss if a tenant or counterparty fails to meet an obligation under a contract.
Credit risk arises primarily from trade receivables but also from the Groups holdings of assets with counterparties such as cash deposits and derivative instruments.
Credit risk associated with trade receivables is actively managed tenants are managed individually by asset managers who continuously monitor and work with tenants aiming wherever possible to identify and address risks prior to default.
Prospective tenants are assessed via a review process including obtaining credit ratings and reviewing financial information which is conducted internally.
As a result deposits or guarantees may be obtained.
The amount of deposits held as collateral at 31 December 2014 is 3.4 million 201 3  4.0 million.
It is Group policy to calculate any impairment of receivables specifically on each contract.
The ageing analysis of trade receivables is as follows
Represented Group Up to three months 22.5 13.6 Three to six months 2.1 2.4 T rade receivables 24.6 16.0 At 31 December 2014 trade receivables are shown net of provisions totalling 7 .
1 million 201 3  6.
1 million.
The credit risk relating to cash deposits and derivative financial instruments is actively managed by the Groups treasury department.
Relationships are maintained with a number of tier one institutional counterparties ensuring compliance with Group policy relating to limits on the credit ratings of counterparties between BBB and AAA.
Excessive credit risk concentration is avoided through adhering to authorised limits for all counterparties.
Counterparty Credit rating Authorised limit Group Exposure 31 December 2014 Counterparty 1 AA 125.0 170.6 Counterparty 2 A 100.0 41.0 Counterparty 3 A 75.0 13.5 Counterparty 4 A 100.0 6.9 Counterparty 5 A 15.0 4.8 Sum of five largest exposures 236.8 Sum of cash deposits and derivative financial instrument assets 239.7 Five largest exposures as a percentage of risk 99% The exposure exceeded the authorised limit for seven days over the balance sheet date reducing back to below the limit on 5 January 2015.
A review and authorisation process was adhered to before the limit was exceeded and authorisation was given on the basis of the strength of the counterparty and the short time the limit would be exceeded.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 35 Financial risk management continued Classification of financial assets and liabilities The tables below set out the Groups accounting classification of each class of financial assets and liabilities and their fair values at 31 December 2014 and 31 December 201 3.
The fair values of quoted borrowings are based on the ask price.
The fair values of derivative financial instruments are determined from observable market prices or estimated using appropriate yield curves at 31 December each year by discounting the future contractual cash flows to the net present values.
Carrying value
Profitloss to income statement Profit to other comprehensive income Derivative financial instrument assets 9.7 9.7 15.9 T otal held for trading assets 9.7 9.7 15.9 Trade and other receivables 70.9 70.9 Cash and cash equivalents 230.0 230.0 T otal cash and receivables 300.9 300.9 Other investments 189.7 189.7  21.1 T otal availableforsale investments 189.7 189.7  21.1 Derivative financial instrument liabilities 356.5 356.5 128.9 T otal held for trading liabilities 356.5 356.5 128.9 Trade and other payables 19.5 19.5 Borrowings 4354.0 4664.2 12.8 T otal loans and payables 4373.5 4683.7 12.8
Carrying value
Profitloss to income statement Profit to other comprehensive income Derivative financial instrument assets 25.8 25.8 3.4 T otal held for trading assets 25.8 25.8 3.4 Trade and other receivables 41.9 41.9 Shortterm investments 69.3 69.3 Cash and cash equivalents 156.7 156.7 T otal cash and receivables 267.9 267.9 Other investments 154.9 154.9  8.1 T otal availableforsale investments 154.9 154.9  8.1 Derivative financial instrument liabilities 230.6 230.6 270.7 T otal held for trading liabilities 230.6 230.6 270.7 Trade and other payables 26.4 26.4 Borrowings 4014.9 4071.8 1.8 T otal loans and payables 4041.3 4098.2 1.8
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 35 Financial risk management continued The table below presents the Groups financial assets and liabilities recognised at fair value.
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets
Derivative financial instruments Fair value through profit or loss  9.7  9.7 Availableforsale investments 5.0 184.7  189.7 T otal assets 5.0 194.4  199.4
Convertible bonds Designated as at fair value through profit or loss 325.6   325.6 Derivative financial instruments Fair value through profit or loss  356.5  356.5 T otal liabilities 325.6 356.5  682.1
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets
Derivative financial instruments Fair value through profit or loss  25.8  25.8 Availableforsale investments 1.0 153.9  154.9 T otal assets 1.0 179.7  180.7
Convertible bonds Designated as at fair value through profit or loss 312.8   312.8 Derivative financial instruments Fair value through profit or loss  230.6  230.6 T otal liabilities 312.8 230.6  543.4 Fair value hierarchy Level 1  Valuation based on quoted market prices traded in active markets.
Level 2 Valuation techniques are used maximising the use of observable market data either directly from market prices or derived from market prices.
Level 3 Where one or more inputs to valuation are unobservable.
Valuations at this level are more subjective and therefore more closely managed including sensitivity analysis of inputs to valuation models.
Such testing has not indicated that any material difference would arise due to a change in input variables.
T ransfers into and transfers out of the fair value hierarchy levels are recognised on the date of the event or change in circumstances that caused the transfer .
There were no transfers in or out for the above financial assets and liabilities during the year .
Valuation techniques for level 2 hierarchy financial assets and liabilities are presented in the accounting policies.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 35 Financial risk management continued Capital structure The Group seeks to enhance shareholder value both by investing in the business so as to improve the return on investment and by managing the capital structure.
The capital of the Group consists of equity debt and hybrid financial instruments.
The Group aims to access both debt and equity capital markets with maximum efficiency and flexibility.
The key ratios used to monitor the capital structure of the Group are the debt to assets ratio and interest cover .
The Groups stated medium to longterm preference is for the debt to assets ratio to be within the 4050 per cent range and interest cover to be greater than 1.60x.
At 31 December 2014 the debt to asset ratio remains within the preferred range and the interest cover ratio continues to be above the preferred level.
As the Groups debt is sometimes secured on joint ventures these ratios are monitored for the Group including share of joint ventures.
A reconciliation from the relevant amounts as presented to those including the Groups share of joint ventures is presented in the Other information section.
Debt to assets ratio
Group
Market value of investment and development property 8963.4 7623.8 Net external debt 3963.4 3698.4 Debt to assets ratio 44.2% 48.5% Interest cover
Group
Finance costs 201.2 197.2 Finance income 1.2 0.6 Interest on convertible bonds recognised directly in equity 2.9 5.8 Underlying operating profit 370.3 345.6 Remove trading property related items 0.6 0.1 Interest cover 1.82x 1.71x Accounts Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 36 Deferred tax provision Under IAS 1 2 Income T axes provision is made for the deferred tax assets and liabilities associated with the revaluation of assets and liabilities at the corporate tax rate expected to apply to the Group at the time the temporary differences are expected to reverse.
For those UK assets and liabilities benefitting from REIT exemption the relevant tax rate will be 0 per cent 201 3  0 per cent for other UK assets and liabilities the relevant rate will be 21.5 per cent 201 3  20 per cent and for other assets and liabilities the relevant tax rate will be the prevailing corporate tax rate in the relevant country.
Movements in the provision for deferred tax
Investment and development property
Derivative financial instruments
Total
Provided deferred tax provisionasset At 1 January 2013  8.7 11.2 2.5 Acquisition of subsidiaries note 40 12.0    12.0 Recognised in the income statement 0.2 1.9 3.2 2.9 1.4 Recognised in other comprehensive income  1.6   1.6 Foreign exchange movements 0.2    0.2 At 31 December 2013 12.0 8.4 8.0 0.4 12.0 Recognised in the income statement  0.9 5.6 0.1 6.6 Recognised in other comprehensive income  6.6   6.6 Disposal of subsidiaries note 41 12.0    12.0 At 31 December 2014  14.1 13.6 0.5 Unrecognised deferred tax asset At 1 January 2014 0.3  23.1 45.8 69.2 On acquisition of subsidiaries    1.0 1.0 Income statement items 0.2  16.9 8.9 26.0 At 31 December 2014 0.5  40.0 55.7 96.2 In accordance with the requirements of IAS 1 2 Income T axes the deferred tax asset has not been recognised in the Group financial statements due to uncertainty over the level of profits that will be available in the nonREIT elements of the Group in future periods.
The Company recognises a deferred tax asset of 0.4 million which resulted from carried forward losses and a difference between the timing of certain deductions for tax and accounting purposes.
37 Share capital and share premium
Share premium Issued and fully paid At 1 January 2013  868473001 ordinary shares of 50p each 434.2 577.4 Ordinary shares issued 52.7 118.2 At 31 December 2013  973845701 ordinary shares of 50p each 486.9 695.6 Ordinary shares issued on conversion of bonds note 33 21.2 122.5 Other ordinary shares issued 150.3 403.9 At 31 December 2014  1316838051 ordinary shares of 50p each 658.4 1222.0 During the year the Company issued a total of 655398 ordinary shares in connection with the exercise of options by employees and former employees under the Intu Properties plc Approved Share Option Scheme and the Intu Properties plc Unapproved Share Option Scheme.
As a result the Companys share capital increased by 0.3 million and share premium by 1.3 million.
On 22 April 2014 the Company undertook a two for seven rights issue of 27824 1628 new ordinary shares at an issue price of 180.0 pence per share.
Shareholders did not take up their rights for 27 47 838 shares approximately one per cent of the total rights issue shares.
These shares were placed at 289.5 pence per share.
The combined impact was that the Company raised a total of 502.4 million before 1 2.0 million of expenses and as a result the Companys share capital increased by 1 39.
1 million and share premium by 35 1.3 million net of expenses charged to share premium.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 37 Share capital and share premium continued On 20 May 201 4 and 25 November 201 4 the Company issued 16442684 and 5257 86 1 new ordinary shares respectively to shareholders who elected to receive their 201 3 final and 201 4 interim dividends in shares under the Scrip Dividend Scheme.
The value of the Scrip Shares was calculated in accordance with the terms of the Scrip Dividend Scheme being the average middle market quotations for each day between 31 March to 4 April 201 4 inclusive and between 3 October to 9 October 201 4 respectively less the gross amount of dividend payable.
As a result the Companys share capital increased by  10.9 million and share premium by 5 1.3 million.
On 7 July 2014 the Company issued 42394779 new ordinary shares following conversion of 3.75 per cent convertible bonds see note 33.
Utilising the convertible bonds equity reserve of 143.7 million the Companys share capital increased by 21.2 million and share premium by 1 22.5 million.
Full details of the rights and obligations attaching to the ordinary shares are contained in the Companys Articles of Association.
These rights include an entitlement to receive the Companys report and financial statements to attend and speak at General Meetings of the Company to appoint proxies and to exercise voting rights.
Holders of ordinary shares may also receive dividends and may receive a share of the Companys assets on the Companys liquidation.
There are no restrictions on the transfer of the ordinary shares.
At 27 February 201 5 the Company had an unexpired authority to repurchase shares up to a maximum of 1 25208732 shares with a nominal value of 62.6 million and the Directors have an unexpired authority to allot up to a maximum of 353267  1 19 shares with a nominal value of 1 76.6 million.
Included within the issued share capital as at 31 December 2014 are 1 3 1 31 185 ordinary shares 201 3  1 2620925 held by the T rustee of the ESOP which is operated by the Company note 39.
The nominal value of these shares at 31 December 2014 is 6.6 million 201 3  6.3 million.
38 Other reserves
Capital redemption
Other
Total
At 1 January 2013 61.4 0.2 275.5 336.7 Revaluation of other investments note 25   8.1 8.1 Exchange differences  7.1  7.1 T ax relating to components of other comprehensive income note 14   1.6 1.6 Ordinary shares issued   164.4 164.4 At 31 December 2013 61.4 7.3 446.4 500.5 Revaluation of other investments note 25   21.1 21.1 Exchange differences  7.4  7.4 T ax relating to components of other comprehensive income note 14   6.6 6.6 Realisation of merger reserve   164.4 164.4 At 31 December 2014 61.4 0.1 296.5 358.0
Capital redemption
Total
At 1 January 2013 61.4  61.4 Ordinary shares issued  164.4 164.4 At 31 December 2013 61.4 164.4 225.8 Realisation of merger reserve  164.4 164.4 At 31 December 2014 61.4  61.4 During the year the merger reserve created as part of the March 201 3 capital raise has been realised and transferred to retained earnings following redemption of preference shares held by the Company.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 39 Employee Share Ownership Plan ESOP The cost of shares in Intu Properties plc held by the T rustee of the Employee Share Ownership Plan operated by the Company is accounted for as a deduction from equity.
The purpose of the ESOP is to acquire and hold shares which will be transferred to employees in the future under the Groups employee incentive arrangements as described in note 49 and the Directors remuneration report on pages 71 to 83 including joint ownership of shares in its role as T rustee of the Joint Share Ownership Plan.
Dividends of 1.4 million 201 3  1.8 million in respect of these shares have been waived by agreement.
Group and Company
Shares million At 1 January 12.6 48.2 11.4 43.9 Adjustment for rights issue 1.3 Acquisitions 0.3 1.0 2.0 7.0 Disposals 1.1 4.1 0.8 2.7 At 31 December 13.1 45.1 12.6 48.2 40 Business combinations Acquisition during 2014 On 1 May 2014 the Group acquired interests in a number of entities for a consideration of 854.9 million.
These entities together hold a 100 per cent interest in intu Derby a 50 per cent joint venture interest in intu Merry Hill and a 100 per cent interest in Sprucefield retail park in Northern Ireland.
The transaction is accounted for as a single business combination as this was announced as one deal from one ultimate vendor and completed on the same day.
Consideration was in cash and totalled 854.9 million consisting of a payment on completion of 867 .8 million less 1 2.9 million received following final agreement of the completion balance sheet.
The cash flow statement reflects the 854.9 million less the cash acquired of 3.6 million.
Acquisition related costs of 1 1.8 million have been incurred in the year and recognised in the income statement in exceptional administration expenses.
Further details of the acquisition are given in the Strategic review.
The fair value of assets and liabilities acquired is set out in the table below Fair value
Investment and development property 458.4 Investment in joint venture  intu Merry Hill 403.8 Cash and cash equivalents 3.6 Trade and other receivables 2.8 T otal assets 868.6
Trade and other payables 12.1 T otal liabilities 12.1 Net assets 856.5 Fair value of consideration paid 854.9 Gain on acquisition of businesses 1.6 The fair value of the assets investment in joint venture and liabilities acquired exceeds the fair value of the consideration and as a result a gain of 1.6 million is recognised in the income statement on acquisition.
The acquired companies contributed 28.7 million to the revenue of the Group and 76.9 million to the profit of the Group for the year .
Acquisitions during 2013 Acquisition of Midsummer Place On 25 March 201 3 the Group acquired 100 per cent of the Midsummer Place Shopping Centre renamed intu Milton Keynes with certain integrated activities assets and liabilities for cash consideration of 248.6 million.
Assets and liabilities acquired consisted of investment property with book and fair value of 250.5 million along with other payables with book and fair value of 1.9 million.
Consideration was equal to the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired and so no goodwill arose.
Acquisition related costs of 1 1.2 million were incurred and recognised in the income statement in exceptional administration expenses.
During 201 3 the acquired business contributed 1 1.4 million to the revenue and 9.3 million to the profit of the Group.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 40 Business combinations continued Acquisition of Parque Principado In 201 3 the Group and CPP Investment Board Real Estate Holdings Inc.
CPPIB together established Parque Principado S. r . up for the purpose of acquiring Parque Principado.
On 4 October 201 3 a 100 per cent owned subsidiary of Parque Principado S. r . acquired 100 per cent of the share capital of Parque Principado S.
142.6 million.
The businesses acquired form Parque Principado a shopping centre in Oviedo Spain.
Acquisition related costs of 2.0 million were incurred and recognised in the income statement in exceptional administration expenses.
CPPIB held a 49 per cent noncontrolling interest in Parque Principado S. r . investment and provided funding of 71.
1 million.
In 2014 CPPIB exercised an option allowing them to acquire an additional one per cent of debt and equity on terms in line with the original acquisition see note 4 1 .
The fair value of assets and liabilities acquired in 201 3 is set out in the table below Fair value
Investment property 144.7 Trade and other receivables 1.1 Cash and cash equivalents including restricted cash of 4.1 million 13.0 T otal assets 158.8
Trade and other payables 8.4 Deferred tax liabilities 12.0 T otal liabilities 20.4 Net assets 138.4 The fair value of the consideration of 142.6 million exceeded the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired resulting in the recognition of goodwill of 4.2 million in the balance sheet on acquisition.
The goodwill arose due to the recognition of a deferred tax liability.
The deferred tax liability is calculated as required under IFRS on the basis of the tax gain that would arise in the acquired company were it to dispose of the asset.
During 201 3 the acquired businesses contributed 3.4 million to the revenue and 2.8 million to the profit of the Group.
41 Disposal of subsidiaries On 20 June 2014 the Group sold 80 per cent of its interest in Intu Uxbridge Limited a wholly owned subsidiary for consideration of 1 7 4.6 million before expenses of 1.3 million.
The Group retains a 20 per cent interest in the company and as a result of the terms governing the management of the business this interest has been accounted for as a joint venture from 20 June 2014.
As a result of this transaction the Group has recorded a gain on disposal of 0.6 million in the income statement.
The cash flow statement records a net inflow of 1 7 4.
1 million being cash received of 1 7 4.6 million net of cash in the business of 0.5 million.
During the year CPPIB who held a 49 per cent noncontrolling interest in Parque Principado S. r . them to acquire an additional one per cent holding and certain rights relating to the management of the business.
This has resulted in Parque Principado previously accounted for as a subsidiary being accounted for as a joint venture from that date.
As a result the assets and liabilities of Parque Principado previously recorded in the balance sheet at 100 per cent and the related noncontrolling interest in reserves of 68.7 million have been reclassified to investments in joint ventures.
The cash flow statement shows an outflow of 1 1.6 million representing cash in the business of 1 2.9 million which is reclassified as part of the investment in joint ventures net of consideration received on exercise of the option of 1.3 million.
No gain or loss arose on exercise of the option.
42 Capital commitments At 31 December 2014 the Board had approved 80.
1 million 201 3  86.
1 million of future expenditure for the purchase construction development and enhancement of investment property.
Of this 30.7 million 201 3  54.3 million is contractually committed.
The majority of this is expected to be spent in 201 5.
43 Contingent liabilities At 31 December 2014 the Group has no material contingent liabilities other than those arising in the normal course of business.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 44 Cash generated from operations
Group
Represented
Group
Company
Company
Profit before tax joint ventures and associates 493.2 336.8 158.6 53.0
Revaluation of investment and development property 19 567.8 109.9 Gain on acquisition of businesses 40 1.6 Gain on disposal of subsidiaries 41 0.6 Depreciation 20 2.1 1.8 1.7 1.5 Sharebased payments 2.5 2.0 2.5 2.0 Lease incentives and letting costs 8.3 11.5 Reversal of impairment of investment in group companies 21   208.1 88.3 Finance costs 10 197.1 192.6 26.4 17.4 Finance income 11 11.9 0.6 13.0 8.0 Other finance costs 12 56.8 164.5 7.5 0.8 Change in fair value of financial instruments 13 157.6 272.3 12.7 2.0 Changes in working capital Change in trade and other receivables 29.6 4.3 144.8 450.9 Change in trade and other payables 3.2 1.5 193.0 216.0 Cash generated from operations 292.7 300.6 349.5 254.5 45 Principal subsidiary undertakings Company and principal activity Class of share capital % held Barton Square Limited property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Shopping Centres plc property and its principal subsidiary undertakings Ordinary shares of 50p each 100 Belside Limited property Jersey Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Braehead Park Estates Limited property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Broadmarsh Retail General Partner Limited acting as General Partner of The Broadmarsh  A  Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Retail Limited Partnership property B Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Curley Limited property Jersey Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 IntuDigital Limited online shopping centre 31 March year end Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Bromley Limited property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Experiences Limited commercial promotion Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Midsummer Limited property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Retail Services Limited facilities management services Ordinary shares of 1 each 51 Intu The Hayes Limited finance Ordinary shares of 50p each 100 Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 45 Principal subsidiary undertakings continued Company and principal activity Class of share capital % held Intu SGS Limited holding company and its principal subsidiary undertakings Braehead Glasgow Limited property  A  Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 B Ordinary shares of 1.3 each 100 Braehead Park Investments Limited property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Chapelfield GP Limited acting as General Partner of The Chapelfield Partnership property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Lakeside Limited property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu SGS Finco Limited finance Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Watford Limited property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 VCP GP Limited acting as General Partner of The Victoria Centre Partnership property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Wilmslow No.3 General Partner Limited acting as General Partner of The Wilmslow No.3 Limited Partnership Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Debenture plc finance and its principal subsidiary undertakings Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Braehead Limited as partner in the Braehead Leisure Partnership property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Braehead Leisure Limited as partner in the Braehead Leisure Partnership property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Eldon Square Limited property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Potteries GP Limited acting as General Partner of The Potteries Shopping Centre Limited Partnership property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Steventon Limited property Jersey Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Finance MH Limited finance Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Intu Jersey Limited finance Jersey Ordinary shares of 100 each 100 Sprucefield No.2 General Partner Limited acting as General Partner of Sprucefield No.2 Limited Partnership Ordinary shares of 100 each 100 Liberty International Group Treasury Limited treasury management Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Liberty International Holdings Limited holding company Ordinary shares of 50p each 100 Metrocentre GP Limited acting as General Partner of The Metrocentre Partnership property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 Nailsfield Limited holding company Mauritius Ordinary shares of US1 each 100 The Trafford Centre Finance Limited finance Cayman Islands Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 The Trafford Centre Limited property Ordinary shares of 1 each 100 A  Preference shares of 17p each 100 B Preference shares of 1 each 100 Shareholdings in these companies are held by intermediate subsidiary undertakings except for Liberty International Holdings Limited where 40.2 per cent is held by Intu Properties plc 31.1 per cent is held by Conduit Insurance Holdings Limited and 28.7 per cent is held by TAI Investments Limited.
By virtue of their 40 per cent interest in The Metrocentre Partnership GIC Real Estate is entitled to appoint 40 per cent of the Directors of Metrocentre GP Limited.
72.8 million of the noncontrolling interest shown in the balance sheet as at 31 December 2014 2013  33.0 million and 12.5 million of the noncontrolling interest share of profit for the year shown in the income statement for the year ended 31 December 2014 2013  4.0 million relates to GIC Real Estates interest.
At 31 December 2014 this was the Groups only subsidiary that has a noncontrolling interest that is material to the Group.
Summarised financial information is provided below.
Bilfinger Europa Facilities Management Limited formerly Europa Support Services Limited hold a 49 per cent interest in Intu Retail Services Limited.
At 31 December 2014 an amount of nil is included within the noncontrolling interest balance in the balance sheet of nil million 2013  nil million and nil million of the noncontrolling interest share of profit for the year shown in the income statement for the year ended 31 December 2014 2013  nil relating to their interest.
4 Percentage held is the Groups effective interest in the subsidiaries listed.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 45 Principal subsidiary undertakings continued Companies are incorporated and registered in England and Wales and have a 31 December year end unless otherwise stated.
The companies listed are those subsidiary undertakings whose results or financial position in the opinion of the Directors principally affected the figures in the Companys consolidated financial statements.
A full list of related undertakings will be annexed to the Companys next annual return.
Intu SGS Finance plc and Intu Metrocentre Finance plc are consolidated as subsidiaries in these financial statements but are not listed in the table above as the Group does not own the shares in these companies.
These companies are vehicles set up on behalf of the Group for the sole purpose of issuing some of the Groups listed debt.
The Groups obligations in respect of this debt via a backto back intercompany loan agreement between these companies and other Group companies and security over investment property via a deed of charge between the security trustees and other Group companies mean that the Group is deemed to have control of these entities.
Set out below is the summarised financial information of The Metrocentre Partnership at 100% as consolidated Summarised income statement Revenue 65.9 66.7 Profit for the year 31.2 10.0 Summarised balance sheet Investment and development property 909.5 867.0 Other assets 50.8 38.1 Liabilities 775.1 819.1 Net assets 185.2 86.0 46 Related party transactions Key management compensation is analysed below Salaries and shortterm employee benefits 5.4 4.8 Pensions and other postemployment benefits 0.4 0.4 Sharebased payments 1.6 1.3 1 Key management comprise the Directors of Intu Properties plc and employees who have been designated as persons discharging managerial responsibility.
As John Whittaker  Deputy Chairman and NonExecutive Director of Intu is the Chairman of the Peel Group members of the Peel Group are considered to be related parties.
T otal transactions between the Group and members of the Peel Group are shown below Income 1.6 2.7 Expenditure 0.9 1.0 Income predominantly relates to leases of office space and a contract to provide advertising services.
Expenditure predominantly relates to costs incurred under a management services agreement and the supply of utilities.
All contracts are on an arms length basis at commercial rates.
Additionally as part of the rights issue on 22 April 2014 the Peel Group agreed to underwrite their rights for which the Group paid an underwriting fee of 1.0 million.
Balances outstanding between the Group and members of the Peel Group as at 31 December 2014 are shown below Amounts owed by members of the Peel Group 0.2 0.1 Amounts owed to members of the Peel Group  0.1 Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 46 Related party transactions continued Under the terms of the Groups acquisition of intu T rafford Centre from the Peel Group the Peel Group have provided a guarantee in respect of Section 106 planning obligation liabilities at Barton Square which as at 31 December 2014 totalled 1 1.6 million 201 3  1 1.3 million.
In 201 2 the Group acquired for 2.5 million alongside a refundable deposit of 7 .5 million a three year option to purchase two parcels of land in the province of Mlaga Spain from Peel Holdings Limited.
The option was subsequently extended for no additional consideration to 6 March 201 5 and it is the Groups intention subject to shareholder approval to exercise this option in March 201 5.
During the year the Group paid 3.
1 million towards costs associated with predevelopment activity.
Richard Gordon a NonExecutive Director of Intu is the Gordon Family Interests representative on the Board therefore those companies comprising the Gordon Family Interest are considered to be related parties.
As part of the rights issue on 22 April 2014 the Gordon Family Shareholders agreed to underwrite part of their rights for which the Group paid an underwriting fee of 0.2 million.
T ransactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties have been eliminated on consolidation in the Groups financial information.
Significant transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries are shown below Interest paid 20.6 10.3 Interest received 13.0 7.9 Dividend received 9.1 Investment in subsidiaries 182.8 197.2 Redemption of preference shares 197.2 The Company has provided Intu Jersey Limited a guarantee over obligations in relation to the 2.5 per cent convertible bonds see note 33.
Significant balances outstanding between the Company and its subsidiaries are shown below Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings 1284.4 1126.4 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings 376.8 544.6 47 Directors emoluments The details of individual Directors remuneration and pension benefits as set out in the tables contained in the Directors remuneration report on pages 71 to 83 form part of these financial statements.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 48 Change in accounting policy As described in note 1 the Group has adopted IFRS 1 1 Joint Arrangements in preparing these financial statements.
The tables below show the impact on the income statements and balance sheets for the periods presented in these financial statements.
The adoption of IFRS 1 1 Joint Arrangements has no impact on the profit for the year attributable to owners of Intu Properties plc and noncontrolling interests basic earnings per share and diluted earnings per share the consolidated statement of comprehensive income or statement of changes in equity for current or comparative periods.
Details of the Groups principal investments in joint ventures are given in note 22.
Consolidated income statement Before adoption Impact of IFRS 11 As presented Net rental income 396.6 34.0 362.6 Net other income 4.8  4.8 Revaluation of investment and development property 648.2 80.4 567.8 Gain on acquisition of businesses 1.6  1.6 Gain on disposal of subsidiaries 0.6  0.6 Administration expenses  ongoing 31.1 0.3 30.8 Administration expenses  exceptional 13.9 0.1 13.8 Operating profit 1006.8 114.0 892.8 Finance costs 201.2 4.1 197.1 Finance income 1.2 10.7 11.9 Other finance costs 56.8  56.8 Change in fair value of financial instruments 157.0 0.6 157.6 Net finance costs 413.8 14.2 399.6 Profit before tax joint ventures and associates 593.0 99.8 493.2 Share of posttax profit of joint ventures  99.7 99.7 Share of posttax profit of associates 0.8  0.8 Profit before tax 593.8 0.1 593.7 Current tax 0.6 0.1 0.5 Deferred tax 6.6  6.6 Taxation 6.0 0.1 6.1 Profit for the year 599.8  599.8 Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 48 Change in accounting policy continued Consolidated income statement As previously presented Impact of IFRS 11
Net rental income 369.5 13.3 356.2 Net other income 3.8 0.1 3.7 Revaluation of investment and development property 125.8 15.9 109.9 Administration expenses  ongoing 27.7 0.1 27.6 Administration expenses  exceptional 21.2  21.2 Operating profit 450.2 29.2 421.0 Finance costs 197.2 4.6 192.6 Finance income 0.6  0.6 Other finance costs 164.5  164.5 Change in fair value of financial instruments 273.8 1.5 272.3 Net finance costs 87.3 3.1 84.2 Profit before tax joint ventures and associates 362.9 26.1 336.8 Share of posttax profit of joint ventures  26.1 26.1 Share of posttax profit of associates 0.5  0.5 Profit before tax 363.4  363.4 Current tax 0.8  0.8 Deferred tax 1.4  1.4 Taxation 0.6  0.6 Profit for the year 364.0  364.0 Accounts Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 48 Change in accounting policy continued Consolidated balance sheet Before adoption Impact of IFRS 11 As presented Noncurrent assets Investment and development property 8888.8 869.2 8019.6 Plant and equipment 5.1  5.1 Investment in joint ventures  851.5 851.5 Investment in associates 38.0  38.0 Other investments 189.7  189.7 Goodwill 5.9 1.9 4.0 Derivative financial instruments 9.0  9.0 Trade and other receivables 113.8 14.1 99.7 9250.3 33.7 9216.6 Current assets Trading property 0.1 0.1 Trade and other receivables 128.1 13.4 114.7 Derivative financial instruments 0.7  0.7 Cash and cash equivalents 260.1 30.1 230.0 T otal assets 9639.3 77.3 9562.0 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 270.8 19.3 251.5 Current tax liabilities 0.7 0.1 0.6 Borrowings 21.3  21.3 Derivative financial instruments 80.7  80.7 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 4368.3 35.6 4332.7 Derivative financial instruments 276.2 0.4 275.8 Other payables 18.9 16.3 2.6 Deferred tax 5.6 5.6 4669.0 57.9 4611.1 T otal liabilities 5042.5 77.3 4965.2 Net assets 4596.8  4596.8 Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 48 Change in accounting policy continued Consolidated balance sheet As previously presented Impact of IFRS 11
Noncurrent assets Investment and development property 7551.4 272.7 7278.7 Plant and equipment 5.5  5.5 Investment in joint ventures  209.5 209.5 Investment in associates 35.8  35.8 Other investments 154.9  154.9 Goodwill 8.2  8.2 Derivative financial instruments 25.1  25.1 Trade and other receivables 111.2 12.0 99.2 7892.1 75.2 7816.9 Current assets Trading property 0.4 0.2 0.2 Trade and other receivables 81.6 3.5 78.1 Derivative financial instruments 0.7  0.7 Shortterm investments 69.3  69.3 Cash and cash equivalents 165.5 8.8 156.7 T otal assets 8209.6 87.7 8121.9 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 245.8 7.7 238.1 Current tax liabilities 1.2 0.3 0.9 Borrowings 149.2 78.3 70.9 Derivative financial instruments 11.4 1.3 10.1 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 3944.0  3944.0 Derivative financial instruments 220.5  220.5 Other payables 4.4 0.1 4.3 Deferred tax 12.0  12.0 4180.9 0.1 4180.8 T otal liabilities 4588.5 87.7 4500.8 Net assets 3621.1  3621.1 Accounts Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 48 Change in accounting policy continued Consolidated balance sheet As previously presented Impact of IFRS 11
Noncurrent assets Investment and development property 7009.7 275.5 6734.2 Plant and equipment 5.6  5.6 Investment in joint ventures  191.9 191.9 Investment in associates 40.9  40.9 Other investments 148.8  148.8 Goodwill 4.0  4.0 Derivative financial instruments 21.2  21.2 Trade and other receivables 104.0 11.5 92.5 7334.2 95.1 7239.1 Current assets Trading property 2.1 1.9 0.2 Trade and other receivables 66.6 3.3 63.3 Derivative financial instruments 0.7  0.7 Cash and cash equivalents 188.1 5.7 182.4 T otal assets 7591.7 106.0 7485.7 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 220.9 9.6 211.3 Current tax liabilities 0.6 0.2 0.4 Borrowings 94.2 0.1 94.1 Derivative financial instruments 19.1  19.1 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 3751.6 92.5 3659.1 Derivative financial instruments 495.8 3.5 492.3 Other payables 3.3 0.1 3.2 4250.7 96.1 4154.6 T otal liabilities 4585.5 106.0 4479.5 Net assets 3006.2  3006.2 49 Sharebased payment The Group operates a number of sharebased payment arrangements providing employee benefits and incentives.
All schemes are equity settled and as such the expense recognised in the income statement is based on the fair value of the equity instruments awarded as determined at their grant date.
The expense is recognised on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on Group estimates of the number of shares that are expected to vest.
Share Option Schemes Options to subscribe for ordinary shares may be awarded under the Intu Properties plc Approved Share Option Scheme and the Intu Properties plc Unapproved Share Option Scheme.
Certain grants are subject to an earnings per share EPS performance condition.
Options granted to members of the Executive Committee in 201 2 are subject to a sliding scale performance condition based on EPS growth of between 4 to 6 per cent per annum over a threeyear period.
Options granted to staff who are not members of the Executive Committee 201 2 are not subject to a performance condition.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 49 Sharebased payment continued Except in the case of a good leaver  options may not be exercised within three years of grant and before satisfaction or waiver of any applicable performance condition and are forfeited if the employee leaves the Group before the options become capable of exercise.
The options automatically lapse if not exercised within 10 years of the date of grant.
Movements in the number of share options outstanding and their related weighted average exercise prices are as follows 2014 2013 Number of options Weighted average exercise price pence Number of options Weighted average exercise price pence Outstanding at 1 January 5867697 320 6202036 312 Awarded prior to rights issue   1565000 335 Forfeited prior to rights issue 10000 335 234417 346 Lapsed prior to rights issue 536628 430 93016 389 Exercised prior to rights issue 11041 272 1571906 294 Adjustment for rights issue 897337 na  na Awarded after rights issue 1834800 292 Forfeited after rights issue 100759 287 Exercised after rights issue 1768303 255 Outstanding at 31 December 6173103 275 5867697 320 Exercisable at 31 December 2406626 253 3744305 307 The weighted average share price at the date of exercise during the year was 307p 201 3  334p.
The number of options outstanding at 31 December 2014 includes a total of 2 1 5054 1 201 3  381 7 931  which are subject to a capped gain price of 2.8563 per share as adjusted for rights issue.
In 201 3 663 192 were subject to a capped price of 3.066 per share adjusted for the rights issue.
All were exercised in 2014.
If the market price of shares at the date of exercise exceeds the capped price the maximum gain the holder of such options can realise is the difference between exercise price and the capped price per share.
Share options outstanding at 31 December 2014 had exercise prices between 232p and 292p 201 3  between 272p and 528p and a weighted average remaining contractual life of approximately seven years 201 3  seven years.
More detail by exercise price ranges is shown below Exercise price pence Number of options
Exercise price pence Number of options
387 to 528 536628 5 The fair value of options granted during the year  determined using the BlackScholes option pricing model was 0.26 per option The significant inputs to the model for the majority of options granted during the year were as follows 2014 2013 Share price and exercise price at grant date 2.92 3.35 Expected option life in years 4 years 4 years Risk free rate 1.8% 0.9% Expected volatility 19.2% 22.0% Expected dividend yield 4.7% 4.5% Expected dividend yield is based on public pronouncements about future dividend levels.
All other measures are based on historical data.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 49 Sharebased payment continued Performance Share Plan The Company operates a Performance Share Plan PSP for eligible employees at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
The PSP was approved by shareholders at the 201 3 Annual General Meeting.
Awards may be made in the form of nil cost options a conditional share award or a joint share ownership award and fixed value zero cost option and eligible employees may be granted any combination of such awards subject to any individual limits.
Vesting of PSP awards made in 2014 and 201 3 is based on T otal Shareholder Return TSR and Absolute T otal Return TR with performance measured one third over three years one third over four years and one third over five years.
Half of the awards vest by reference to TR 25 per cent vesting for 6 per cent per annum return full vesting for 10 per cent per annum straight line vesting in between.
The remaining half of the awards vest by reference to TSR relative to the top five UKlisted REIT s 25 per cent return vesting for TSR in line with the third rated company full vesting for TSR in line with the top rated company straight line vesting in between subject to a Remuneration Committee operated discretionary assessment of underlying financial performance.
Movements in the number of PSP options outstanding are as follows Number of options Number of options Outstanding at 1 January 1913145 Adjustment for rights issue 205416 Awarded during the year 1559340 1913145 Forfeited in the year 129825 Outstanding at 31 December 3548076 1913145 The fair value of TSR options granted during the year was determined using the MonteCarlo option pricing model.
The fair value of the TR options granted during the year was determined using the BlackScholes option pricing model.
The fair values per option granted in the year were as follows 2014 2013 Performance period TSR TR TSR TR The significant inputs to the valuation model for the TSR options granted during the year were as follows 2014 2013 Performance period TSR 3 years TSR 4 years TSR 5 years TSR 3 years TSR 4 years TSR 5 years Share price at grant date 2.92 2.92 2.92 3.57 3.57 3.57 Expected option life in years 2.7 years 3.7 years 4.7 years 2.5 years 3.5 years 4.5 years Risk free rate 1.06% 1.51% 1.83% 0.38% 0.58% 0.81% Expected volatility 20% 23% 26% 23% 27% 43% Expected competitor volatility 11%17% 11%17% 11%17% 20%23% 24%27% 41%52% Average correlation 68% 71% 72% 72% 74% 78% The fair value of the TR options before taking account of the performance condition is equal to the share price at the date of grant of 2.92 201 3  3.57 as these awards accumulate dividends over the performance period.
At the date of grant a 25 per cent vesting has been assumed resulting in a fair value per share of 0.73 201 3  0.89 as above.
Joint Share Ownership Plan Eligible employees may be invited to participate in the Joint Share Ownership Plan  JSOP which forms part of the Intu Properties plc Unapproved Share Option Scheme and the PSP .
Under the JSOP shares are held jointly by the employee and the Employee Share Ownership Plan T rustee with any increases in the share price and dividends paid on those shares being allocated between the joint owners in accordance with the terms of the scheme.
Conditions for exercise including satisfaction of the same performance condition forfeiture and lapsing are as set out above for options or PSP generally.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 49 Sharebased payment continued In 201 2 individuals who received awards of unapproved options in 201 1 and 201 2 were given the option to exchange their awards for jointly owned shares under the JSOP .
In 201 3 participants in the PSP were given the option to take their awards in the form of jointly owned shares under the JSOP and fixed value zero cost options.
No option was given in 2014.
Bonus Share Scheme Under the Companys Bonus Scheme the Bonus Scheme deferred shares may be awarded as part of any bonus.
Such awards comprise Restricted shares and  Additional shares.
Where awarded Additional shares are equal to 50 per cent of the Restricted shares and SIP shares see below combined.
The vesting of deferred share awards is not dependent on the achievement of any further performance conditions other than that participants remain employed by the Group for a specified time from the date of the award typically two to three years in the case of Restricted shares and four years in the case of Additional shares.
The fair value of Restricted shares granted with the condition for participants to remain employed by the Group for two years during the year determined using the BlackScholes option pricing model was 2.66 per share 201 3  3.06 per share.
The fair value of Restricted shares with the condition for participants to remain employed by the Group for three years determined using the BlackScholes options pricing model was 2.54.
The significant inputs to the model were as follows Vesting periodtel Remain employed for 3 years 2 years 2 years Share price at grant date 2.92 2.92 3.35 Expected option life in years 3 years 2 years 2 years Risk free rate 1.5% 1.1% 0.6% Expected volatility 15.6% 15.4% 14.2% Expected dividend yield 4.7% 4.7% 4.5% Movements in shares awarded under the Bonus Share Scheme are as follows 2014 2013 Y ear of grant Restricted Additional Restricted Additional Outstanding at 1 January 1085286  995099 Awarded during the year 428424  545219 Adjustment for rights issue 183348 Forfeited during the year 35751  32885 Vested during the year 647500  422147 Outstanding at 31 December 1013807  1085286 Share incentive plan SIP The Company operates a SIP for all eligible employees who may receive up to 3000 3600 from the tax year 20141 5 worth of shares as part of their annual bonus arrangements.
The SIP arrangements offer worthwhile tax advantages to employees and to the Company.
The SIP Bonus shares can be released three years after the date of the award provided the individual employee has remained in employment but the shares must then be held in trust for a further two years in order to qualify for tax advantages.
The fair value of shares granted during the year  determined using the BlackScholes option pricing model was 2.92 per share 201 3  3.35 per share.
As these awards accumulate dividends the fair value of each share awarded is equal to the share price at the date of grant of 2.92.
As part of the SIP arrangements the Company also offers eligible employees the opportunity to participate in a Partnership share scheme under which employees can save up to 1 25 a month 1 50 a month from the tax year 20141 5.
The Group offers one free Matching share for every two Partnership shares purchased by the employee at the end of a 1 2 month saving period.
Matching shares are forfeited if the employee leaves the Group within three years of the date of award and qualify for tax advantages if they are held in the SIP for five years.
The fair value of Matching shares is determined by the market price at the grant date.
The dividend payable in respect of the shares held in the SIP is used to purchase additional shares known as Dividend Shares which are also held in trust and allocated to individuals and are subject to the same conditions of release.
Accounts
Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 49 Sharebased payment continued Movements in SIP bonus shares granted are as follows 2014 2013 Outstanding at 1 January 224743 147935 Awarded during the year 114319 84956 Adjustment for rights issue 7158 Forfeited during the year 20171 8148 Vested during the year Outstanding at 31 December 260271 224743 1 May still be held in trust.
2 Shares that remain within their threeyear holding period.
50 Pensions The Group operates defined contribution group pension plans for its head office and centre management staff.
Additionally the Group makes contributions to selfinvested personal pension arrangements SIPPs on behalf of an Executive Director .
All contributions are invested in funds administered outside of the Group.
In 201 3 the Group also operated for T rafford Centre employees a trusteebased money purchase scheme The T rafford Centre Limited Retirement Benefits Scheme and a stakeholder scheme.
From 1 October 201 3 the Groups subsidiary Intu Retail Services Limited has operated a defined contribution group pension plan for its staff including previous members of The T rafford Centre Limited Retirement Benefit Scheme.
Since 1 October 201 3 the Group has made no further contribution to The T rafford Centre Limited Retirement Benefits Scheme which no longer has any active members.
The pension charge for the Groups contributions to these arrangements is the amount paid which totalled 2.7 million for the year ended 31 December 2014 201 3  1.9 million.
51 Events after the reporting period On 19 January 201 5 the Group completed the acquisition of Puerto Venecia Investments SOCIMI SA which owns the Puerto Venecia shopping centre in Zaragoza Spain.
Initial consideration was 21 5.5 million which will be adjusted to reflect the finalisation of the completion balance sheet.
Additionally loans of 59.
1 million were acquired from the vendor .
The value of investment properties on acquisition was 450.8 million and loan liabilities of 180.9 million were acquired and refinanced on completion.
An exercise is being undertaken to assess the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired but has not been completed at the date of signing these financial statements.
52 Directors interests a In shares in the Company The number of ordinary shares of the Company in which the Directors were beneficially interested were 2014 2013
Patrick Burgess 37627 29266 Deputy Chairman John Whittaker 296155452 192102358
David Fischel 965646 666987 Matthew Roberts 154506 64499
Adle Anderson 18124 13712 Richard Gordon 7004818 5436526 Andrew Huntley 7714 18000 Louise Patten 12857 10000 Neil Sachdev Andrew Strang Total beneficial interest includes shares held by subsidiaries of the Peel Group of which John Whittaker is the Chairman.
In addition the 2013 reporting included the 3.75 per cent convertible bonds issued on 28 January 2011 and converted on 7 July 2014 which are explained in detail in note 33 are held by the Peel Group and therefore constituted an interest of John Whittaker.
John Whittakers total interest in ordinary shares of the Company including shares issuable on conversion of the 3.75 per cent convertible bonds at 31 December 2013 was therefore 230681608 representing 23.69 per cent of issued share capital following such conversion.
During the year interest on the 3.75 per cent convertible bonds recognised directly in equity totalled 2.9 million 2013  5.8 million.
Notes to the accounts continued
Intu Properties plc site 52 Directors interests continued Conditional awards of shares have previously been made to Executive Directors under the Companys annual bonus scheme.
The awards comprise Restricted shares and  Additional shares the latter equal to 50 per cent of the Restricted and Share Incentive Plan shares combined.
Executive Directors were required to retain the shares net of shares sold to meet tax and PA YE deductions which vested ahead of the normal vesting date.
Awards to Executive Directors under the scheme since January 201 3 are as follows Award date
Original
Market price at vesting pence Number of shares at 31 December
Number of shares awarded during 2014 Number of shares vested during 2014 Number of shares at 31 December David Fischel 05032012 336 05032014 292 153795 25991  179786 07032013 335 07032015  123283 20834   144117 29042014 292 29042016    30655  30655 29042014 292 29042017    29627  29627 Matthew Roberts 05032012 336 05032014 292 113170 19125  132295 07032013 335 07032015  94626 15991   110617 29042014 292 29042016    24558  24558 29042014 292 29042017    23530  23530 1 Due to the rights issue vesting was delayed to 7 April 2014.
Details of Restricted and Additional shares awarded in respect of the year ended 31 December 2014 are given in the Directors remuneration report on pages 71 to 83.
Awards may also be made under the Companys Share Incentive Plan SIP.
The SIP shares can be released three years after the date of the award provided the individual Director has remained in employment but the shares must be held in trust for a further two years in order to qualify for tax advantages.
The dividend payable in respect of the shares held in trust is used to purchase additional shares known as Dividend Shares which are also held in trust.
At
31 December Removed from trust Lapsed Awarded
At
31 December Current Directors David Fischel 11578   1027 1248 13853 Matthew Roberts 4222   1027 961 6210 1 SIP shares in respect of the year ended 31 December 2013 awarded in April 2014.
Details of SIP shares awarded in respect of the year ended 31 December 2014 are given in the Directors remuneration report on pages 71 to 83.
Executive Directors interests in share options and the PSP are given in the Directors remuneration report on pages 71 to 83.
No Director had any dealings in the shares of any Group company between 31 December 2014 and 27 February 201 5 being a date less than one month prior to the date of the notice convening the Annual General Meeting.
Other than as disclosed in these accounts no Director of the Company had a material interest in any contract other than service contracts transaction or arrangement with any Group company during the year ended 31 December 2014.
Other information Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 1 Property data Market value
Net initial yield EPRA T oppedup NIY
Nominal equivalent yield Occupancy As at 31 December 2014
Manchester Arndale 430.2 7% 4.6% 4.7% 5.2% 96% intu Derby 420.0 8% 6.3% 6.6% 6.2% 100% intu Watford 335.0 3% 4.5% 4.8% 6.3% 92% intu Victoria Centre 314.0 7% 4.0% 4.6% 6.2% 93% intu Milton Keynes 277.5 10% 4.5% 4.6% 4.9% 99% intu Eldon Square 272.6 7% 4.1% 4.9% 6.1% 95% intu Chapelfield 261.0 7% 5.0% 5.5% 6.0% 97% Cribbs Causeway 242.9 5% 4.1% 4.3% 5.5% 90% intu Bromley 170.7 5% 5.3% 5.6% 7.1% 86% intu Potteries 164.5 3% 5.3% 5.4% 7.5% 95% Other 210.8 Investment and development property excluding Groups share of joint ventures 8081.6 Joint ventures St Davids Cardiff 308.0 15% 4.7% 4.9% 5.2% 93% intu Merry Hill 434.8 7% 5.1% 5.2% 5.1% 95% Parque Principado 82.2 21% 5.7% 6.5% 6.0% 99% Other 56.8 Investment and development property including Groups share of joint ventures 8963.4 4.36% 4.60% 5.32% 95% As at 31 December 2013 including Groups share of joint ventures 7623.8 4.74% 4.97% 5.79% 95%
A Revaluation surplus assessed from date of acquisition.
B Calculated in local currency.
31 December 31 December Passing rent 401.4 367.9 Annual property income 436.2 402.1 Weighted average unexpired lease term 7.4 years 7.5 years Please refer to the Glossary for definitions.
Investment and development property unaudited Other information Intu Properties plc site Investment and development property unaudited continued 2 Analysis of capital return in the year Market value Revaluation surplusdeficit m m % Likeforlike property 7839.7 7187.5 587.7 8.2 Acquisitions 923.2  56.3 na Part disposals 126.1 357.0 15.5 na Developments 74.4 79.3 11.3 na T otal investment and development property 8963.4 7623.8 648.2 na 3 Additional property information Ownership Note Form of
Gross area million sq. ft.
Year opened
Date
As at 31 December 2014 intu Trafford Centre 100% FH 2.0 1998 2011 intu Lakeside 100% FH 1.4 1990 intu Metrocentre 90% A LH 2.1 1986 1995 intu Braehead 100% FH 1.1 1999 Manchester Arndale 48% B LH 1.6 1976 2005 intu Derby 100% FHLH 1.3 2007 2014 intu Watford 93% LH 0.7 1992 intu Victoria Centre 100% FH 1.0 1972 2002 intu Milton Keynes 100% FH 0.4 2000 2013 intu Eldon Square 60% FHLH 1.4 1976 intu Chapelfield 100% FH 0.5 2005 Cribbs Causeway 33% C FHLH 1.1 1998 2005 intu Bromley 64% LH 0.5 1991 intu Potteries 100% FH 0.6 1998 St Davids Cardiff 50% FHLH 1.4 2009 2006 intu Merry Hill 50% FH 1.7 1985 2014 Parque Principado 50% FH 0.8 2001 2013 Other D 1.8 Investment and development property including Groups share of joint ventures 21.4 As at 31 December 2013 18.2
Interest shown is that of the Metrocentre Partnership in intu Metrocentre 90 per cent and the Metro Retail Park 100 per cent.
The Group has a 60 per cent interest in the Metrocentre Partnership which is consolidated as a subsidiary of the Group.
B The Groups interest is through a joint operation ownership of a 95 per cent interest in Manchester Arndale and a 90 per cent interest in New Cathedral Street Manchester.
C The Groups interest is through a joint operation ownership of a 66 per cent interest in The Mall at Cribbs Causeway and a 100 per cent interest in The Retail Park Cribbs Causeway.
D Includes the Groups interests in intu Broadmarsh Soar at intu Braehead Sprucefield and intu Uxbridge.
E Form of ownership is shown as either freehold FH leasehold LH or freehold and leasehold FHLH.
F Area shown is not adjusted for the proportion of ownership.
G The acquisition date is presented only where the centre was not built by the Group.
H Intu held a 20 per cent stake in intu Victoria Centre Nottingham prior to 2002 when it acquired the remaining 80 per cent to take its holding to 100 per cent.
Other information Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Financial covenants unaudited Intu SGS Finance plc and Intu SGS Finco Limited Secured Group Structure
LTV covenant
Interest
Interest
T erm loan 351.8 2018 3.875 per cent bonds 450.0 2023 4.625 per cent bonds 350.0 2028 4.250 per cent bonds 350.0 2030 1501.8 80% 47% 125% 241% Tested on the Security Group the principal assets of which are intu Lakeside intu Braehead intu Watford intu Victoria Centre intu Chapelfield and intu Derby.
The structure has a tiered operating covenant regime giving the Group a significant degree of flexibility when the covenants are below certain levels.
In higher tiers the level of flexibility is reduced.
The Group retains operating control below loan to value of 72.5 per cent and interest cover above 1.4x.
No financial covenant default occurs unless the loan to value exceeds 80 per cent or the interest cover falls below 1.25x.
The Trafford Centre Finance Limited There are no financial covenants on the intu T rafford Centre debt of 81 2.7 million at 31 December 2014.
However a debt service cover ratio is assessed quarterly and where this falls below specified levels restrictions come into force.
The loan to 31 December 2014 market value ratio is 38 per cent.
No restrictions are in place at present.
Intu Metrocentre Finance plc
LTV covenant
Interest
Interest
4.125 per cent bonds 485.0 2023 100% 52% 125% 212% The structures covenant regime gives the Group a significant degree of flexibility when the covenants are below certain levels.
The Group retains operating control below loan to value of 70 per cent and interest cover above 1.4x.
No financial covenant default occurs unless loan to value exceeds 100 per cent or interest cover falls below 1.25x.
Other assetspecific debt
LTV covenant Loan to 31 December market value
Interest
Sprucefield 30.0 2016 65% 44% 150% 509% intu Merry Hill 191.3 2016 65% 44% 150% 338% intu Milton Keynes 125.3 2017 65% 45% 150% 242% Barton Square 42.5 2017 65% 49% 175% 205% St Davids Cardiff 122.5 2021 65% 40% 150% 298% Parque Principado 94.7m 2019 65% 51% 150% 273% The loan values are the actual principal balances outstanding at 31 January 2015 which take into account any principal repayments made in January 2015.
The loan to 31 December 2014 market value provides an indication of the impact the 31 December 2014 property valuations could have on the LTV covenants.
The actual timing and manner of testing LTV covenants varies and is loan specific.
Based on latest certified figures calculated in accordance with loan agreements which have been submitted between 31 December 2014 and 31 January 2015.
The calculations are loan specific and include a variety of historic forecast and in certain instances a combined historic and forecast basis.
4 During the year the loan facility was extended by one year.
5 50 per cent of the debt is shown which is consistent with the Groups economic interest.
Other information Intu Properties plc site Financial covenants unaudited continued Intu Debenture plc
Capital cover covenant Capital cover actual Interest cover covenant Interest cover actual 231.4 2027 150% 231% 100% 114% The debenture is currently secured on a number of the Groups properties including intu Potteries intu Eldon Square intu Broadmarsh and Soar at intu Braehead.
Should the capital cover or interest cover test be breached Intu Debenture plc the Issuer has three months from the date of delivery of the valuation or the latest certificate to the T rustees to make good any deficiencies.
The Issuer may withdraw property secured on the debenture by paying a sum of money or through the substitution of alternative property provided that the capital cover and interest cover tests are satisfied immediately following the substitution.
Financial covenants on corporate facilities Net worth covenant Net worth actual Interest cover covenant Interest cover actual
Borrowingsnet worth actual 600m facility maturing in 2019 750m 2575.3m 120% 192% 110% 57% 300m due in 2018 2.5 per cent convertible bonds na na na na 175% 10% Tested on the Borrower Group which excludes at the Groups election certain subsidiaries with assetspecific finance.
The facility is secured on the Groups investments in Manchester Arndale and Cribbs Causeway.
Tested on the Group excluding at the Groups election the borrowings on certain subsidiaries with assetspecific finance.
Interest rate swaps The table below sets out the nominal amount and average rate of hedging excluding lenders margins in place under current and forward starting swap contracts.
Nominal amount Average rate % In effect on or after 1 year 1678.3 3.20 2 years 1382.4 3.41 20 years 283.5 4.53 Other information Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Group including share of joint ventures unaudited for the year ended 31 December 2014 The information below is presented to show the Group including its share of joint ventures.
A reconciliation from the amounts shown in the Groups income statement and balance sheet is also shown.
Underlying profit for the year ended 31 December 2014 Groups income statement Share of joint ventures
Rent receivable 441.1 39.3 480.4 Service charge income 88.2 9.5 97.7 Facilities management income from joint ventures 7.1 3.0 4.1 Net rental income 362.6 34.0 396.6 Net other income 4.8  4.8 Administration expenses 30.8 0.3 31.1 Underlying operating profit 336.6 33.7 370.3 Finance costs 197.1 4.1 201.2 Finance income 11.9 10.7 1.2 Other finance costs 6.1  6.1 Underlying net finance costs 191.3 14.8 206.1 Underlying profit before tax joint ventures and associates 145.3 18.9 164.2 T ax on underlying profit 0.6 0.3 0.9 Share of underlying profit of joint ventures 18.6 18.6 Remove amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests 1.3  1.3 Interest on convertible bonds deducted directly in equity 2.9  2.9 Underlying earnings 161.7  161.7 Balance sheet as at 31 December 2014
Share of joint ventures
Assets
Investment and development property 8019.6 869.2 8888.8 Investments in joint ventures 851.5 851.5 Derivative financial instruments 9.7  9.7 Cash and cash equivalents 230.0 30.1 260.1 Other assets 451.2 29.5 480.7 T otal assets 9562.0 77.3 9639.3
Borrowings 4354.0 35.6 4389.6 Derivative financial instruments 356.5 0.4 356.9 Other liabilities 254.7 41.3 296.0 T otal liabilities 4965.2 77.3 5042.5 Net assets 4596.8  4596.8 Other information Intu Properties plc site Group including share of joint ventures unaudited for the year ended 31 December 2014 continued Net external debt The table below provides a reconciliation between the components of net debt included on the Groups balance sheet and net external debt including the Groups share of joint ventures debt and cash.
T otal borrowings 4354.0 4014.9 Cash and cash equivalents 230.0 156.7 Net debt 4124.0 3858.2 Metrocentre compound financial instrument 166.1 160.0 Shortterm investments Net external debt  before Groups share of joint ventures 3957.9 3628.9 Add share of borrowing of joint ventures 35.6 78.3 Less share of cash of joint ventures 30.1 8.8 Net external debt  including Groups share of joint ventures 3963.4 3698.4 Analysed as Debt including Groups share of joint ventures 4223.5 3933.2 Cash including Groups share of joint ventures 260.1 165.5 Shortterm investments Net external debt  including Groups share of joint ventures 3963.4 3698.4 1 Shortterm investments represents CMBS notes issued in respect of intu Metrocentre and received as cash in February 2014 following refinancing of this debt.
Debt to assets ratio Market value of investment and development property 8963.4 7623.8 Net external debt 3963.4 3698.4 Debt to assets ratio 44.2% 48.5% Interest cover Finance costs 201.2 197.2 Finance income 1.2 0.6 Interest on convertible bonds recognised directly to equity 2.9 5.8 Underlying operating profit 370.3 345.6 Less trading property related items 0.6 0.1 Interest cover 1.82x 1.71x Other information Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Underlying profit statement unaudited The underlying profit information in the table below shows the Group including its share of joint ventures which have been included on a linebyline basis.
Y ear ended 31 December Y ear ended 31 December Six months ended 31 December Six months ended 31 December Six months ended 30 June Six months ended 30 June Net other income 4.8 3.8 2.8 1.4 2.0 2.4 Administration expenses 31.1 27.7 16.2 13.8 14.9 13.9 Underlying operating profit 370.3 345.6 194.0 176.1 176.3 169.5 Finance income 1.2 0.6 0.7  0.5 0.6 Other finance costs 6.1 6.5 3.0 3.2 3.1 3.3 Underlying net finance costs 206.1 203.1 105.8 101.9 100.3 101.2 Underlying profit before tax and T ax on underlying profit 0.9 0.9 0.6 0.6 0.3 0.3 Share of underlying profitloss of associates    0.1  0.1 Remove amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests 1.3 4.4 2.1 1.5 0.8 2.9 Interest on convertible bonds deducted directly in equity 2.9 5.8  2.9 2.9 2.9 Underlying earnings 161.7 140.2 89.7 72.1 72.0 68.1 Underlying earnings per share pence 13.3p 13.7p 6.9p 6.9p 6.4p 6.8p Weighted average number of shares million 1214.6 1027.1 1297.9 1049.7 1129.5 1004.0 For the reconciliation from basic earnings per share see note 1 7 .
Other information Intu Properties plc site 1 Summary The EPRA Best Practice Recommendations identify six key performance measures including the EPRA Cost Ratios.
The measures are deemed to be of importance for investors in property companies and aim to encourage more consistent and widespread disclosure.
The Group is supportive of this initiative but continues to disclose additional measures throughout this report which it believes are more appropriate in the Groups current circumstances.
In 2014 the Group retained its EPRA Gold Award for exceptional compliance with the EPRA Best Practice Recommendations.
The EPRA measures as calculated including the Groups share of joint ventures are summarised below and detailed in the tables following Table 2014
EPRA cost ratio including direct vacancy costs 2 19.4% 18.9% EPRA cost ratio excluding direct vacancy costs 2 15.5% 15.7% EPRA earnings 3 154.9m 134.6m per share 3 12.8p 13.1p EPRA NAV 4a 4740.0m 3669.5m per share 4a 361p 334p EPRA NNNAV 4b 4322.4m 3535.3m per share 4b 329p 321p EPRA net initial yield 5 4.4% 4.7% EPRA toppedup NIY 5 4.6% 5.0% EPRA vacancy rate 6 3.0% 3.0% Details of the Groups performance against the EPRA Best Practice Recommendations on Sustainability Reporting can be found in full in the 2014 Corporate Responsibility Report.
In 2014 the Group was awarded a Gold EPRA Sustainability Best Practice Recommendations award.
2 EPRA Cost Ratios Other nonrecoverable costs 49.1 43.9 Administration expenses  ongoing 31.1 27.7 Net service charge costs 11.3 10.7
Service charge costs recovered through rents 3.3 2.5 EPRA costs  including direct vacancy costs 88.2 79.8 Direct vacancy costs 17.9 13.5 EPRA costs  excluding direct vacancy costs 70.3 66.3 Rent receivable 480.4 447.6 Rent payable 23.4 23.5 Gross rental income less ground rent payable 457.0 424.1
Service charge costs recovered through rents 3.3 2.5 Gross rental income 453.7 421.6 EPRA cost ratio including direct vacancy costs 19.4% 18.9% EPRA cost ratio excluding direct vacancy costs 15.5% 15.7% EPRA performance measures unaudited Other information Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 3 EPRA earnings EPRA earnings per share has been presented as recommended by EPRA which seeks to assist comparison between European property companies.
However  we believe that our measure of underlying earnings per share is more appropriate than the EPRA measure in the context of our business as set out in note 1 7 .
The key difference relates to the adjustments in respect of exceptional items where EPRA is prescriptive about the adjustments that can be made limiting these to acquisition related costs and costs incurred on termination of derivative financial instruments.
A reconciliation of EPRA earnings per share to the Groups measure of underlying earnings per share is provided below.
On 22 April 2014 the Company issued 27824 1628 new ordinary shares of 50 pence each through a rights issue.
The number of shares previously used to calculate earnings per share have been adjusted to reflect the rights issue as per note 1 7 .
Represented
Earnings
Shares million Pence per share
Shares million Pence per share Basic earnings per share 583.3 1214.6 48.0p 354.0 1027.1 34.5p
Revaluation of investment and development property 567.8 46.7p 109.9 10.7p Gain on acquisition of businesses 1.6 0.1p Gain on disposal of subsidiaries 0.6 Share of associates adjusting items 0.8 0.1p 0.5 Share of joint ventures adjusting items 81.7 6.7p 17.5 1.7p Change in fair value of financial instruments 157.6 13.0p 272.3 26.5p Exceptional administration costs acquisition and disposal related 13.1 1.1p 13.2 1.3p Exceptional finance charges  termination of derivative financial instruments 44.1 3.6p 155.1 15.1p T ax on the above 5.6 0.5p 3.4 0.3p Noncontrolling interests in respect of the above 14.9 1.2p 9.1 0.8p EPRA earnings per share 154.9 1214.6 12.8p 134.6 1027.1 13.1p Reconciliation to the Groups measure of underlying earnings per share
Other exceptional items 7.3 0.6p 10.9 1.0p Other exceptional tax 1.1 0.1p 4.9 0.4p
Share of joint ventures adjusting items 0.6  0.1 Noncontrolling interest in respect of the above   0.5 Underlying earnings per share 161.7 1214.6 13.3p 140.2 1027.1 13.7p EPRA performance measures unaudited Other information Intu Properties plc site 4 EPRA NAV a EPRA NAV EPRA NAV has been presented as recommended by EPRA which seeks to assist comparison between European property companies.
However  we believe that our measure of NAV per share diluted adjusted as presented in note 18a is more appropriate than the EPRA measure in the context of our business.
The key difference is the swaps not currently used for economic hedges of debt which are excluded in the Groups definition of NAV per share diluted adjusted.
The adjustment in respect of the noncontrolling interest recoverable balance not recognised is due to historic accounting practices and is required in our view to give a more appropriate value of net assets attributable to equity owners of the Group.
A reconciliation of EPRA NAV to the Groups measure of NAV per share diluted adjusted is provided below.
As for earnings per share the comparative number of shares have been adjusted to reflect the rights issue.
See note 1 7 for details.
Represented
Net assets
NAV per share pence Net assets
NAV per share pence NAV attributable to owners of Intu Properties plc 4524.0 1303.7 347p 3518.8 1055.5 333p Dilutive convertible bonds share options and awards 22.2 8.6 3.8 45.1 Diluted NAV 4546.2 1312.3 347p 3522.6 1100.6 320p
Fair value of derivative financial instruments excluding swaps not currently used for economic hedges of debt and net of tax 104.3 8p 61.9 6p Deferred tax on investment and development property and other investments 14.1 1p 20.4 2p Goodwill resulting from recognition of deferred tax liabilities   4.2 Share of joint ventures adjusting items 4.1  1.3 Noncontrolling interest in respect of the above   3.8
Noncontrolling interest recoverable balance not recognised 71.3 5p 71.3 6p EPRA NAV 4740.0 1312.3 361p 3669.5 1100.6 334p Reconciliation to the Groups measure of underlying earnings per share
Swaps not currently used for economic hedges of debt net of tax 228.9 18p 134.9 12p NAV per share diluted adjusted 4968.9 1312.3 379p 3804.4 1100.6 346p b EPRA NNNAV The Groups measure of NNNAV per share diluted adjusted disclosed in note 18 is equal to the EPRA NNNAV measure presented below.
Represented
Net assets
NAV per share pence Net assets
NAV per share pence EPRA NAV 4740.0 1312.3 361p 3669.5 1100.6 334p Fair value of derivative financial instruments net of tax 104.3 8p 61.9 6p Excess of fair value of debt over book value 310.2 24p 56.9 5p Deferred tax on investment and development property and other investments 14.1 1p 20.4 2p Share of joint ventures adjusting items 6.0  1.3 Noncontrolling interests in respect of the above 17.0 1p 6.3 EPRA NNNAV 4322.4 1312.3 329p 3535.3 1100.6 321p EPRA performance measures unaudited Continued Other information Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site 5 EPRA net initial yield and toppedup NIY Investment and development property 8963 7624 Less developments 74 29 Completed property portfolio 8889 7595 Allowance for estimated purchasers costs 457 361 Gross up completed property portfolio valuation 9346 7956 Annualised cash passing rental income 436 397 Property outgoings 21 20 Annualised net rents 415 377 Notional rent on expiration of rent free periods or other lease incentives 19 17 T oppedup net annualised rent 434 394 EPRA net initial yield 4.4% 4.7% EPRA toppedup NIY 4.6% 5.0% EPRA net initial yield and toppedup NIY by property is given in the Investment and development property section.
6 EPRA vacancy rate % % intu Trafford Centre 3.4 2.7 intu Lakeside 2.2 2.3 intu Metrocentre 2.7 3.5 intu Braehead 3.8 3.1 Manchester Arndale 2.6 2.7 intu Derby 0.1 na intu Watford 2.6 1.1 intu Victoria Centre 3.3 2.4 intu Milton Keynes 0.8 1.8 intu Eldon Square 3.1 2.9 intu Chapelfield 1.2 3.8 Cribbs Causeway 8.2 5.8 intu Potteries 3.0 4.4 intu Bromley 4.8 4.7 St Davids Cardiff 5.0 4.9 intu Merry Hill 3.0 na Parque Principado 0.7 2.5 EPRA vacancy rate is the ERV of vacant space divided by total ERV .
Other information Intu Properties plc sitetel 2013 2014 Net rental income 277m 364m 363m 370m 397m Underlying earnings 97m 139m 138m 140m 162m Underlying earnings per share Dividend per share Property revaluation surplus 501m 63m 41m 126m 648m NAV per share diluted adjusted Market value of investment and development property 5099m 6960m 7073m 7624m 8963m Net external debt 2437m 3374m 3504m 3698m 3963m Debt to assets ratio 48.0% 48.5% 49.5% 48.5% 44.2% Interest cover 1.56x 1.71x 1.69x 1.71x 1.82x Change in likeforlike net rental income 2.1% 3.6% 2.7% 1.9% 3.2% Occupancy 98% 97% 96% 95% 95% Growth in footfall likeforlike 3% 2% 1% 2% 0% Amounts presented include the Groups share of joint ventures.
1 Amounts for 2013 and earlier are as adjusted by the bonus factor.
See note 17.
Financial record 2010  2014 Other information Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
ABC1 customers Proportion of customers within UK social groups A B and C1 defined as members of households whose chief earners occupation is professional higher or intermediate management or supervisory.
Annual property income The Groups share of passing rent plus the external valuers estimate of annual excess turnover rent and sundry income such as that from car parks and mall commercialisation.
Debt to assets ratio Net external debt dividend by the market value of investment and development property.
Diluted figures Reported amounts adjusted to include the effects of dilutive potential shares issuable under convertible bonds and employee incentive arrangements.
Earnings per share Profit for the period attributable to owners of Intu divided by the weighted average number of shares in issue during the period.
EPRA
European Public Real Estate Association the publisher of Best Practice Recommendations intended to make financial statements of public real estate companies in Europe clearer more transparent and comparable.
ERV estimated rental value The external valuers estimate of the Groups share of the current annual market rent of all lettable space net of any non recoverable charges before bad debt provision and adjustments required under IFRS regarding tenant lease incentives.
Exceptional items Exceptional items are those items that in the Directors view are required to be separately disclosed by virtue of their size nature or incidence to enable a full understanding of the Groups financial performance.
Headline rent ITZA Annual contracted rent per square foot after expiry of concessionary periods in terms of zone A.
Interest cover Underlying operating profit excluding trading property related items divided by the net finance cost plus interest on convertible bonds recognised in equity excluding the change in fair value of financial instruments exceptional finance costs and amortisation of compound financial instruments.
Interest rate swap A derivative financial instrument enabling parties to exchange interest rate obligations for a predetermined period.
These are used by the Group to convert floating rate debt to fixed rates.
IPD
Investment Property Databank Limited producer of an independent benchmark of property returns.
Likeforlike property Investment property which has been owned throughout both periods without significant capital expenditure in either period so that income can be compared on a likeforlike basis.
For the purposes of comparison of capital values this will also include assets owned at the previous reporting period end but not throughout the prior period.
Longterm lease A lease with a term certain of at least five years.
L TV loan to value The ratio of attributable debt to the market value of an investment property.
NAV per share diluted adjusted NAV per share calculated on a diluted basis and adjusted to reflect any unrecognised surplus on trading properties net of tax to remove the fair value of derivatives net of tax to remove goodwill resulting from the recognition of deferred tax liabilities and to remove deferred tax on investment and development property and other investments.
Net asset value NAV per share Net assets attributable to owners of Intu Properties plc divided by the number of ordinary shares in issue at the period end.
Net external debt Net debt after removing the Metrocentre compound financial instrument and for 31 December 201 3 shortterm investments representing CMBS notes issued in respect of intu Metrocentre and received as cash in February 2014.
Net initial yield EPRA Annualised net rent on investment property after deduction of revenue costs such as head rent running void service charge after shortfalls empty rates and merchant association contribution expressed as a percentage of the gross market value before deduction of theoretical acquisition costs consistent with EPRAs net initial yield and as provided by the Groups independent external valuers.
Net rental income The Groups share of net rents receivable as shown in the income statement having taken due account of nonrecoverable costs bad debt provisions and adjustments to comply with IFRS including those regarding tenant lease incentives.
Other information Intu Properties plc site NNNAV per share diluted adjusted NAV per share diluted adjusted adjusted to include the fair values of derivatives debt and deferred taxes.
Nominal equivalent yield Effective annual yield to a purchaser from an asset at market value before taking account of notional acquisition costs assuming rent is receivable annually in arrears reflecting ERV but disregarding potential changes in market rents as determined by the Groups independent external valuers.
Occupancy
The passing rent of let and under offer units expressed as a percentage of the passing rent of let and under offer units plus ERV of unlet units excluding development and recently completed properties.
Units let to tenants in administration and still trading are treated as let and those no longer trading are treated as unlet.
Passing rent The Groups share of contracted annual rents receivable at the balance sheet date.
This takes no account of accounting adjustments made in respect of rent free periods or tenant incentives the reclassification of certain lease payments as finance charges or any irrecoverable costs and expenses and does not include excess turnover rent additional rent in respect of unsettled rent reviews or sundry income such as from car parks etc.
Contracted annual rents in respect of tenants in administration are excluded.
PMA
Property Market Analysis LLP  a producer of property market research and forecasting.
Property Income Distribution PID A dividend generally subject to UK withholding tax at the basic rate of income tax that a UK REIT is required to pay to its shareholders from its qualifying rental profits.
Certain classes of shareholder may qualify to receive a PID grosssite for further information.
The Group can also pay nonPID dividends which are not subject to UK withholding tax.
Real Estate Investment Trust REIT REIT s are internationally recognised property investment vehicles which have now been introduced in many countries around the world.
Each country has its own rules but the broad intention of REIT s is to encourage investment in domestic property by removing tax distortions for investors.
In the UK REIT s must meet certain ongoing rules and regulations including the requirement to distribute at least 90 per cent of qualifying rental profits to shareholders.
Withholding tax of 20 per cent is deducted from these Property Income Distributions see Glossary.
Profits from a REITs non property business remain subject to normal corporation tax.
The Group elected for REIT status in the UK with effect from 1 January 2007 .
Scrip Dividend Scheme The Group offers shareholders the opportunity to participate in the Scrip Dividend Scheme.
This enables participating shareholders to receive shares instead of cash when a Scrip Alternative is offered for a particular dividend.
Shortterm lease A lease with a term certain of less than five years.
Tenant or lease incentives Any incentives offered to occupiers to enter into a lease.
T ypically incentives are in the form of an initial rent free period andor a cash contribution to fit out the premises.
Under IFRS the value of incentives granted to tenants is amortised through the income statement on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Toppedup NIY EPRA Net initial yield adjusted for the expiration of rent free periods and other unexpired lease incentives.
Total financial return The change in NAV per share diluted adjusted plus dividends per share paid in the period expressed as a percentage of opening NAV per share diluted adjusted.
Total property return The change in capital value less any capital expenditure incurred plus net income in the year expressed as a percentage of the capital employed opening capital value plus capital expenditure incurred in the year as calculated by IPD.
Trading property Property held for trading purposes rather than to earn rentals or for capital appreciation and shown as a current asset in the balance sheet.
Underlying earnings per share EPS Earnings per share adjusted to exclude valuation movements exceptional items and related tax.
Underlying figures Amounts described as underlying exclude valuation movements exceptional items and related tax.
Vacancy rate EPRA The ERV of vacant space divided by total ERV .
Yield shift A movement usually expressed in basis points in the yield of a property asset.
Glossary
Continued Other information Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site
The Directors of Intu Properties plc have proposed a final dividend per ordinary share ISIN GBtel of 9.
1 pence 1 pence as adjusted for the rights issue bonus factor to bring the total dividend per ordinary share for the year to 1 3.7 pence 201 3  1 3.7 pence as adjusted by the rights issue bonus factor.
A scrip dividend alternative will continue to be offered.
The dividend may be partly paid as a Property Income Distribution PID and partly paid as a nonPID.
The PID element will be subject to deduction of a 20 per cent withholding tax unless exemptions apply please refer to the PID special note below.
Any nonPID element will be treated as an ordinary UK company dividend.
For South African shareholders nonPID cash dividends may be subject to deduction of South African Dividends T ax at 1 5 per cent.
The following are the salient dates for the payment of the proposed final dividend.
Tuesday 31 March 2015 SterlingRand exchange rate struck Wednesday 1 April 2015 SterlingRand exchange rate and dividend amount in SA currency announced Monday 13 April 2015 Ordinary shares listed exdividend on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange Thursday 16 April 2015 Ordinary shares listed exdividend on the London Stock Exchange Friday 17 April 2015 Record date for 2014 final dividend in London and Johannesburg Thursday 28 May 2015 Dividend payment date for shareholders South African shareholders should note that in accordance with the requirements of Strate the last day to trade cumdividend will be Friday 10 April 201 5 and that no dematerialisation or rematerialisation of shares will be possible from Monday 1 3 April 201 5 to Friday 1 7 April 201 5 inclusive.
No transfers between the UK and South African registers may take place from Thursday 31 March 201 5 to Sunday 19 April 201 5 inclusive.
PID SPECIAL NOTE UK shareholders For those who are eligible for exemption from the 20 per cent withholding tax and have not previously registered for exemption an HM Revenue and Customs HMRC T ax Exemption Declaration is available for download from the Investors section of the Intu Properties plc website site or on request to our UK registrars Capita Asset Services.
Validly completed forms must be received by Capita Asset Services no later than the dividend Record Date to be advised otherwise the dividend will be paid after deduction of tax.
South African and other nonUK shareholders South African shareholders may apply to HMRC after payment of the dividend for a refund of the difference between the 20 per cent withholding tax and the UKSouth African double taxation treaty rate of 1 5 per cent.
Other nonUK shareholders may be able to make similar claims for a refund of UK withholding tax deducted.
Refund application forms for all nonUK shareholders are available for download from the Investors section of the Intu Properties plc website site or on request to our South African registrars Computershare or
UK withholding tax refunds are not claimable from Intu Properties plc the South African Revenue Service SARS or other national authorities only from the UKs HMRC. investorsshareholdersbondholdersrealestateinvestmenttrust .
The above does not constitute advice and shareholders should seek their own professional guidance.
Intu Properties plc does not accept liability for any loss suffered arising from reliance on the above.
Other information Intu Properties plc site Shareholder information Registered Office 40 Broadway London SW1H 0BT Registered in England and Wales no.
Registrars
All enquiries concerning shares or shareholdings including notification of change of address queries regarding loss of a share certificate and dividend payments should be addressed to For shareholders registered in the UK Capita Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road Beckenham Kent BR3 4TU T elephone within UKtel calls cost 10p per minute plus network extras lines are open 9.00 am  5.30 pm Monday  Friday T elephone outside UK 44tel email For shareholders registered in South Africa Computershare Investor Services Pty Ltd 70 Marshall Street Johannesburg 2001 South Africa Postal address PO Box 6105 1 Marshalltown 2107  South Africa T elephone
Email web.
Payment of dividends Shareholders who wish to have their dividends paid directly into a bank or building society account should complete a mandate form available from the appropriate registrars.
Webbased enquiry service for shareholders Shareholders registered in the UK can go to capitashareportal. com to obtain details of their shareholdings and dividends.
The shareholders surname Investor Code found on any correspondence from registrars and postcode are required to use this service.
Shareholders may also use this service to amend or change their address and dividend mandate details.
Shareholders registered in South Africa can go to computershare. cominvestor to obtain details of their shareholdings.
Shareholders will need to follow a registration process in order to access such information.
Unfortunately due to South African legal requirements shareholders may not update records but will be able to view their entire holding of shares globally.
Please note that the Computershare company code for Intu Properties plc is ITUZ.
Share dealing Existing UK shareholders may trade Intu Properties plc shares through Capita Share Dealing Services who provide an easy to use realtime online telephone and postal dealing service.
Contact details aresite T elephone within UKtel calls cost 10p per minute plus network extras lines are open 8.00 am  4.30 pm Monday  Friday Ireland Locall teloutside UK 44tel Existing South African shareholders whose shares are held in electronic format through Computershare CSDP may trade Intu Properties plc shares through Computershares low cost telephone share dealing service on telSA calls only.
Sharegift
Shareholders with a small number of shares which may be uneconomic to sell on a commission basis may wish to consider donating them to the charity Sharegift registered charity no.
Further information can be found on Sharegifts website sharegift. rg or by calling them ontel .
Strate Charity Shares SA shareholders for whom the cost of selling their shares would exceed the market value of such shares may wish to consider donating them to charity.
An independent nonprofit organisation called Strate Charity Shares has been established to administer this process.
The South African Revenue Service SARS has advised Strate Charity Shares that the value of any shares donated may be deducted from taxable income as the scheme is registered under section 18A of the Income T ax
For further details queries andor donations contact the Strate Share Care toll free help line on telor if you are phoning from outside South Africa or email email Electronic communication The Company supplies information such as the Annual Report via its website to shareholders who have consented to such communication.
Shareholders will be notified by email or post when new information is available on the website.
Shareholders can at any time revoke a previous instruction in order to receive hard copies of shareholder information.
UK shareholders may register to receive email alerts by logging on to the website of the UK Registrars capitashareportal. address.
SA shareholders may register to receive email alerts by written instruction to the SA Registrar  Computershare sent either by email email or by facsimile Once registered shareholders are sent a Notice of Availability email highlighting that the Annual Report or other information is available for viewing on the website.
Other information Strategic report Governance Accounts Other information Intu Properties plc site Other information Intu Properties plc site This report contains forwardlooking statements regarding the belief or current expectations of Intu Properties plc its Directors and other members of its senior management about Intu Properties plcs businesses financial performance and results of operations.
These forwardlooking statements are not guarantees of future performance.
Rather  they are based on current views and assumptions and involve known and unknown risks uncertainties and other factors many of which are outside the control of Intu Properties plc and are difficult to predict that may cause actual results performance or developments to differ materially from any future results performance or developments expressed or implied by the forwardlooking statements.
These forwardlooking statements speak only as at the date of this report.
Except as required by applicable law  Intu Properties plc makes no representation or warranty in relation to them and expressly disclaims any obligation to update or revise any forwardlooking statements contained herein to reflect any change in Intu Properties plcs expectations with regard thereto or any change in events conditions or circumstances on which any such statement is based.
Any information contained in this report on the price at which shares or other securities in Intu Properties plc have been bought or sold in the past or on the yield on such shares or other securities should not be relied upon as a guide to future performance.
