HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Where more happens Annual Report 2015 We are Hammerson
At Hammerson we create destinations that excite shoppers attract and support retailers reward investors and serve communities destinations where more happens.
STRATEGIC REPORT Highlights 01 Our business at a glance 02 Our business model 04 Our business model in action 06 In conversation with David Atkins Chief Executive 08 Our market 14 Key performance indicators 18 Business review 22 Sustainability review 43 Our people 49 Financial review 53 Principal risks and uncertainties 62 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Chairmans letter 68 In conversation with the Board 70 Your Boards year 74 Nomination Committee report 78 Audit Committee report 80 Directors Remuneration report 84 Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code Directors biographies 108 Directors report 110 Visit our website site for more information about us and our business Follow us on twitter hammersonplc Watch us on youtube Search hammerson Follow us on LinkedIn Search hammerson FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Directors responsibilities 113 Independent Auditors report 114 Primary financial statements 118 Notes to the accounts 124 Company primary statements 158 Notes to the Company accounts 160 OTHER INFORMATION Additional disclosures 166 Tenyear financial summary 173 Summary of Directors remuneration policy 174 Shareholder information 178 Glossary 181 Index 183 Cover image Taurus Geodessica installation by Joshua Harker at Bullring September 2015 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 HIGHLIGHTS 2015 overview Portfolio value 9.1 billion 17% Profit for the year 727 million 4% 2014 699 million Adjusted earnings per share 26.9p 13% 2014 23.9p EPRA NAV per share 7.10 11% 2014 6.38 Shareholders equity 5517 million 11% 2014 4974 million Total property return 12.4% 2014 13.6% Dividend per share 22.3p 9% 2014 20.4p 34% 18% 20% 14% 8% 6% UK shopping centres UK retail parks
Premium outlets Ireland loans Developments and other Significant acquisition in Ireland Four developments completed of 64900m 360 million of disposals 400 lettings totalling 136000m 1 As at 31 December 2015 including cost of Irish loan portfolio.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 1 HAMMERSON.
OM OUR BUSINESS AT A GLANCE 57 places where more happens We are an owner manager and developer of retail destinations in Europe.
Our portfolio includes investments in prime shopping centres in the UK and France convenient retail parks in the UK and premium outlets across Europe.
21 shopping centres 21 retail parks 15 premium outlets 2.2 million m lettable area 4500 tenants Les Terrasses du Port Marseille HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 2 UK SHOPPING
Brent Cross London Bullring Birmingham Cabot Circus Bristol Centrale Croydon Grand Central
Highcross Leicester Silverburn Glasgow The Oracle Reading Union Square Aberdeen Victoria Quarter Leeds WestQuay Southampton UK RETAIL PARKS Abbey Retail Park Belfast Abbotsinch Retail Park
Battery Retail Park
Brent South Shopping Park London Central Retail Park
Cleveland Retail Park
Cyfarthfa Retail Park Merthyr Tydfil Dallow Road Luton Elliotts Field Rugby Fife Central Retail Park
Imperial Retail Park
Manor Walks
Parc Tawe Swansea Ravenhead Retail Park St Helens St Oswalds Retail Park
Telford Forge Shopping Park Telford The Orchard Centre
Thurrock Shopping Park
Westmorland Retail Park
Westwood and Westwood Gateway Retail Parks
Wrekin Retail Park
FRANCE
SHOPPING
CENTRES
Espace St Quentin St
Italie Deux Paris Le Jeu de Paume
Les Trois Fontaines Cergy Pontoise Les Terrasses du Port
Nicetoile Nice OParinor Paris Place des Halles
Saint Sbastien Nancy SQY Ouest St
Villebon 2 Paris PREMIUM OUTLETS VALUE RETAIL Bicester Village London Fidenza Village Milan Ingolstadt Village
Kildare Village Dublin La Roca Village
La Valle Village Paris Las Rozas Village Madrid Maasmechelen Village
Wertheim Village
VIA OUTLETS Alcochete Lisbon Batavia Stad Amsterdam Fashion Arena Prague Festival Park Majorca Kungsbacka Gothenburg Landquart Zurich Acquired in 2016 Contracts exchanged for sale in January 2016 Note Properties underlying Irish loans are not shown which include Dundrum Town Centre Dublin Swords Pavilions Dublin and The Ilac Centre Dublin STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 3 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT AT A GLANCE OUR BUSINESS MODEL How we create value Our mission At Hammerson our mission is to create desirability for our consumers and commercial partners.
We own operate and develop retail destinations that interact seamlessly with digital and bring together the very best retail leisure and entertainment brands.
We seek to deliver value for all our stakeholders and to create a positive and sustainable impact for generations to come.
Key resources The success of our business depends on a number of principal inputs.
A clear operational model The key actions that we undertake towards achieving our strategic objectives to create value.
ASSET MANAGEMENT We skilfully manage our portfolio in a sustainable way to generate income growth and to attract tenants and shoppers INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT We employ market expertise to recycle our portfolio.
Taking advantage of acquisition opportunities which enhance the quality of our portfolio and future returns and disposing of assets at the right time DEVELOPING VENUES We have a proven track record in creating sustainable retail and leisure destinations which anticipate future consumer needs and ensure that retailers will thrive for years to come FINANCIAL EFFICIENCY We manage and control our costs both operational and financial and optimise the capital base to support the delivery of our strategy HIGHQUALITY PROPERTY Highquality property in prime locations across selected European retail markets TALENTED PEOPLE Skilful and motivated people and teams united around a clear set of values RETAIL INSIGHT Deep retail knowledge captured through longstanding commercial relationships data insight and consumer research FINANCIAL CAPITAL Dependable access to and continued trust of international capital markets See pages 6  7 for our Strategic Priorities under each of these areas and the progress achieved in 2015 4 4 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Uniquely differentiated by our Product Experience Framework Our Product Experience Framework is embedded across everything we do providing a unique point of differentiation.
We constantly challenge ourselves to apply best practice in retail design and digital solutions customer engagement and sustainability.
To deliver value for our stakeholders By successfully employing our business model we aim to deliver a positive result for all our stakeholder groups.
FINANCIAL RETURNS For shareholders
For retailers and shoppers ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL BENEFITS For our people and communities ICONIC DESTINATIONS We create outstanding architecture to enhance locations.
We place our centres at the heart of local communities connected by seamless technology and transportation links BEST AT RETAIL We deliver the optimal retail mix consistently refreshed and showcasing new concepts CONVENIENT and EASY We make shopping simple and stressfree with enhanced customer facilities and services such as click and collect encouraging regular shopper visits INTERACTIVE and ENGAGING Our outstanding customer service and leading digital infrastructure drive engagement and loyalty and encourage shoppers to spend longer at our destinations ENTERTAINING and EXCITING We constantly evaluate and refresh our food and leisure offers and provide a local and national calendar of events to surprise and delight our customers and keep them coming back POSITIVE PLACES We create destinations that deliver positive impacts economically socially and environmentally See the Chief Executives letter on pages 8  13 for how we have delivered value for our stakeholders in 2015 See pages 6  7 for how the Product Experience Framework guides our Strategic Priorities and the Chief Executives letter pages 8  13 for examples of how the Framework has been put into action in 2015 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 5 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT BUSINESS MODEL We successfully implemented our business model in 2015 to deliver progress against our strategic priorities OUR BUSINESS MODEL IN ACTION Strategic priorities Progress in 2015 Focus in 2016 ASSET MANAGEMENT  Deploy the Product Experience Framework across the Group Introduce the latest retail and leisure brands and new store concepts to the portfolio Remerchandise retail parks with updated homeware and fashion retailers Deliver valueadd projects such as kiosks digital screens popup retail units new store concepts environmental improvements Build digital capabilities to support multichannel retail and provide insight on consumer behaviour Identify and capitalise on opportunities to drive sustainability across the portfolio 400 lettings totalling 136000m across the portfolio New flagship stores for international brands like Victorias Secret Apple HandM and Polo Ralph Lauren 25 new retailers in French portfolio of which four are firsts to France First ever Debenhams on a retail park 14% of space in UK shopping centres now food and beverage Commercialisation income up 9% Plus app in all UK and French shopping centres 3% reduction in electricity consumption across UK assets Evaluate opportunities to introduce existing international brands across the rest of the Hammerson portfolio Continue to reinvigorate the tenant mix in France Capitalise on strong occupier demand at retail parks to drive remerchandising and income growth Use customer data collected from the Plus app to better inform understanding of consumers behaviour and preferences INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT  Grow the portfolio and enhance overall quality Recycle capital into higherperforming retail markets Focus on European countries and cities with strong economic opportunities Aim for a leading position in all chosen market segments Dispose of assets which do not meet our investment management criteria or are underperforming Acquired loan portfolio to create new Irish platform Deployed further capital in Birmingham the UKs second city with the Grand Central acquisition Acquired new VIA Outlet Festival Park Majorca and increased ownership stake in Kildare Village Dublin 360 million of disposals including Villebon 2 in January 2016 Convert Irish loans into owned assets and integrate portfolio Target further acquisitions in premium outlets primarily through VIA Outlets Complete planned 300 million of disposals Evaluate further capital recycling opportunities DEVELOPING VENUES  Complete onsite development schemes Advance major London developments Extend shopping centres emphasising food beverage and leisure offers Deliver smallerscale retail park extensions and reconfigurations for nextgeneration retail park schemes Support premium outlet extension opportunities Four developments completed Le Jeu de Paume regional shopping centre in Beauvais France 10900m leisure and dining extension at Silverburn Glasgow Nextgeneration retail park at Elliotts Field Rugby Reconfiguration at Cyfarthfa Retail Park Merthyr Tydfil Acquired 50% interest in Whitgift Croydon and concluded the CPO inquiry acquired infrastructure consents at Brent Cross and submitted revised planning at The Goodsyard London Delivered further prelets at Victoria Gate Leeds and WestQuay Watermark Southampton Complete and open Victoria Gate Leeds and achieve BREEAM Excellent status Progress construction and prelets at WestQuay Watermark ahead of 2017 opening Advance next planning steps land acquisition and retailer discussions at Croydon Brent Cross and The Goodsyard Nextgeneration retail park programme continues with The Orchard Centre Didcot Start extensions at Bicester Village London Fidenza Village Milan and Batavia Stad Amsterdam FINANCIAL EFFICIENCY  Maintain financial leverage in line with 40% loantovalue LTV guidance and strong investmentgrade credit ratings Uncomplicated and transparent approach to funding  primarily unsecured bank facilities and corporate bonds Effectively manage the maturity and average cost of debt Maintain currency hedge to limit foreign exchange exposure Joint ventures with a selected group of international partners Reduce operational and financial costs Relocated head office to Kings Cross reducing operational costs whilst achieving SKA Gold sustainability rating Over 1.8 billion of new capital raised 350 million bond issue at 2.5% effective coupon Redemption of 272 million 5.25% bond due December 2016 Credit rating upgrade to Baa1 from Moodys Further details on the progress against our Strategic Priorities are available in the Chief Executives letter pages 8 13 and in the Business Review pages 22  42 Manage cost base whilst delivering income growth Reduce LTV through disposals Acquisition facility to be refinanced by disposals and new debt issuance Take opportunities to further reduce cost of debt Bullring Birmingham Dundrum Town Centre Dublin Hammerson office Kings Place Silverburn Glasgow 6 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Strategic priorities Progress in 2015 Focus in 2016 ASSET MANAGEMENT  Deploy the Product Experience Framework across the Group Introduce the latest retail and leisure brands and new store concepts to the portfolio Remerchandise retail parks with updated homeware and fashion retailers Deliver valueadd projects such as kiosks digital screens popup retail units new store concepts environmental improvements Build digital capabilities to support multichannel retail and provide insight on consumer behaviour Identify and capitalise on opportunities to drive sustainability across the portfolio 400 lettings totalling 136000m across the portfolio New flagship stores for international brands like Victorias Secret Apple HandM and Polo Ralph Lauren 25 new retailers in French portfolio of which four are firsts to France First ever Debenhams on a retail park 14% of space in UK shopping centres now food and beverage Commercialisation income up 9% Plus app in all UK and French shopping centres 3% reduction in electricity consumption across UK assets Evaluate opportunities to introduce existing international brands across the rest of the Hammerson portfolio Continue to reinvigorate the tenant mix in France Capitalise on strong occupier demand at retail parks to drive remerchandising and income growth Use customer data collected from the Plus app to better inform understanding of consumers behaviour and preferences INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT  Grow the portfolio and enhance overall quality Recycle capital into higherperforming retail markets Focus on European countries and cities with strong economic opportunities Aim for a leading position in all chosen market segments Dispose of assets which do not meet our investment management criteria or are underperforming Acquired loan portfolio to create new Irish platform Deployed further capital in Birmingham the UKs second city with the Grand Central acquisition Acquired new VIA Outlet Festival Park Majorca and increased ownership stake in Kildare Village Dublin 360 million of disposals including Villebon 2 in January 2016 Convert Irish loans into owned assets and integrate portfolio Target further acquisitions in premium outlets primarily through VIA Outlets Complete planned 300 million of disposals Evaluate further capital recycling opportunities DEVELOPING VENUES  Complete onsite development schemes Advance major London developments Extend shopping centres emphasising food beverage and leisure offers Deliver smallerscale retail park extensions and reconfigurations for nextgeneration retail park schemes Support premium outlet extension opportunities Four developments completed Le Jeu de Paume regional shopping centre in Beauvais France 10900m leisure and dining extension at Silverburn Glasgow Nextgeneration retail park at Elliotts Field Rugby Reconfiguration at Cyfarthfa Retail Park Merthyr Tydfil Acquired 50% interest in Whitgift Croydon and concluded the CPO inquiry acquired infrastructure consents at Brent Cross and submitted revised planning at The Goodsyard London Delivered further prelets at Victoria Gate Leeds and WestQuay Watermark Southampton Complete and open Victoria Gate Leeds and achieve BREEAM Excellent status Progress construction and prelets at WestQuay Watermark ahead of 2017 opening Advance next planning steps land acquisition and retailer discussions at Croydon Brent Cross and The Goodsyard Nextgeneration retail park programme continues with The Orchard Centre Didcot Start extensions at Bicester Village London Fidenza Village Milan and Batavia Stad Amsterdam FINANCIAL EFFICIENCY  Maintain financial leverage in line with 40% loantovalue LTV guidance and strong investmentgrade credit ratings Uncomplicated and transparent approach to funding  primarily unsecured bank facilities and corporate bonds Effectively manage the maturity and average cost of debt Maintain currency hedge to limit foreign exchange exposure Joint ventures with a selected group of international partners Reduce operational and financial costs Relocated head office to Kings Cross reducing operational costs whilst achieving SKA Gold sustainability rating Over 1.8 billion of new capital raised 350 million bond issue at 2.5% effective coupon Redemption of 272 million 5.25% bond due December 2016 Credit rating upgrade to Baa1 from Moodys Further details on the progress against our Strategic Priorities are available in the Chief Executives letter pages 8 13 and in the Business Review pages 22  42 Manage cost base whilst delivering income growth Reduce LTV through disposals Acquisition facility to be refinanced by disposals and new debt issuance Take opportunities to further reduce cost of debt STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT BUSINESS MODEL IN CONVERSATION WITH DAVID ATKINS CHIEF EXECUTIVE We delivered value for our stakeholders 2015 has been a busy and successful year for Hammerson.
I am delighted that the focus on our strategic priorities continues to deliver positive results for our stakeholders.
8 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 8 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 8 More happened for shareholders WHAT HAVE BEEN THE HIGHLIGHTS OF 2015 Our focus on generating sustainable income growth continues to succeed and we have grown EPS by 13%.
This enables us to once more increase the dividend for our shareholders which at 22.3p per share is up 9 .3% on last year and with compound annual growth of 7 .7% since 2011.
NAV per share was up 11% principally due to a total property return of 12.4% significantly beating IPD .
This strong financial performance is in part thanks to the high quality of our portfolio.
We continue to recycle capital into those assets and developments which are best positioned to create value for shareholders.
A key highlight of this year was our acquisition in Ireland which provides a marketleading platform in Europes fastestgrowing economy.
Acquiring a portfolio of loans requires some extra steps before we own the properties but once the transaction is complete we will operate one of Europes leading shopping centres Dundrum Town Centre Dublin.
We also increased our investment in the UKs second city Birmingham through the acquisition of Grand Central shopping centre in joint venture with CPPIB.
Birmingham offers an increasingly wealthy catchment and improving public infrastructure investment.
To fund these transactions we are on track with a programme of disposals and we remain focused on maintaining a prudent balance sheet.
Likeforlike NRI growth of 2.3% is higher than last year as we continue to see a growing demand for prime retail and leisure space.
Against a backdrop of falling vacancy combined with our Product Experience Framework initiatives we are wellpositioned to drive future rental income growth.
This year we successfully relocated our UK offices to more costefficient sites moving our London headquarters to Kings Place Kings Cross.
Costs were tightly controlled across the business and we reduced total administrative costs alongside investing further in important areas such as digital and marketing.
There is still more to be done however especially as a result of additional property costs from the strategic development properties we hold.
In 2015 we completed an impressive four developments adding 64900m of incremental retail space.
This included Le Jeu de Paume a new regional shopping centre in Beauvais the Winter Garden restaurant and leisure extension at Silverburn Glasgow a next generation fashion park in Rugby with Elliott s Field as well as an MandSanchored extension to Cyfarthfa Retail Park Merthyr Tydfil.
We also made good progress at our major London development schemes.
HOW IS THE INVESTMENT PROPOSITION FOR SHAREHOLDERS IN 2016 DIFFERENTIATED VERSUS PEERS We are better positioned than ever to take advantage of the improving consumer backdrop and to continue to generate earnings growth ahead of our peers.
As well as owning prime real estate driving rental growth requires a thorough and handson approach to asset management.
This is where we are differentiated by our embedded Product Experience Framework which is designed to deliver a consistently great experience for shoppers and retailers across our portfolio.
Furthermore we remain the only European REIT with strategic exposure to the premium outlets market.
Our
We aim to further grow our exposure to this market which is set to benefit from strong occupational demand driven by growing global tourism.
2016 will see the opening of Victoria Gate Leeds which together with Victoria Quarter will create the leading aspirational retail offer in the north of England.
The next 18 months will also see us make advancements on our major London development schemes including moving towards starting onsite at Brent Cross and
These schemes are set to deliver retail assets of the future and further differentiate our longterm investment proposition.
Chart 1 Dividend per share pence 7.7% CAGR STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 9 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW In conversation with David Atkins Chief Executive downloads More happened for retailers WHAT ARE THE CURRENT TRENDS FOR RETAILERS TAKING MORE SPACE The increase in occupancy across the Group to 97 .7% reflects the continued strong demand from retail and leisure tenants for prime space.
With the growth in multichannel retailing tenants are looking to position a greater share of their stores in the best locations.
This trend plays well to our strategy of owning and operating prime shopping centres in key regional destinations.
We have successfully worked with major international tenants during 2015 to create flagship stores including three Victorias Secret stores and a new twolevel Hugo Boss at Cabot Circus.
Retailers are also creating more innovative store designs and formats.
We are delighted with the River Island Style Studio at Bullring a new concept for the brand offering customers a VIP personalstyling service in a relaxed and contemporary setting.
The store has performed exceptionally well since opening and is now one of the best in River Islands portfolio.
Increasingly discerning retailers want a portfolio of stores to match the full range of ways in which their customers shop.
We are wellpositioned to respond to retailers requirements for a multiformat presence.
Fat Face is a good example of this upsizing its footprint at Union Square in Aberdeen in April and also taking its first store on a retail park in England when we opened the doors at our newly developed shopping park at Elliotts Field Rugby.
In fact the trend for traditional fashion and department store brands to bring their full offering closer to the convenience shopper was evident throughout the year with names such as Debenhams MandS and Next all taking space across our retail parks.
Furthermore we are able to offer retailers a European footprint covering the UK France and now Ireland.
In
France our focus on reinvigorating the portfolio is delivering results.
The team are focused on identifying the new and emerging international brands that will resonate with our panEuropean customers.
During the year we welcomed 25 new brands to our French portfolio notably including four retailers first store in France.
WHAT ELSE ARE YOU DOING TO SUPPORT RETAILERS IN YOUR CENTRES It is our responsibility as a landlord to drive healthy footfall for our retail tenants and create new experiences for shoppers to encourage greater dwell time.
We saw visitor numbers up 1.1% in UK shopping centres this year.
This result was encouraging and we outperformed the wider market which was down 1.9% yearonyear according to Springboard.
No doubt a significant factor in our success is our Product Experience Framework which drives a constant and evolving programme of events popups and interactive experiences for shoppers.
We have launched click and collect in four of our centres with strong results.
More than 85% of shoppers using the service at Brent Cross go on to shop drink or dine whilst in the centre.
Our investment in digital infrastructure and technology across the shopping centre portfolio is also demonstrating encouraging results.
Our Plus app has now been rolled out across the entire estate of shopping centres in the UK and France.
The app a personalised shopping companion enables us to communicate in realtime with our shoppers in a tailored way.
It gives us greater insight into consumer shopping habits which we can then analyse and share with our retail tenants to improve the customer offer.
To date the app has achieved over 140000 downloads.
Occupancy
97.7% OParinor Paris Bullring Birmingham 10 10 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 More happened for shoppers WHAT DIFFERENTIATES YOUR OFFER FOR SHOPPERS For us being the Best at Retail means being at the forefront of new retail trends and concepts.
As retail specialists we are able to draw on the strength of our relationships to ensure we bring the right mix of leading international brands and new innovative concepts to our shopping destinations across Europe.
During the year we welcomed premium British fashion brand All Saints to Les Terrasses du Port in Marseille representing the brands debut in a French shopping centre and leveraging our reputation for retail excellence in France we secured leases with Sandro and Sraphine at Victoria Quarter representing firsts for both aspirational French boutiques in Leeds.
VIA
Outlets introduced more international luxury brands thanks to the partnership with Value Retail including Brooks Brothers at Landquart Zurich and Desigual at Kungsbacka Gothenburg.
To differentiate our offer and give consumers more reasons to visit our centres with greater frequency we are increasingly looking beyond pure retail to provide entertaining and exciting experiences.
We opened the impressive Wintergarden at Silverburn a 35 million 10900m dining and leisure development anchored by a 14screen Cineworld and featuring 11 new restaurants including Carluccios Five Guys and Glasgows first
In the first six months after opening the Wintergarden the centre saw a 4% increase in customer dwell time and a 5% increase in sales demonstrating the importance of creating customer experiences that bring the whole family together.
Across our UK shopping centre portfolio leisure and dining now accounts for 14% of space and with trends showing additional growth in the casual dining market we see opportunities to increase this further in 2016.
Our restaurants and leisure team look for fresh new brands to attract diners as well as tried and tested favourites.
Restaurants which debuted with us such as Wham Bam Tikka at WestQuay and Thaikhun at Union Square have become popular favourites and expanded to other parts of our portfolio.
We are also responding to this trend at our retail parks introducing the latest food and beverage offerings.
Eds Easy Diner Caff Nero and Nandos have all taken space at Elliotts Field in Rugby.
Our retail parks have seen strong footfall up 4.2% as they become even more popular for shoppers looking for convenience.
This was nearly double the market level of 2.3%.
We are now introducing facilities and services to our retail parks which are similar to those found at shopping centres including customer service suites free wifi mobile phone charging points and Amazon lockers to leverage the growing demand for click and collect.
Our retail venues also give shoppers a vibrant array of entertainment.
The Disco Bull Head a sound and music installation at Bullring which you can see on the front cover of our report was designed by leading artist Josh Harker and was seen by nearly two million visitors.
This summer we also created a beach at Brent Cross complete with sandy shores and seaside entertainment We recognise that while these events are stimulating for our shoppers we also need to ensure a comfortable and safe environment in which to spend time.
This year we have undertaken a full sensory audit of our centres to see how light sounds smell and the feel of a centre affects our shoppers.
Over the course of the year we have also made significant investment in upgrading our customer service desks.
As ever the safety of customers and staff in our centres is a priority and our security procedures are constantly reviewed in close consultation with local and national authorities.
The brands you love W eve added some new favourites to the portfolio during the year Elliotts Field Rugby STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 11 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW RELOCATION OF HEADQUARTERS TO KINGS CROSS LONDON In June we moved into our new London headquarters at Kings Place Kings Cross.
The office which overlooks Regents Canal is set over 2200m and offers modern flexible workspace for more than 150 colleagues.
Moving away from the property industrys traditional Mayfair heartland not only allows us to benefit from significant cost savings but also reflects our strategic focus on retail real estate.
The modern design provides colleagues with a digitallyenabled agile workspace which enhances collaboration across our various asset leasing and development projects.
The Retail Showcase provides our retail leasing teams with a stateoftheart marketing suite which we use to demonstrate the benefits of our portfolio to prospective tenants.
Situated close to St Pancras International rail terminal it brings us closer to our French business fostering crossborder collaboration and partnerships.
We were awarded an SKA Gold sustainability rating at Kings Place.
More happened for our people over a third of these employed in professional and senior professional roles.
By the end of 2015 27% of senior management roles across the Group were held by women well on the way to meeting our stated aspiration of at least 30%.
Irrespective of internal targets we are never complacent and we recognise there is more to do in 2016.
As a FTSE 100 employer we take seriously our responsibility to train and nurture the talents of those embarking on a career in the property industry.
Since the launch of our UK Graduate Programme in 2011 I am pleased to report that three graduates have successfully completed the two year programme and gained RICS accreditation becoming permanent employees within our business.
We also recognise our responsibility to promote the benefits of a rewarding career in retail real estate to the next generation of retail property specialists.
In my role as President of BCSC I was delighted to award successful apprentices of the Retail Path scheme with certificates at the BCSC Gold Awards evening in December.
The scheme backed by BCSC Retail Trust and the National Skills Academy was piloted in shopping centres across the UK.
These included Highcross Leicester where five apprentices took on 12month placements giving them unique exposure to a range of centre management and retailbased skills and experiences.
Two of the five have now graduated from the scheme and won permanent roles with retailers at Highcross.
CAN YOU OUTLINE THE PROGRESS YOU HAVE MADE EMBEDDING YOUR VALUES Our values of ambition collaboration respect and responsibility continue to enhance our culture and influence the way we operate.
The relocation of our UK headquarters from Mayfair to Kings Cross not only marked a shift in how we see ourselves as a business but also introduced a more agile and collaborative culture and working environment.
You can read more about the move in the casestudy below.
Our ambition is best demonstrated in the strategic acquisition in Ireland which was the largest in our history and broadens our European platform.
I am proud of the hard work and dedication of all employees who came together to make the deal happen.
We have recently established a local office in Dublin and we anticipate a number of opportunities for both current and new colleagues.
During the year we continued to develop our diversity and inclusion strategy encouraging respect and understanding within the workplace.
Unconscious bias workshops were held for senior managers in our UK and French teams with key messages filtering through and embedding across our business.
We are now planning to extend the workshops to all colleagues in 2016.
Encouragingly these initiatives are translating into positive action at a resourcing level with half of all new employees recruited during the year being female and In conversation with David Atkins Chief Executive Hammerson office Kings Place Further details of Our People are available on pages 49  52 12 12 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 CREATIVE CAREERS AT BULLRING We are increasingly aware of the importance of digital and creative development skills for the employment market.
In November Bullring Birmingham hosted Creative Careers 0121  a careers fair with a difference.
The event aimed at children young people parents and educational providers showcased the creative industries and provided access to a variety of professionals already shaping our digital world through business and enterprise.
Attendees were provided with tips networking connections and opportunities for young people looking to start a career in the digital and design sectors.
More happened for communities Our sustainability initiative forms part of the Product Experience Framework and underpins our operational decisions.
This is particularly the case in developments where we look to combine thoughtful and sustainable building techniques with iconic design producing destinations where customers feel proud to shop.
We were delighted to achieve BREEAM Excellent at the design stage for Le Jeu de Paume Beauvais our new shopping centre north of Paris.
This was in addition to receiving industry recognition for our sustainability initiatives throughout the year notably for the BandQ Ecolearning store at Cyfarthfa Retail Park in Merthyr Tydfil and the Costa EcoPod at Wrekin Retail Park in
These initiatives continue to demonstrate our commitment to sustainable development and our leadership of the wider sector.
During the year we also launched the Moving Towards Net Zero Buildings commitment in collaboration with The Prince of Wales Corporate Leaders Group and property services company Jones Lang LaSalle.
The commitment which seeks to drive a coordinated approach to the delivery of nearly zero energy buildings for new build by 2020 has already attracted a number of leading European signatories from across the built environment.
HOW ARE YOU DELIVERING POSITIVE PLACES FOR THE COMMUNITIES YOU SERVE The positive social impacts that our business creates are both significant and long term.
During the year our investment in extensions developments and refurbishments generated over 4500 construction jobs alone.
Over 85% of these jobs went to local people.
Once completed these projects are expected to deliver a further 2600 employment opportunities in the retail and hospitality sectors.
This can only be achieved by working closely with our supply chain tenants and local authority partners to ensure that the requisite skills and training opportunities are in place.
For example at Merthyr Tydfil South Wales we worked with the local council construction contractors BAM and tenants MandS and Next.
We invested in skills and training provision for the local community resulting in the creation of close to 500 local jobs at the recent extension of Cyfarthfa Retail Park.
These numbers demonstrate the vital role that our industry can play in creating sustainable careers and stimulating local economies across our many communities.
At a corporate level we encourage colleagues to play a greater role in volunteering in the communities in which we operate.
In 2015 staff volunteered over 400 days a clear illustration of our culture and values in practice.
Hammerson s Community Day now well established saw high levels of participation with colleagues taking part in a range of 27 activities including a river cleanup and mentoring young people.
HOW ARE YOU LEADING THE SECTOR ON SUSTAINABILITY INITIATIVES As a founding member of the Better Buildings Partnership BBP we have been instrumental in leading the sector.
The organisation which brings property owners and occupiers together to share new ideas and importantly work together to reduce carbon emissions is chaired by our Head of Sustainability Louise Ellison.
In 2015 members of the BBP achieved a 5% yearonyear reduction in energy consumption across their portfolio.
Share of job opportunities to local people 85% Staff days volunteered to community activities Community Day Further details on Sustainability are available on pages 43  48 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 13 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 13 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW OUR MARKET
The retail landscape 2015 was another positive year for the performance of retail real estate across Europe driven primarily by an improving economic backdrop.
In a dynamic and evolving retail landscape tenants continue to enhance their brand proposition by taking more space in prime retail destinations that meet consumer needs.
INTRODUCTION
Our strategy focuses on highquality property in prime locations across selected European retail markets.
We operate in the retail property market because it offers attractive and sustainable longterm returns with lower volatility than other commercial property markets and a granular and diverse tenant mix which mitigates counterparty risk.
We aim to be among the leaders in each of our market subsectors so as to capitalise on the favourable market trends and exercise scale efficiencies.
ECONOMIC BACKGROUND Macroeconomic conditions drive consumer confidence and spending which translates into retailers appetite for expansion and ability to finance new space.
Chart 2 illustrates the relative consumer spending growth rates for our main geographic markets.
UK GDP growth of 2.4% for 2015 was ahead of the Eurozone 1.5% Source OECD.
Disposable income currently benefits from low interest rates low fuel and food costs and real wage growth.
Household consumer expenditure grew by 4.2% in 2015.
The GfK UK consumer confidence index finished the year in positive territory suggesting 2016 will see continued spending growth by UK households.
French GDP growth of 1.1% in 2015 was higher than last year 2014 0.2% and unemployment was flat.
Household consumer expenditure grew by 2.0% in 2015.
The government initiated changes to allow more Sunday trading which should help future sales growth.
While forwardlooking consumer confidence finished 2015 higher Source INSEE the mediumterm impact of the destabilising terrorist attacks in France is still uncertain.
Ireland attracts significant inward investment due to a low corporate tax rate and skilled workforce.
It is Europes fastest growing economy with GDP up 5.6% in 2015 household consumer expenditure up by 8.6% and sharply falling unemployment.
New car sales were up 18% in 2015 indicating households confidence in their financial position.
Despite some macroeconomic shocks in 2015 the number of international tourists to Europe grew partly as a result of the weakness of the Euro currency supporting the continued structural growth of the global tourism industry.
DEMAND FOR RETAIL REAL ESTATE The continued economic recovery in Europe supported attractive total returns from retail real estate in 2015.
The UK shopping centre market saw over 4bn of investment 2014 5.9bn.
With a limited number of prime shopping centres changing hands investment transactions attracted significant competition and lifted capital valuations across this sector.
Total IPD return for UK shopping centres was 10.0%.
UK retail parks investment volumes were up on last year at 3.6bn 2014 2.7bn.
There were signs of a divergence in performance across different types of retail parks with fashion parks delivering better returns and some supermarketanchored parks seeing values fall see page 16 for market subsegments.
Total IPD return for the whole UK retail parks sector was 6.9%.
French shopping centre transaction volumes were 3.9bn 2014 5.8bn.
Investor appetite was strong in particular with low European interest rates and this drove capital value uplifts.
Total IPD returns are not yet available for French shopping centres.
Irish retail transactions were 0.5bn 2014 1.1bn and retail property delivered a total IPD return of 20.9% driven by strong rental and capital growth.
An influx of capital into the premium outlets market from international funds and private equity firms contributed to a 15% rise in the volume of transactions total c.
The strong demand and a lack of new supply drove a sharp increase in valuations.
Total property returns were approximately 20% source Cushman and Wakefield.
Francetelteltel 2016 United Kingdom Ireland Chart 2 Household consumer expenditure growth % Source Marketline analysis using data from Eurostat OECD and ONS 14 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 14 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 We have selected retail assets that match the latest trends driving demand for space in a dynamic retail environment.
CONSUMER TRENDS Our assets are in the subsectors of prime shopping centres retail parks and premium outlets.
We believe that these categories are best positioned to match the latest trends in shopping habits of consumers.
In a dynamic and evolving retail landscape we see an opportunity to outperform our competitors by selecting retail assets in these categories.
Table 3 Retail theme Driving demand for space in
Retail parks
Brand flagships As a growing share of consumers purchases are made online a retailers physical space needs to offer the boldest brand experience to drive shopper loyalty P P
Restaurant operators recognise the opportunity afforded by a high footfall environment P P P
63% of consumers named convenience as an important factor driving their purchase decision in our survey by Conlumino.
Retail needs to offer quick efficient and seamless service P P Global shoppingtourism Shopping is increasingly enjoyed by international tourists as part of a global luxury travel experience P P HOW DOES THE GROWTH OF ONLINE SHOPPING IMPACT RETAILERS DEMAND FOR PHYSICAL SPACE To help us better understand the topic we carried out research with the Investment Property Federation CBRE and Conlumino.
Our survey found that 86% of customers use at least two channels when shopping eg both physical stores and online.
The physical store channel was identified as being important for more than just making a transaction.
Shoppers use the physical space to research products trial and compare different brands and for transaction fulfilment eg click and collect.
In fact despite the growing share of sales completed online nine out of ten shopper journeys still involve a physical store for at least one step of the process.
Click and collect is a growing trend and over half of customers said they would use the service if it was offered.
For click and collect customers the store offers a fulfilment solution however a Verdict report found that 32% of customers went on to make additional purchases in store when collecting a click and collect package.
Retailers also recognise the role a physical store plays in creating brand awareness and loyalty.
Our research showed that sales online increased in the stores catchment area by 56% when a new fashion store opened.
Overall our findings suggest that retailers with a successful multichannel strategy are able to drive greater sales efficiency from their physical retail space.
Cabot Circus Bristol Shoppers using at least two channels 86% Shoppers spending more in store when using click and collect 32% See page 23 for details of our click and collect initiatives.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 15 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 15 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OUR MARKET 0
Hammerson
Land Securities
GIC
CPPIB
Capital and Regional Standard Life
Hermes
Unibail
Klpierre
Hammerson
Carrefour
Immochan
Axa
Altarea
Santander
Carmila
Wereldhave
Our market continued OCCUPIER MARKETS PRIME SHOPPING CENTRES Prime shopping centres are those which cover a sizeable catchment include large anchor stores and offer consumers catering and entertainment as well as retail.
With the emergence of multichannel distribution retailers are reevaluating the size and efficiency of their physical store footprint.
As a result there is a polarisation in demand for space with retailers prioritising stores in prime shopping centres and reducing space in secondary centres and high street locations.
Prime shopping centres are more likely to deliver higher footfall and dwell time given the range of leading brands food beverage and leisure offering digital infrastructure and attractive surroundings.
With ownership stakes in 15 of the top shopping centres as designated by Property Market Analysis PMA and a total of 1.7 million m of retail and leisure space we are a leading European shopping centre owner and one of the top three in both the UK and France see Charts 4 and 5.
We have over 700 different retail and leisure brands across our shopping centres and 14% of our space is let to catering and leisure tenants.
The rents achievable at shopping centres are driven by their size location demographic catchment and local competition.
High tenant demand and low vacancy drives growth in ERV estimated rental value.
In
France rental growth is driven by new lettings and inplace leases are also linked to a price inflation index.
RETAIL PARKS Retail parks are predominantly situated in out of town locations which are easily accessible by car and are wellconnected to major road networks with plentiful free parking.
Units are on average larger and rents are lower per square metre than in shopping centres.
W e are the second largest direct owner of retail parks in the UK with 500000m across 21 assets.
The total UK market comprises 11 million m and ownership is fragmented.
As Chart 6 below shows the retail park market is categorised into five subsegments.
We are primarily focused on three of the subsegments being shopping parks hybrid parks and key homeware parks.
We choose to operate in these segments because they offer the strongest occupational demand.
In hybrid and key homeware parks improved economic conditions and greater consumer confidence across the regions in the UK are driving strong demand from homeware and furnishings brands.
Retailers such as ScS Oak Furniture Land and Tapi have all been expanding their portfolios.
These retailers have also been absorbing space from DIY retailers such as BandQ and Homebase who are reducing their store numbers.
There is also a growing trend for fashion retailers which traditionally locate in shopping centres to take space Shopping park Hybrid park Key homeware goods Standard homeware
Chart 6 UK retail park market Chart 4 Largest owners of top 50 UK shopping centres Total UK space 18.
1 million m Source PMA Note Number of centres including JVs Source PMA Note Number of centres including JVs Chart 5 Largest owners of top 50 French shopping centres Total French space 17 .6 million m Hammerson retail park portfolio Source Hammerson PMA Shopping park Hybrid park Key homeware goods Standard homeware
Brent Cross London 16 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 16 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 on retail parks.
Retail parks offer a costeffective way for fashion retailers to fill in the gaps in their store footprint between prime shopping centres in large towns.
This strategy is also leading to improved unit fitouts more attractive surroundings and more food and beverage on retail parks.
PREMIUM OUTLETS Outlet centres offer a channel for retailers to distribute excess inventory by selling it at a material discount to original price.
Furthermore premium outlets are often designed to match the storefit of a fullprice store hence retailers are able to retain their brand identity even with customers shopping at premium outlets.
There are approximately 200 outlet centres across the European market.
The market can be broadly categorised according to the type of customer it serves.
The pyramid structure in Chart 7 represents the European premium outlets market.
Value Retail and VIA Outlets together are among the top three largest players in Europe and operate in the upper two segments.
Premium outlets which provide international fashion and luxury brands are at the top of the market.
Value
Retail is positioned at this level with its nine unique shoppingtourism Villages serving the international luxury and fashion consumer.
Sales densities at Value Retail villages can be as high as 30000 m The middle segment caters to the mainstream fashion customer.
VIA Outlets six centres are in this category.
The strategy of improving the tenant mix at VIA Outlets will raise the sales densities at these centres and lift them within this middle segment.
The third lowend segment which offers discounted high street clothes or factory surplus goods is not served by Value Retail or VIA Outlets.
Outlet centre rents are on the whole directly linked to tenant sales.
Tenants are on shorter leases than shopping centres.
Outlet operators also change the brand lineup at outlets more frequently to match supply and demand.
Sales growth has been on average 8% p. premium outlets market in the last three years.
A key driver of the market is the strong demand from international tourists.
International visitors in particular from China the Middle East and Russia who appreciate luxury design take advantage of the opportunity to buy goods at a discount while travelling in Europe.
OUTLOOK
In terms of economic backdrop the ingredients are in place to support continued retail sales growth in the UK with rising wages low interest rates and low inflation expected to continue through 2016.
In France consumer confidence is more muted in particular as a result of recent terrorist attacks.
In Ireland the economic picture is forecast to remain strong with continued growth in retail sales.
In occupational markets we expect there to be greater polarisation in demand for prime retail space as a result of multichannel trends.
This will favour Hammersons portfolio and help drive aboveaverage rental growth.
Premium outlet sales growth is expected to continue supported by growth in the shoppingtourism market from a wide mix of global travellers.
This sales growth will translate into growing rents strong investment volumes and higher than average returns.
However since the start of 2016 stock markets have been volatile reflecting a more uncertain global economic and political outlook.
Downside risks associated with China Brexit and the Middle East could impact consumer confidence and capital returns in 2016.
We expect capital value growth in commercial property to slow in 2016.
However retail property has traditionally lagged the cycles of other more volatile commercial property such as office assets.
Table 8
Consumer confidence Retail sales ERVs Capital values
France
Ireland
European premium outlets
FASHION AND LUXURY
MAINSTREAM
FASHION BRAND OUTLETS LOWEND DISCOUNT OUTLETS Increasing sales densities sq m Value Retail VIA Outlets Landquart Zurich Chart 7 European premium outlets market STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 17 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 17 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OUR MARKET KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Delivering value for our stakeholders We have seven primary Key Performance Indicators or KPIs.
They are split between financial and operational measures and are used to monitor the performance of the business to ensure that we deliver value for our stakeholders.
Chart 9 TOTAL PROPERTY RETURNS % Chart 10 GROWTH IN LIKEFORLIKE NRI %
The annual growth in net rental income NRI for investment properties owned throughout the current and prior periods excluding the impact of acquisitions disposals developments and exchange rate movements.
Principal stakeholder focus 1 NRI from the property portfolio is the primary source of operating cash flow and the main contributor to earnings.
We aim to grow likeforlike NRI through leasing vacant space capturing uplifts from rent reviews and indexation tenant engineering and other valueadding initiatives.
Performance
2.3% 2014 2.1% On a likeforlike basis NRI grew by 2.3% in 2015 above our target of 2.0%.
Income from UK shopping centres and retail parks grew by 2.1% and 2.6% respectively.
Our French shopping centres produced income growth of 2.5%.
2016 outlook We expect the occupational market to improve in 2016 particularly in the UK.
Lease expiries breaks rent reviews and leasing vacant space provide the opportunity to increase rental income and implement tenant rotation to improve the quality of the retail offer across our portfolio.
Description
We compare the total return achieved by our property investments on a proportionally consolidated basis including premium outlets against a benchmark based on the annual IPD Retail Property Universe.
The benchmark is weighted 7030 between the IPD UK and French indices to be comparable with the geographical allocation of our property portfolio.
As the final 2015 IPD indices are not published until after the publication of this Annual Report the benchmark is managements best estimate using available IPD data.
Principal stakeholder focus 1 We invest in create and operate highquality real estate which is attractive to both retailers and shoppers and provides a platform from which to deliver income and value growth in excess of industry benchmarks.
Performance
12.4% Benchmark 9 .9% 2014 13.6% Benchmark 12.5% During 2015 the property portfolio produced a total return of 12.4% which was 250bp ahead of the estimated IPD benchmark.
The outperformance was driven by premium outlets which delivered a total return of 23.7%.
2016 outlook In 2016 we believe our highquality portfolio and clear business model will continue to outperform the retail benchmark.
More in the Financial Review on page 58 More in the Financial Review on page 54 Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets.
IPD Benchmark IPD Benchmark 2015 Total property return 2015 Total property return
FINANCIAL KPIs 18 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 18 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 More in the Financial Review on page 54 More in the Financial Review on page 55 Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets.
CPI benchmark Growth in adjusted EPS Growth in adjusted
CPI benchmark Chart 11 GROWTH IN ADJUSTED EPS % Chart 12 COST RATIO %
The cost ratio shows the total operating costs including the cost of vacancy as a percentage of gross rental income for our property portfolio.
We have amended the calculation methodology in line with EPRA best practice to adjust for costs associated with inclusive leases.
We have restated the prior year ratios using the same methodology.
The ratio is not directly comparable between different companies as it is impacted by different business models and accounting treatments.
Principal stakeholder focus 1 Maintaining an efficient operating structure supports growth in earnings and future dividends.
Performance
23.1% 2014 22.8% During 2015 our cost base has been managed effectively and the proportion of net administration costs as a percentage of gross rental income has reduced from 12.8% to 11.8%.
This reduction was offset by an increased proportion of property costs from 10.0% to 11.3%.
This increase is principally due to higher vacancy and property running costs at properties awaiting redevelopment.
2016 outlook The ratio is forecast to improve as additional income from recent acquisitions and completed developments are expected to offset investment in growing business areas such as digital and development.
We will continue to manage effectively property costs associated with properties awaiting development ahead of these projects commencing on site.
Description
The annual percentage increase in adjusted earnings per share EPS compared with inflation.
Principal stakeholder focus 1 Adjusted EPS is our principal profit measure and an indicator of the level of recurring profit available for distribution to shareholders as dividends.
Sustained growth in EPS reflects the effective delivery of our business model and supports strong financial returns and a progressive dividend policy.
Performance
12.6% 2014 3.5% In 2015 adjusted EPS increased by 3.0 pence or 12.6% to 26.9 pence.
This increase was driven by increased rental income and additional earnings from our premium outlet investments.
Earnings were further enhanced by the lower average cost of borrowing and lower administration expenses but impacted by the dilution associated with the 2014 share placing.
We benchmark this KPI against inflation which for 2015 was 0.2% resulting in an outperformance of 12.4 percentage points.
This benchmark was previously UK RPI but has been changed in 2015 to a weighted 7030 UK France CPI benchmark.
This is also now reflected in the 2015 LTIP performance conditions and comparative benchmarks in Chart 11 have been restated.
2016 outlook 2016 EPS growth will be driven by income from recent acquisitions and completed developments partly offset by lost income associated with recent and planned disposals.
ALIGNMENT TO OUR BUSINESS MODEL STAKEHOLDER FOCUS 1 Shareholders 2 Retailers and shoppers 3 People and communities LINK TO REMUNERATION The remuneration of Executive Directors is aligned closely with our primary KPIs through the Company s Annual Incentive Plan AIP and Long Term Incentive Plan L TIP.
For 2015 the AIP contains all four of the Financial KPIs.
Total property returns and growth in adjusted EPS are also included as performance measures within a number of the annual L TIP awards.
The operational KPIs are consistent with our business model and good performance in these areas should create value for our stakeholders.
Details of Executive Director remuneration is included in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 84 to 101.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 19 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 19 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Chart 14 LEASING ACTIVITY M Chart 15 GLOBAL EMISSIONS INTENSITY RATIO MTCO
Description
Tonnes of CO e emissions from properties and facilities under our direct control including corporate operations.
This metric is calculated as a ratio of adjusted profit before tax.
The measure is calculated over the 12 months ended 30 September each year.
The ratio has been calculated since 2013 when mandatory Greenhouse Gas GHG emissions reporting was introduced.
Principal stakeholder focus 3 Highquality property is increasingly expected to be carbon efficient.
We are committed to leading the property industry in delivering energyefficient retail assets with low operational cost.
Performance
172mtCO em 2014 180mtCO em The ratio has improved by 4% during 2015 reflecting greater operational efficiency although the reduction in the ratio has been tempered by emissions associated with increased gas consumption.
2016 outlook We expect to further reduce the ratio in 2016 as we implement initiatives involving investment in renewables energyefficient technology and lighting.
However the absolute level of emissions is forecast to increase as the portfolio grows and the effective management of emissions at acquired and newlydeveloped properties will be a key area of focus.
Description
The amount of income secured through leasing activity during the year from both new leases and lease renewals across our investment portfolio.
This is an absolute not a likeforlike figure.
Principal stakeholder focus 2 Leasing is directly linked to rental income growth and also enables us to enhance the retail offer across our portfolio through proactive tenant rotation.
Performance
27 .9 million 2014 29 .5 million Leasing volumes have remained high in 2015 totalling 27 .9 million.
Whilst absolute volumes were slightly lower than in 2014 demand for space in our prime properties remained strong.
On average principal leases signed in 2015 were secured at 3% above December 2014 ERVs and 10% above the previous passing rent.
Across the portfolio we signed 396 leases UK 260 France 136 representing a total area of 136000m 2016 outlook We expect leasing volumes to remain high in 2016 with continued retailer demand for new space.
We are focused on delivering tenant rotation to enhance the retail offer across our portfolio although the absolute volume of leasing is affected by the timing of lease expiries.
Key Performance Indicators continued
The ERV of the space in our investment portfolio which is currently let as a percentage of the total ERV of the portfolio.
Principal stakeholder focus 2 We aim to maximise the occupancy of our properties as income lost through vacancy has a direct impact on profitability.
However we believe that a low level of structural vacancy provides an opportunity for us to manage the mix and location of retailers within a property.
This enhances the consumer experience encourages footfall and sales and is consistent with the strategy for generating income and capital growth.
Performance
97 .7% 2014 97 .5% Occupancy remains above our 97 .0% target with the portfolio being 97 .7% occupied at the year end.
This was marginally higher than the prior year principally due to higher occupation in our shopping centres in both the UK and France.
2016 outlook We expect occupancy to remain high in 2016 as retailers in both the UK and France seek space in the best retail venues and we target retailers who will enhance the desirability of our portfolio.
Chart 13 OCCUPANCY % More in the Business Review on pages 22 to 33 More in the Business Review on pages 22 to 33 More in the Sustainability Review on page 47 Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets.
Target
OPERATIONAL KPIs 20 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 20 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 EPRA FINANCIAL REPORTING BEST PRACTICE RECOMMENDATIONS Hammerson is a member of European Public Real Estate Association EPRA and actively participates in a number of EPRA committees and initiatives.
This includes working with peer group companies real estate investors and analysts and the large audit firms to improve the transparency comparability and relevance of the published results of listed real estate companies in Europe.
We have adopted the EPRA Best Practice Recommendations and the key EPRA metrics are shown in table 16.
EPRA BEST PRACTICE RECOMMENDATIONS BPR ON SUSTAINABILITY REPORTING Absolute and intensity measures for energy and water usage greenhouse gas emission and waste as defined by EPRA are set out in the full Global Reporting Initiative and EPRA Best Practice Recommendation compliant pack which can be found online at site In 2015 we achieved an EPRA Gold award for achieving exceptional compliance with the EPRA Sustainability BPR in our reporting and disclosure.
For more information on our approach to Sustainability see page 43.
Table 16 EPRA performance measures Performance measure performance performance Definition Page Earnings 213.0m 171.3m Recurring earnings from core operational activities.
In both 2015 and 2014 EPRA earnings differed from the Groups adjusted earnings due to adjustments to better reflect the Groups underlying performance.
See note 10 to the accounts for further information.
Earnings per share
27.1p 23.4p EPRA earnings divided by the weighted average number of shares in issue during the period.
As for EPRA earnings above EPRA EPS differs from the Groups 2015 adjusted EPS of 26.9p 2014 23.9p due to adjustments as shown in note 10 to the accounts.
Net asset value NAV per share 7.10 6.38 NAV excluding the fair values of financial instruments debt and deferred tax balances divided by the number of issued shares.
Triple net asset value NNNAV per share 6.74 5.96 NAV adjusted to include the fair values of financial instruments debt and deferred taxes.
Net Initial Yield NIY 4.6% 4.7% Annualised rental income based on cash rents passing at the balance sheet date less nonrecoverable property operating expenses divided by the market value of the property including estimated purchasers costs.
Toppedup NIY 4.7% 4.9% EPRA NIY adjusted for the expiry of rentfree periods.
Vacancy 2.3% 2.5% Estimated market rental value ERV of vacant space divided by the ERV of the whole portfolio.
Occupancy is the inverse of vacancy.
Cost ratio 23.1% 22.8% Total operating costs as a percentage of gross rental income after rents payable.
The calculation is shown in table 106 on page 168 in the Additional Disclosures section.
In 2015 we have amended the calculation methodology in line with EPRA best practice to adjust for costs associated with inclusive leases and have restated the 2014 comparative figure.
Also the 2014 ratio excluded a net oneoff restructuring cost of 3.0 million.
EPRA MEASURES STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 21 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 21 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS This Business Review provides key information on each of our operational sectors and their performance during 2015.
UK shopping centres The UK retail environment remains robust as demonstrated by another strong operational performance.
Our prime centres are destinations that continue to excite and attract retailers and shoppers.
Martin Plocica Director UK and Ireland Shopping Centres
BUSINESS REVIEW
KEY FACTS 11 shopping centres 150 million visitors 755000m of lettable space with 1000 tenants Portfolio valuation 3.1 billion
PORTFOLIO HIGHLIGHTS
Likeforlike net rental income growth of 2.1% Retail sales growth of 1.3% Digital platform implemented across whole portfolio Opened leisureled extension at Silverburn Grand Central Birmingham acquired in February 2016 22 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 22 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 NET RENTAL INCOME On a likeforlike basis net rental income increased by 2.1% in 2015 compared with a 2.2% increase in 2014.
The growth in 2015 is driven by rent review settlements income from new lettings and increased car park income.
The best performing centres were Highcross Monument Mall Silverburn and Union Square which benefitted from recent lettings and uplifts associated with rent reviews.
Nonrental income being net income from car parks and the sale of advertising and merchandising opportunities at our centres totalled 19 .1 million and grew by 10% in 2015 on a likeforlike basis.
LEASING OCCUPANCY AND ERVS Tenant demand for space at our centres remained strong with 151 leases signed representing 11.7 million of annual rental income and 47 800m of space.
For principal leases rents secured were 4% above December 2014 ERVs and 9% above the previous passing rent.
Associated with this occupational demand the portfolio achieved ERV growth of 2.8% compared with 2.6% in 2014.
Occupancy levels remained high at 98.3% compared with 98.1% in December 2014.
We have delivered a number of key leasing deals across our portfolio during the year.
These targeted deals help strengthen and refresh our centres drive ERV growth and include flagship stores for UK and international brands and luxury operators.
Highlights included three Victorias Secret lettings at The Oracle Cabot Circus and WestQuay upsized Topshop and River Island stores at Bullring and the introduction of Watchfinder and Sraphine at Victoria Quarter.
We also signed leases with a range of exciting caterers including Cau at The Oracle Byron at Union Square its first Scottish restaurant and TGI Fridays restaurants at The Oracle and Highcross.
SALES FOOTFALL AND OCCUPANCY COST Consumers continue to demonstrate increasing confidence and our centres have achieved sales growth in 2015 of 1.3% calculated on a same centre basis.
The strongest growth was at Silverburn and The Oracle.
Footfall increased by 1.1% a turnaround compared with the 1.3% reduction in 2014.
This increased activity has resulted in a reduction in the occupational cost ratio from 20.8% at the beginning of the year to 19 .2% at 31 December 2015.
LEASE EXPIRIES AND RENT REVIEWS The portfolio has a diverse tenant base and offers both a robust income stream with a weighted unexpired lease term of six years as well as opportunities for rental growth.
Within the portfolio leases that are subject to rent reviews break clauses or expiry offer the prospect to secure additional rental income.
Over the three years to December 2018 these leases would provide additional annual rental income of 10.7 million if renewed or if reviews are settled at current market rents.
TENANT COVENANTS AND CREDIT
There were only five units let to tenants in administration at 31 December 2015 nine fewer than at the beginning of the year.
In total these tenants represented just 0.1% of the Groups total passing rents.
Our credit control function oversees our collection process and collection rates remain strong with 97% of billings received within 14 days of the December due date.
It also assesses the covenant strength of prospective tenants and monitors the credit standing of our existing tenants using a credit rating agency.
The agency has a fourpoint risk indicator scale and at 31 December 2015 87% of our shopping centre tenants were rated within the two lowest risk categories.
COMMERCIAL INITIATIVES In line with our Product Experience Framework we are enhancing the quality of customer experience and service across our portfolio.
Key initiatives include upgrading our customer service desks providing electric car and mobile phone charging points and introducing pianos to each mall to enliven the shopping experience.
Our customer service performance was recognised during the year with the Silverburn team winning an unprecedented fourth BCSC Achieving Customer Excellence award.
We are also trialling a number of new initiatives including a popup programme and click and collect provisions.
Click and collect is available in four centres with performance significantly exceeding expectations.
In Brent Cross we are seeing an average of 400 parcels being handled each week and the click and collect service at The Oracle launched in November 2015 is already outperforming Brent Cross at the same stage of operation.
We will be rolling out to additional sites and trialling new formats of click and collect in 2016.
Table 17 Operational summary Key metrics
NRI growth %
Leasing activity Leasing vs
Likeforlike
ERV growth % Retail sales growth %
31 December 2015 2.1 98.3 11.7 4 2.8 1.3 1.1 31 December 2014 2.2 98.1 13.5 10 2.6 2.6 1.3 Note Figures on a proportionally consolidated basis.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 23 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT BUSINESS REVIEW Interactive hoardings used on a temporary basis on units being refurbished are a great example of a simple lowcost solution to enliven the mall.
Trialled in four centres and retail parks over a six week period they received more than two million interactions from shoppers.
As retail specialists we continue to demonstrate industryleading insight and in 2015 we have Launched the Hammerson Retail Tracker HART published on a monthly basis for a national readership in The Times to provide insight into UK spending habits and retail trends Issued our third annual retail report Shopper Tribes in conjunction with retail consultant Conlumino and Coauthored and hosted a seminar on Pricing Retail Space in conjunction with the Investment Property Forum.
Looking ahead to 2016 we are working on a wide range of initiatives to deliver a consistent high quality offer across the portfolio for the benefit of both retailers and shoppers.
These initiatives are designed to extend dwell times and encourage loyalty .
W e are enhancing the family experience at our centres by improving facilities such as toilets with upgrades to infant feeding and changing rooms.
W e will extend our programme of events and innovative food concepts to bring our centres to life and drive footfall as well as providing premium services to better support the customer experience.
A key part of many shopping journeys involves our car parks.
In 2016 we will be trialling a new design as well as upgrading the technology across our car parks.
We will combine best in class wayfinding lighting and design principles to deliver an experience that is welcoming safe and easy to use.
DIGITAL ENGAGEMENT Our integrated digital platform is now live across all shopping centres.
The Plus app a personalised shopping companion allows us to communicate directly with shoppers in realtime providing personalised content and exclusive offers based on their interests redemption history and stores visited together with centre information such as floorplans events and live centre news.
The app has been well received by shoppers with a 140000 downloads well ahead of our expectations.
We continue to see strong levels of customers registering their data through the app and more than a quarter of those registered redeemed an offer.
Version 2 of the Plus app will go live in the Spring with a new look and feel and additional functionality including the ability to reward shoppers for their loyalty.
Business review continued UK SHOPPING CENTRES ACQUISITIONS DISPOSALS AND COMPLETED DEVELOPMENTS In March we took 100% ownership of Martineau Galleries Birmingham by acquiring the stakes of our two joint venture partners.
We are considering a number of potential strategic development opportunities for the property in the medium term and for this reason it is classified within the UK Other portfolio in the segmental analysis in the accounts and the Additional Disclosures section of this report.
In June Cineworld opened its new 14screen cinema completing the 10900m leisureled extension at
The case study on page 25 gives further details about this exciting project.
In December we announced the disposal of Monument Mall Newcastle for 75 million some 8 million above its value at the beginning of the year.
The 9 500m centre was acquired in 2011 and was redeveloped in 2013.
The sale crystallised a 24 million profit on cost and is part of the 500 million disposal programme announced at the time of the Irish loan portfolio acquisition.
In February 2016 we acquired Grand Central Birmingham a 40400m shopping centre for a total cost of 350 million.
The centre which opened in September 2015 is anchored by a 23200m John Lewis and provides a modern retail environment for 40 premium stores including Jo Malone Joules Cath Kidston and The White Company.
It also contains 20 casual dining brands including Yo Sushi Caffe Concerto and Tapas Revolution.
The acquisition supports our longterm commitment to Birmingham which is benefitting from significant inward investment.
We have contracted to sell subject to regulatory approval 50% of the scheme to CPPIB one of the existing joint venture partners in Bullring for 175 million.
POSITIVE PLACES Our sustainability initiatives also have financial benefits for the Group and its tenants.
During 2015 we saved 2.0 million in landfill tax through recycling and diversion of waste from landfill and have reduced likeforlike electricity consumption by 3% across our centres.
At Bullring we upgraded the lighting with over 4000 new LED lights.
As the most energyhungry asset within the portfolio this has been a key focus area and we are already seeing reductions in energy consumption.
The project won Energy Demand Reduction funding from the Department of Energy and Climate Change.
At a cost of 1.5 million this has been a significant investment but payback is expected within 4.5 years.
The works on Bullring multistorey car parks were completed in early October and electricity consumption has fallen by almost 50%.
24 24 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 STRATEGIC RATIONALE Silverburn benefits from Scotlands largest standalone shopping destination catchment Existing 90000m centre was underprovided from a food and beverage perspective Upgraded leisure and dining to differentiate from competing locations Scheme to capitalise on growing casual dining market to extend centre catchment and improve visitor profile KEY OBJECTIVES ACHIEVED 11 new restaurants and stateoftheart 14screen Cineworld cinema fully opened by June 2015 Positive impact on footfall and sales across whole centre since opening with footfall 6% and sales 5% Extended average customer dwell times by 4% 350 permanent retail and leisure jobs created for local community Silverburn Extension OUR PROPOSITION IN ACTION
10900m NEW CINEMA 5000m
50% NEW JOBS CREATED FULLY OPENED June 2015 BREEAM RATING V ery good TOTAL COST 35 million PROFIT ON COST 6 million Figures at 100%.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 25 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT
BUSINESS REVIEW Business review continued
Ireland
INTRODUCTION
In September we announced the acquisition in a 5050 joint venture with Allianz of a 1.85 billion loan portfolio secured against prime Dublin retail property.
The face value of the loans acquired was 2.6 billion and following completion of the transaction in October the joint venture has been negotiating with the borrower group to take ownership of the secured real estate.
RATIONALE
This acquisition provides the Group with a new Irish operation to broaden our European platform and the opportunity to become Irelands leading retail property owner.
The portfolio is located in Dublin Irelands strongest retail centre and in addition to the population of 1.3 million the city welcomes significant numbers of tourists 8.6 million in 2015.
The Irish economy had the fastest GDP growth in the Eurozone in 2014 and has achieved further GDP growth of 6.9% in 2015.
Retail sales have risen by 6% in the year to December 2015 and the portfolio offers significant value upside through asset management and development opportunities.
The acquisition is consistent with our corporate strategy and there are significant synergies with our existing UK and French operations which will enable a swift management transition when the assets are acquired from the borrowers.
PROPERTY ASSETS The transaction represents a rare opportunity to acquire a portfolio of quality assets in a single transaction.
The principal property asset is Dundrum Town Centre which is 5km south of the city centre and was opened in 2005.
The property is anchored by Harvey Nichols House of Fraser MandS and Penneys and has 120 shops 38 restaurants a 12screen VIP cinema and 3400 car parking spaces.
The property has an annual footfall of 18 million generates 44 million of passing rent 100% figure and has an average unexpired lease term of 12 years.
Adjacent to Dundrum Town Centre is a six acre development site Dundrum Phase 2 which previously benefitted from a 100000m retail consent to extend the existing centre.
We believe this site offers a better opportunity to bring forward a mixeduse development.
The Swords Pavilions shopping centre is a 50% coownership with IPUT and Irish Life situated in the north of Dublin.
The 45500m centre has annual footfall of 12 million and generates passing rent of 11 million 100% figure.
A 16 acre development site adjacent to the centre offers scope for future mixeduse development.
The Ilac Centre is in the heart of central Dublin on Henry Street and is a 50% coownership with Irish Life.
The 15000m centre has annual footfall of 18 million and generates passing rent of 7 million 100% figure.
The portfolio also includes a 5.3 acre city centre development site adjacent to the Ilac Centre.
We believe this is one of the largest and bestpositioned urban development sites in Europe and has taken over a decade to assemble.
The site comprises multiple buildings along Henry Street OConnell Street and Moore Street.
With its strategic location and mix of current tenants the site offers the flexibility to pursue numerous development scenarios and deliver a modern landmark of international importance that is sympathetic to the neighbourhoods history.
STRUCTURE
Under the terms of the joint venture when the property assets are acquired from the borrowers the Group will own 50% of Dundrum Town Centre and Dundrum Phase 2 in joint venture with Allianz and act as asset and development manager.
We will also own 50% coownership shares in the Ilac Centre and in Swords Pavilions shopping centre and 100% of the two remaining development sites Dublin Central and Swords Pavilions.
The total consideration for the Groups share of the acquisition is 0.91 billion of which 0.69 billion had been incurred at 31 December 2015.
We have established a new Irish team to manage the transition from loans to property assets and expect to own the properties by the summer of 2016.
Dundrum shopping centre 26 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 26 UK retail parks New and existing retailers are demanding space at the best trading locations.
Our portfolio of modern retail parks is ideally placed to benefit from this increasing strength in occupational markets.
Andrew BergerNorth Director UK Retail Parks KEY FACTS 21 retail parks 500000m of lettable space with 460 tenants 2nd largest direct owner in UK Portfolio valuation 1.7 billion
PORTFOLIO HIGHLIGHTS
Likeforlike net rental income growth of 2.6% Completion of developments at Elliotts Field Rugby and Cyfarthfa Merthyr Tydfil Drakehouse Sheffield sold for 62 million ahead of book value in April STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 27 HAMMERSON.
OM 27 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT BUSINESS REVIEW NET RENTAL INCOME Likeforlike net rental income increased by 2.6% in 2015 compared to 2.4% in 2014.
The growth is due to a yearonyear increase in surrender premiums received associated with proactive tenant rotation at Imperial Retail Park Bristol and Fife Central Retail Park
These were partly offset by vacancy costs ahead of the redevelopments at Battery Retail Park Birmingham and Parc Tawe Swansea.
LEASING OCCUPANCY AND ERVS Across the portfolio we signed 79 leases representing 8.3 million of annual rental income and 43300m of space.
For principal leases rents were contracted at 4% above the December 2014 ERVs and 8% above the previous passing rent.
Occupancy levels remained high at 98.4% almost unchanged from the position at 31 December 2014.
ERV growth was 1.3% in 2015 compared with 0.5% for 2014.
The occupational markets are improving particularly homewares and we are targeting tenants which will enhance the retail offer at individual parks and grow income.
Key leasing transactions during the year included a new 1850m TK Maxx at Westmorland Retail Park Cramlington a 1900m Next at Telford Forge Shopping Park Telford and a 900m Tapi at St Oswalds Retail Park Gloucester.
LEASE EXPIRIES AND RENT REVIEWS One of the sectors strengths is security of income.
As at 31 December 2015 the portfolio had the longest weighted unexpired lease term compared to the Groups other portfolios at nine years.
As with the UK shopping centre portfolio a proportion of the leases are subject to rent reviews break clauses or expiry and offer the opportunity to secure additional income.
Over the three years to December 2018 these leases would provide additional annual rental income of 3.5 million if renewed or if reviews are settled at current market rents.
TENANT COVENANTS AND CREDIT
At 31 December 2015 there was just one tenant in administration representing 0.4 million of income.
96% of billings were collected within 14 days of the December due date and 90% of our retail parks tenants were rated by the credit agency in the two lowest risk categories.
COMMERCIAL INITIATIVES As part of the Groups Product Experience Framework we are reducing the amount of space let to DIY operators and reconfiguring this to enhance the retail offer at our parks.
An example of this is at Fife Central Retail Park Kirkcaldy where we are reconfiguring a former Homebase unit to create four new units and increase the passing rent from this space by 150%.
We are also keen to collect more insightful information about the portfolio and are undertaking a series of indepth customer surveys to better understand consumer opinions about facilities and existing or prospective tenants.
Consistent with our strategy at shopping centres we are introducing mobile phone chargers wifi and click and collect lockers at a number of our parks to enhance the customer experience.
DISPOSALS AND COMPLETED
In April we sold Drakehouse Retail Park Sheffield for gross proceeds of 62 million generating a 2 million profit compared with the 31 December 2014 valuation.
At Cyfarthfa Retail Park Merthyr Tydfil we completed a 30 million 14500m extension in August.
The extension includes BandQs first Ecolearning store a fullline 4600m MandS store and five fashion units including Next and River Island.
The scheme has a yield on cost of 7% and generated a profit on cost of 34%.
The redevelopment of Elliotts Field Rugby opened at the end of November.
The scheme accommodates 16 fashion homeware and catering brands and is anchored by a 5600m Debenhams and a 4600m
The scheme includes new retailers to the Groups retail park portfolio including HandM Fat Face and Eds Easy Diner.
The scheme has a BREEAM Excellent rating and generated a profit on cost of 24%.
Further details about the project are provided on page 29 .
POSITIVE PLACES Working with our contractor and retailers at the extension project at Cyfarthfa Retail Park in Merthyr Tydfil we have created substantial training and employment opportunities for local residents.
In total 722 jobs were created which saw 19 unemployed individuals supported into work and two apprenticeships.
50% of contractors employed onsite lived locally and eight local businesses have received training in digital skills.
Table 18 Operational summary Key metrics
NRI growth %
Leasing activity Leasing vs
Likeforlike
ERV growth % 31 December 2015 2.6 98.4 8.3 4 1.3 31 December 2014 2.4 98.5 7.2 7 0.5 Note Figures on a proportionally consolidated basis.
Business review continued UK RETAIL PARKS 28 28 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 STRATEGIC RATIONALE Rugby offers the ideal infill location for retailers situated between core regional cities of Leicester Milton Keynes and Birmingham Opportunity to deliver a next generation retail park in a growth town with strong demographics and a catchment of 440000 Ambition to attract new retailers and restaurateurs to an outoftown location Development capitalised on strong occupational demand KEY OBJECTIVES ACHIEVED Delivered modern shopping park with enhanced customer experience New fashion and dining tenants including 5600m fullline Debenhams department store and Fat Faces first English retail park store New customer facilities include free mobile phone charging and a centre management suite Captured local spend with right mix of shops and restaurants Successful launch in November with strong trading and footfall since opening Elliotts Field Rugby OUR PROPOSITION IN ACTION
16100m TOTAL STORES NEW BRANDS CAR PARKING 746 spaces FULLY OPENED November 2015 BREEAM RATING
TOTAL COST 76 million PROFIT ON COST 18 million STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 29 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT
BUSINESS REVIEW France
By delivering an improved retailer and shopper experience across our prime portfolio we will drive steady income growth while managing cost.
JeanPhilippe Mouton Managing Director France Grald Ferezou Deputy Managing Director France Business review continued KEY FACTS 10 shopping centres 90 million visitors 360000m of lettable space with 1100 tenants Portfolio valuation 1.9 billion
PORTFOLIO HIGHLIGHTS
Likeforlike net rental income of 2.5% Retail sales growth of 0.6% Opened 23800m
Disposals of Bercy 2 Paris and Grand Maine Angers completed in October 13% ahead of the December 2014 valuations 30 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 30 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 NET RENTAL INCOME On a likeforlike basis net rental income increased by 2.5% in 2015 compared to 2.0% in 2014.
Tenant rotation undertaken over the past 24 months has helped increase income.
Les Trois Fontaines Cergy Pontoise was the strongest performing centre with new tenants including Free Levis and Andr.
As with our UK shopping centres we have been focusing on increasing nonrental income and in 2015 this revenue stream has increased to 4.7 million compared to 3.1 million in 2014.
LEASING OCCUPANCY AND ERVS Against an unfavourable macroeconomic backdrop we continue to sign new leases across the portfolio.
In 2015 we contracted 136 leases representing 7 .2 million of annual rental income and 37 600m of space.
For principal leases the new income was 2% above December 2014 ERVs and 10% above the previous passing rent.
ERV growth remains challenging particularly given the low level of indexation growth.
In 2015 likeforlike ERVs were unchanged.
Occupancy levels at 96.9% were marginally higher than in 2014.
One of the key objectives for the French portfolio is to rotate tenants enabling us to introduce new leisure and catering brands to enliven the retail offer at our centres.
Key leasing deals during the year include All Saints and Tiger at Les Terrasses du Port Marseille and seven new international brands taking their first stores in France including Tuc Tuc and Punt Roma.
TENANT COVENANT AND CREDIT CONTROL Associated with the more challenging economic environment in France at 31 December 2015 there were 49 units in administration across the portfolio an increase of 16 during the year.
All of these units continue to trade and represent only 0.8% of the Groups passing rent.
These units provide opportunities to introduce new tenants to enhance the tenant mix.
86% of billings were collected within 14 days of the December due date and 83% of the tenants are deemed low risk using ratings from an external credit agency.
SALES FOOTFALL AND OCCUPANCY COST Over the course of 2015 retail sales increased by 0.6% calculated on a same centre basis but footfall was 0.6% lower.
The sales improvement has been driven by our leasing strategy with new tenants boosting sales as well as a strong performance from Les Terrasses du Port Marseille see case study on page 33 which opened in May 2014.
The sales and footfall performance was adversely impacted by the terrorist attacks in Paris in
Prior to this sales and footfall growth were 1.6% and 0.4% respectively for the ten months to October 2015.
Consistent with the increase in sales the occupational cost ratio decreased during 2015 from 14.4% to 14.0% at 31 December 2015.
LEASE EXPIRIES AND RENT REVIEWS Leases in France tend to be shorter than in the UK retail market and across our portfolio the average unexpired lease term is three years or six years excluding tenant break options.
The portfolio offers opportunities for rental growth with an average reversion of 10%.
Leases expiring or subject to tenants break clauses over the three years to December 2018 would provide additional annual rental income of 2.5 million if renewed at current market rents.
Most of our French leases are subject to annual indexation which will be nil in 2016.
Table 19 Operational summary Key metrics
NRI growth %
Leasing activity Leasing vs
Likeforlike
ERV growth % Retail sales growth %
31 December 2015 2.5 96.9 7.2 2  0.6 0.6 31 December 2014 2.0 96.6 8.0 2 0.2 1.0 1.5 Note Figures on a proportionally consolidated basis.
Nicetoile Nice STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 31 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT
BUSINESS REVIEW COMMERCIAL INITIATIVES
In addition to the tenant rotation initiatives we are applying our Product Experience Framework to the French portfolio in order to enhance the retail and customer experience.
We approach this from a Group perspective with an ambition to deliver a more consistent retailer and shopper experience across our entire shopping centre portfolio.
However we recognise the importance of providing tailored facilities and services which are particularly relevant to each centres catchment.
We are in the process of rolling out mobile phone charging units across all our French assets and are trialling click and collect lockers in two of our shopping centres.
We are also developing retail design guidelines for each of our centres and have been using interactive hoardings to enliven empty units and create an engaging experience for our shoppers.
Our recent acquisitions of Saint Sbastien Nancy and Nicetoile Nice acquired in February 2014 and January 2015 respectively have benefitted from our Product Experience strategy.
At Saint Sbastien works have started to enhance the interior of the centre and are expected to complete in May 2016.
At Nicetoile we have introduced a new management structure implemented a range of Hammerson marketing tools including an upgraded website and launched our portfoliowide Plus app.
The centre is currently fully let although we are in discussion with a number of aspirational retailers to further enhance the tenant mix.
We are also negotiating with local authorities to enable yearround Sunday trading across the portfolio.
During
2015 we were granted permission to trade on Sundays at OParinor and Italie Deux.
In total five of our centres can now trade throughout the week.
ACQUISITIONS DISPOSALS AND COMPLETED DEVELOPMENTS In line with our strategy of actively managing our portfolio and focusing on leading retail destinations in January 2015 we acquired a 10% interest in Nicetoile shopping centre in Nice in conjunction with our partner Allianz.
The 17 600m centre attracts 13 million visitors each year and generates passing rent of 14 million.
We manage the centre and our share of the acquisition cost was 31 million 24 million.
In October we completed the disposal of two smaller shopping centres Bercy 2 Paris for 64 million 47 million and Grand Maine Angers for 63 million 46 million.
Both disposals were ahead of the 31 December 2014 valuations and resulted in a combined profit on disposal of 11 million.
In November we opened Le Jeu de Paume a 23800m scheme in the centre of Beauvais 60km north of Paris.
The new centre which is anchored by a Carrefour Market has attracted highquality tenants the majority of which are new to Beauvais or the Oise region.
Key retailers include HandM Sephora Superdry New Yorker iSwitch and GStar Raw.
The centre incorporates a number of new initiatives including car park guidance technology interactive kiosks mobile phone charging a dedicated welcome desk and a childrens play area.
Initial trading is positive and the scheme welcomed over 200000 shoppers in the first two weeks of trading.
In January 2016 we exchanged contracts for the sale of Villebon 2 retail park for 159 million 117 million.
The disposal was the final part of the 200 million initial tranche of the 500 million disposal programme announced to partfund the Irish loan portfolio acquisition and the disposal is expected to complete in the Spring.
POSITIVE PLACES 63% of leases in our French portfolio include environmental clauses.
The development at Beauvais created 500 construction jobs and 27 apprenticeships with 73% of roles being taken by local people.
Our cradletograve carbon lifecycle assessment of Les Terrasses du Port has helped our development teams to remove carbon from projects during the design process.
Embodied carbon from concrete and steel can be reduced by up to 50% through optimised design.
Business review continued FRANCE SHOPPING CENTRES 32 32 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 STRATEGIC RATIONALE Creation of a new prime regional retail dining and leisure destination in Frances second city Opportunity to capitalise on the success of Euromditerrane Southern Europes largest urban regeneration project.
The
7 billion investment has been the catalyst for the regeneration of Marseille Scheme designed to offer a new retail destination providing space for new international brands to debut in France and capture increasing tourist demand Provide employment opportunities KEY OBJECTIVES ACHIEVED Les Terrasses du Port has rapidly established itself as the regions leading retail destination Outperformed expectations having welcomed 21 million visitors since launch in May 2014 and 2015 footfall 22% and sales 15% First Printemps store to open in 32 years Received industry accreditation winning awards for its innovative architecture and design Les Terrasses Du Port
OUR PROPOSITION IN ACTION
63000m TOTAL STORES RESTAURANT SPACE Unique 260m terrace
13 million
May 2014 BREEAM RATING
TOTAL COST 355 million VALUATION SURPLUS 143 million STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 33 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT
BUSINESS REVIEW Developments
The Group has been an active developer over the last 15 years with a track record of delivering iconic retail projects including Bullring and Les Terrasses du Port.
This track record is to continue as we deliver our pipeline of schemes.
Peter Cole Chief Investment Officer Business review continued KEY FACTS 1.5 billion development pipeline Development valuation 389 million representing 5% of the portfolio Potential to create major destinations and generate 95 million of new income
PORTFOLIO HIGHLIGHTS
Four schemes completed during 2015 Silverburn extension Glasgow Cyfarthfa extension Merthyr Tydfil Elliotts Field Rugby Beauvais near Paris Two projects onsite in Leeds and Southampton Good progress made with three major London development schemes 34 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 34 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 INTRODUCTION The Group has a large number of development opportunities in both the UK and France including two onsite schemes and three major London developments.
These would require expenditure of approximately 1.5 billion and have the potential to significantly grow the business and create iconic retail destinations.
In addition we are working to bring forward a number of potential future development projects but maintain a tight control of expenditure while these opportunities are fully assessed.
COMPLETED DEVELOPMENTS We completed four developments during 2015 in Beauvais Glasgow Merthyr Tydfil and Rugby.
For further details see the UK Shopping Centres UK Retail Parks and France sections of this Business Review.
The teams which delivered these schemes have been redeployed to the Groups onsite and pipeline schemes.
This approach provides new challenges for our people and ensures the experience gained and lessons learnt are retained by the Group.
Victoria Gate Leeds is a 165 million scheme adjacent to Victoria Quarter arcade.
The 35400m development is anchored by a 24200m flagship John Lewis store the first in Leeds and largest outside London.
The scheme includes more than 30 highend retailers and restaurants to complement the offer at Victoria Quarter as well as an 850space multistorey car park.
The scheme is 68% prelet to brands including Maje Cos Anthropologie The White Company and Other Stories and Hackett and is due to open in Autumn 2016.
We are targeting BREEAM Excellent for the development and have managed to divert 98% of construction and demolition waste from landfill.
When combined with Victoria Quarter the new scheme will create the largest premium retail and leisure destination in Northern England.
WestQuay Watermark is a 17 000m leisure and catering scheme next to our jointlyowned WestQuay shopping centre.
The scheme includes 23 new restaurants which will open in late 2016 and a 10screen Showcase Cinema de Lux which will open in early 2017 .
The project will create a new city centre leisure and dining destination for Southampton.
Leasing continues to progress well and the scheme is 80% prelet.
Key tenants already secured include Wahaca Byron Bills Cabana Cau Five Guys and Red Dog Saloon.
We are targeting BREEAM Excellent when the scheme fully opens next year.
Further details about the development are on page 38.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS We have made further progress with our three major London developments.
These are forecast to deliver attractive financial returns for the Group and create new iconic destinations.
These complex longterm projects have the potential to deliver significant benefits for their localities and catalyse wider urban regeneration.
ONSITE DEVELOPMENTS Table 20
Lettable area
Current value
Estimated annual income
Victoria Gate Leeds Phase 1 35400 QWestQuay Watermark Southampton 17000 QTotal 52400 124 16
Group ownership 100% for onsite schemes.
Valuation at 31 December 2015.
Incremental capital cost including capitalised interest.
Incremental income net of head rents and after expiry of rentfree periods.
Let or in solicitors hands by income at 12 February 2016.
Victoria Gate Leeds STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 35 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT
BUSINESS REVIEW Business review continued
DEVELOPMENTS
Table 21 The redevelopment of Croydon town centre is an opportunity to deliver a major destination fulfilling the current and future retail leisure and social requirements of the local community and wider catchment.
The scheme involves the redevelopment of the Whitgift Centre and refurbishment of Centrale shopping centre by the Croydon Partnership a 5050 joint venture with Westfield which will establish Croydon as the principal retail and leisure hub for South London.
The new Whitgift Centre will underpin a fundamental shift in the perception of Croydon attracting new residents and businesses and fuelling further investment.
Croydon town centre is a strategic growth area in the GLA London plan.
A growth fund was announced in the Autumn Statement to enable the London Borough of Croydon in partnership with the GLA to deliver key infrastructure projects to regenerate the wider town centre.
In 2015 significant progress has been made in advancing the scheme.
In September the Secretary of State confirmed Croydon Council CPO powers to purchase the land required to undertake the project.
This followed the CPO inquiry which concluded in
Also in March the Croydon Partnership acquired a further 50% long leasehold interest in the Whitgift shopping centre and assumed operational control of the centre.
The partnership now owns or controls the majority of the land interests required for the 200000m scheme.
Given the extended planning process and discussions with a number of potential anchor tenants the scheme timetable has been revised.
Works are now expected to start in 2017 with potential completion in 2020 21.
In 2015 we continued to discuss the planning application for redevelopment of The Goodsyard London E1 with the local authorities of Hackney and Tower Hamlets.
The scheme being advanced in conjunction with our joint venture partner Ballymore Properties is a 270000m mixeduse development which includes a 20000m retail village 1350 residential units and substantial public realm including a new park.
The development will cater for the growing Tech City media and technology startups attracted to the local area with the provision of 80000m of workspace.
In June a revised planning application was submitted which reduced the residential provision on the 4.2ha site by 100 homes and increased the office element of the scheme to more than 76000m We welcomed the decision in September by the Mayor of London to call in the scheme due to nondetermination by the local authorities and are working to achieve the planning consent by Spring 2016 enabling a potential start onsite in 2017 .
In conjunction with our joint venture partner Standard Life work continues on the regeneration of Brent Cross Cricklewood in northwest London.
Following extensive local consultation consent was granted by Barnet Council in September for a major investment in the local transport infrastructure and the first section of a new riverside park.
An outline masterplan planning permission for the regeneration scheme was granted in 2010 and amended in 2014.
A key element of the new town centre masterplan is a 90000m extension to Brent Cross shopping centre.
The extension and refurbished existing centre will result in a retailled dining and leisure destination for North London.
The new retail destination will form an integral part of the wider regeneration of the area and will provide offices 7 500 homes schools new parks sports and other community facilities.
As announced in the UK Governments March budget a commitment was made by the Treasury to support a new Brent Cross Overground station.
Barnet Council has approved the use of CPO powers to acquire the remaining land to deliver the extension.
The CPO inquiry will be held in May 2016 and subject to the confirmation of CPO powers and agreements with key tenants works could start onsite towards the end of 2017 with potential completion in 2021.
Scheme
Ownership
Lettable area Earliest start
Estimated cost to complete Croydon town centre South London 50 200tel 21 650700 The Goodsyard London E1 50 270000 2017 Phased 140160 Brent Cross extension London NW4 41 90tel 475550 Total 560000 12651410
Hammerson s share of incremental capital cost including capitalised interest.
These costs are indicative as full scheme details are yet to be finalised.
Cost reflects phase 1 only.
Due to residential component of scheme area is gross external.
36 36 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE OPPORTUNITIES We have a number of potential pipeline schemes which we continue to advance.
The nature and design of these projects are fluid and the speed of delivery will be dependent on a variety of factors including planning permission retailer demand anchor tenant negotiations land assembly and scheme design.
The Groups principal opportunities are shown in table 22.
Table 22 POSITIVE PLACES To reduce the number of heavy goods vehicles at our Victoria Gate development the demolition team reused 99% of demolition waste for the piling mat.
This avoided 650 vehicle journeys cut traffic congestion prevented 14 tonnes of carbon emissions and an adverse impact on air quality and saved 247 000 on disposal and materials costs.
We also reduced mains water consumption by 900000 litres during dust suppression works by reusing onsite ground water.
W e are working with Leeds City Council and John Lewis to provide employee opportunities in Leeds.
In October 2015 the Hammerson Employment and Skills Charter was established to provide skills training for local residents and access to jobs being created by the new scheme.
Scheme Lettable area m Key facts UK shopping centres Silverburn Phase 4 Glasgow 50000  Consent granted in October 2015 for a masterplan for a future extension of existing centre Masterplan includes retail hotel and leisure uses Union Square Aberdeen 27800  Extension of existing shopping centre for retail leisure and catering.
Including
Planning application submitted in February 2016 Victoria Gate Leeds Phase 2 73000  Planning consent for retailled scheme including up to 2700 car park spaces Freehold control of site obtained WestQuay Watermark Southampton Phase 2 58000  Outline planning consent for mixeduse scheme Councilowned land with joint review of scheme under way UK retail parks Oldbury Dudley 10900  Planning submitted in January 2016 for new development Orchard Centre Didcot 10000  50 million expansion of existing centre with MandS Food Hall anchor Planning approved in July 2015 Parc Tawe Swansea 21000  Refurbishment and modernisation of existing retail park Planning dispute successfully appealed in September 2015
Italie Deux Paris 13me 6900  Retail extension of existing shopping centre Progressing necessary consents to enable start onsite Les Trois Fontaines Cergy
24800  Retail and leisure extension as part of wider city centre project Submission of a number of consent applications and agreement with a number of coowners achieved in 2015 Awaiting confirmation of consents and final coownership agreements SQY Ouest Saint QuentinenYvelines 32000  Opportunity to reposition existing shopping centre creating a leisureled destination Total 314400 At Brent Cross in collaboration with the London Borough of Barnet we operate the Brent Cross Retail Job Shop which engages with over 40 potential employers and has placed over 90 previously unemployed applicants into new jobs during 2015.
In Croydon with our joint venture partner Westfield we operate a number of community initiatives in conjunction with local organisations.
During 2015 we ran five community roadshows engaging with local residents businesses and community groups about the regeneration plans.
We also provided local funding through a Youth Opportunity Grants Fund and Crystal Palace Football Foundation to encourage local residents to undertake skills training and find employment.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 37 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT
BUSINESS REVIEW STRATEGIC RATIONALE
Current underprovision of quality dining offers in Southampton city centre Enhance food and beverage offer to capture enhanced affluent catchment area Complementary offer to existing jointlyowned shopping centre to increase dwell time and enhance overall customer experience KEY OBJECTIVES ACHIEVED Iconic design to create new city centre leisure and dining destination Scheme will create new public piazza in front of citys historic walls Strong preletting interest will bring new range of catering brands to Southampton Construction progressing for full opening by Spring 2017 Targeting BREEAM Excellent on completion WestQuay Watermark
OUR PROPOSITION IN ACTION
17000m NEW CINEMA 5800m TOTAL RESTAURANTS NEW JOBS CREATED
Q1 2017
80% TOTAL COST 85 million TOTAL INCOME 5 million 38 38 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Premium outlets We are the only European REIT with a strategic exposure to the premium outlets market.
This growing sector is a critical distribution channel for international fashion and luxury brands.
Timon Drakesmith Chief Financial Officer and Managing Director Premium Outlets Business review continued KEY FACTS Our Premium outlets interests are through investments in Value Retail and VIA Outlets Nine highend Value Retail Villages and six VIA Outlets centres in 12 European countries Lettable area of 370000 m with 1700 stores Portfolio valuation of 1.2 billion Hammersons share
PORTFOLIO HIGHLIGHTS
Strong brand sales growth Value Retail 11% VIA 10% Kildare extension opened and additional 21% stake acquired in December Acquired new VIA centre in Majorca Spain in 2016 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 39 HAMMERSON.
OM 39 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT
BUSINESS REVIEW INTRODUCTION
As part of our strategy the Group has been increasing its exposure to the premium outlets sector over recent years.
Our exposure is gained through our longterm partnership with Value Retail and also through VIA Outlets a joint venture established in 2014.
The Outlet sector has many similarities with our directlymanaged properties and we benefit from the relationship with Value Retail management.
We utilise the knowledge gained to enhance the brand experience across our portfolio for example the inclusion of key aspirational brands at Victoria Gate Leeds.
The Financial Review on pages 53 to 61 provides further information on how our investments in Value Retail and VIA Outlets have benefitted the Groups financial performance during 2015.
VALUE RETAIL VR
VR operates nine highend shopping tourism Villages in the UK and Western Europe which provide over 180000m of floor space and more than 1000 stores.
VR focuses on international fashion and luxury brands and on longhaul tourism.
The Villages which include Bicester Village outside London and La Valle Village near Paris are among the most successful outlet centres in Europe.
The average sales density for the Villages is 15000 m with densities at Bicester Village around 30000 m The Villages are close to Europes wealthiest cities and major tourist attractions and targeted marketing enables VR to benefit from the rapidlygrowing shoppingtourism market.
In total 163 million residents live within a 120 minute drive of a Village and the major cities served by the Villages attract 100 million tourists each year.
The total footfall across the Villages in 2015 was 33.3 million 2014 32.5 million.
This strategy has enabled VR to deliver annual compound brand sales growth of 17% since 2006.
VR manages the Villages and controls their operations but through our board representation and financing agreements we have significant influence and treat our investment as an associate.
In December we acquired an additional 21% interest in Kildare Village Dublin for 12 million.
We expect the Village to perform strongly supported by the expansion of the Irish economy and the recently completed extension.
Performance in 2015 The Villages have continued to perform strongly during 2015 with brand sales growth of 11% and yearend occupancy at 95% which was unchanged from the beginning of the year.
Future growth is expected to be supported by global tourism new emerging brands consumers more considered approach to shopping and the importance of perceived value.
Trends in tourism show that visitor numbers continue to grow with a widening spread of nationalities visiting Europe.
Chinese visitors continue to represent the largest share of overseas retail spending in Europe with growth of 32% in 2015 source Global Blue.
Spending by Middle Eastern tourists has been resilient despite the reduction in the oil price although there has been a fall in spending by visitors from Russia and Brazil.
Developments and extensions The 50 million extension at Kildare Village Dublin opened in November 2015.
The 6100m new phase has introduced 33 new boutiques and two restaurants to the Village as well as a new visitor centre and 400 extra parking spaces.
Initial trading has significantly exceeded expectations.
Further details about the extension are on page 42.
At Bicester Village the approved planning permission for a major extension was revised in April to increase the car parking provision to 519 new spaces.
The 5600m extension will include 33 new boutiques and enhanced road access to reduce congestion.
Construction is expected to begin in the second half of this year with the extension completed in late 2017 .
A new rail station also opened adjacent to the Village in October bringing shoppers directly from London Marylebone.
At Fidenza Village Milan work has started on a 3300m extension which will add 26 units and is due to open in October 2016.
Table 23 Value Retail  2015 performance Year ended 31 December Year ended 31 December Brand sales m 2458 2214 Brand sales growth % 11 11 Footfall millions 33.3 32.5 Average spend per visit  74 68 Average sales densities 000 m Occupancy % 95 95 Note The above figures reflect overall portfolio performance not Hammersons ownership share.
Business review continued PREMIUM OUTLETS 40 40 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Table 24 VIA Outlets  2015 performance Year ended 31 December Year ended 31 December Brand sales m 375 386 Brand sales growth % 10 13 Footfall millions 10.7 11.7 Average spend per visit  38 33 Average sales densities 000 m Occupancy % 87 92
The above figures reflect overall portfolio performance not Hammersons ownership share.
2015 reflects the disposal of Excalibur in late 2015 and the 31 December 2014 figures include preacquisition performance.
VR is continuing to expand in China following the opening of Suzhou Village in May 2014.
The construction of Shanghai Village a 50000m scheme adjacent to Shanghai Disney Resort is underway with the Village due to open this summer.
We have an investment of 5 million in these Chinese Villages.
POSITIVE PLACES VR has been working hard to enhance its sustainability performance in many of the same key areas that the Group focuses on.
As a result over recent years VR has achieved a significant improvement in its GRESB score to reach Green Star status in 2015.
VIA OUTLETS VIA
VIA is an outlets joint venture formed in 2014 in partnership with APG Value Retail and Meyer
VIAs strategy is to create a c.
1 billion portfolio by acquiring existing European outlet centres with strong catchments focused on mainstream fashion brands and with potential for growth.
Under the partnership agreement we are able to exercise joint control in the partnership and account for our interest as a joint venture.
Once acquired VIA utilises the outlet expertise from VR to enhance the overall centre management physical appearance leisure and catering offers and tenant mix of the centres to deliver sales income and value growth.
The strategy also involves work to rightsize units the introduction of more flagship stores and targeted marketing to increase tourist visits.
At 31 December 2015 VIA had five outlet centres providing 160000m of floor space and over 500 stores across five European countries.
The major assets are Alcochete near Lisbon Batavia Stad near Amsterdam F ashion Arena near Prague and Landquart near Zurich.
Performance and investment activity VIAs portfolio has performed strongly during 2015 particularly Batavia Stad and Fashion Arena and sales densities in the VIA centres have increased by 11% yearonyear.
Significant upgrades are being implemented at Batavia Stad including 38 remerchandising projects in 2015 upgraded faades a new information centre and a new tourist marketing strategy.
VIA has recently started a 5500m extension to the centre which will introduce 45 new units increase space by 22% and which will open in early 2017 .
Occupancy at 87% was 5% lower than at the beginning of the year as a result of the phasing of remerchandising initiatives.
In late 2015 VIA sold Excalibur in the Czech Republic near the Austrian border for 10 million Hammersons share.
In January 2016 VIA exchanged a conditional contract to acquire Festival Park Majorca for 44 million Hammersons share.
The 32000m centre includes a 8000m cinema and attracts 3.8 million visitors each year.
VIA intends to enhance the brand mix and reinvigorate the food and beverage offer.
Festival Park Majorca STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 41 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT
BUSINESS REVIEW STRATEGIC RATIONALE
Opportunity to increase the footprint of Irelands bestperforming outlet shopping destination Kildare Village is a key destination for luxury retailers wanting a presence in Ireland Wellplaced to capitalise on expected doubledigit growth of international visitors to Ireland Excellently situated only 60 minutes from central Dublin KEY OBJECTIVES ACHIEVED 60% of the new international luxury brands making their debut in Ireland.
80% of brands also represented at Bicester Village Confirmed Kildare as a unique retail tourism destination attracting over three million guests in 2015 Average fourhour dwell with 30% of visitors from outside Ireland Further enhanced customer experience services including valet parking personal stylists and a VIP suite Exceptional trading and sales performance with footfall 20% and sales 26% in 2015 Kildare Village Extension Dublin OUR PROPOSITION IN ACTION
6100m NEW STORES CAR PARKING Additional 400 spaces
3 million
November 2015 NEW JOBS CREATED TOTAL COST 50 million 42 42 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 We create positive places OUR APPROACH TO SUSTAINABILITY The environmental and social impacts of our business operations are significant presenting both risks and opportunities.
We work consistently through our Positive Places framework to ensure we manage and mitigate the risks and capitalise on the opportunities.
The outcome is a consistently strong track record for sustainability that makes us attractive to investors particularly those with a sustainability mandate.
Our business has five major sustainability impact areas energy security and demand waste management water consumption investment in our local communities materials use and procurement Our sustainability initiatives reflect these issues and go beyond them.
Our stakeholders expect us to maintain our leadership position as a sustainability innovator by for example working collaboratively with our retailers and suppliers driving high sustainability standards with our onsite teams and contractors and ensuring our employees have the right sustainability skills and knowledge for each role.
By taking a collaborative approach assets across the business have benefitted from sustainability initiatives as illustrated through the report.
The strength of this approach can be seen in the activities and achievements we are able to report for 2015.
Our scores against all key industry benchmarks have improved and we have made significant progress against our corporate targets with particular successes in supplier engagement.
Waste management has been more challenging particularly in France as has water management in the UK.
The influence of weather on carbon emissions is also becoming increasingly important as we face more extreme conditions.
These will all be areas of particular attention in 2016.
New annual and fiveyear targets have been set an overview of which are in the following pages.
More extensive information on these and our portfolio and asset level sustainability projects and initiatives can be seen on the sustainability pages on our website via this link www. ustainability.
KEY FACTS 2015 4% reduction in Group CO emissions intensity Four Sustainability awards 2 million saved through waste management 3% reduction in UK electricity demand Retained GRESB Green Star and improved scores in all sustainability benchmarks SUSTAINABILITY REVIEW Our sustainability vision is to create retail destinations that deliver positive impacts economically socially and environmentally.
Positive Places is our strategy for making that happen.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 43 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 43 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT SUSTAINABILITY REVIEW Sustainability Review continued CHALLENGE AND INNOVATE Challenging the status quo and trialling new approaches and solutions to support the transition to a more sustainable business model Our achievements under this commitment in 2015 supported our position as industry leaders and addressed energy security and demand resource use waste management and water consumption.
Outcomes included Delivery of the net zero energy NZE EcoPod with Costa A Ska Gold rated fit out on both new office HQs Our work with leading companies from other sectors to develop the NZE Building commitment launched at COP21 Delivery of BREEAM Excellent developments at Beauvais and at Elliotts Field Rugby where we have installed 890m of solar panels Plans for 2016 include The delivery of BREEAM Excellent developments at Victoria Gate Leeds and WestQuay Watermark
Installation of 0.5 megawatts of renewable energy in the UK To apply knowledge gained from the EcoPod project to further sites PROTECT AND ENHANCE Protecting and enhancing our natural environment by minimising resource consumption and delivering restorative projects Key achievements in energy demand waste and water management 3% yearonyear reduction in electricity consumption across the likeforlike UK portfolio Stable CO e emissions intensity regardless of weather impacts on cooling and heating demand Investment of 1.5 million in LED lighting at Bullring 100% diversion from landfill across the UK managed portfolio 5200m construction waste reused onsite and 900000 litres of water saved at Victoria Gate Leeds Plans for 2016 include 6% yearonyear reduction in electricity consumption across the managed portfolio Extending LED lighting within the UK Shopping Centre and Retail Parks portfolios Investment in water metering and management Focus on understanding weather and nonweather related gas consumption UPSKILL AND INSPIRE Investing in our people and recognising and rewarding those that deliver change Effective delivery of our sustainability strategy requires all our staff to understand our ambitions and their role in achieving them.
To support them during 2015 we Extended rolefocused sustainability training to all new starters Enabled three of our senior management team to attend the Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership CISL training programme Launched an updated environmental training package for all our onsite teams Implemented a new software platform in the UK to support volunteering activity and community engagement work leading to a significant increase in the number of volunteering days delivered by our staff We were delighted that in our 2015 staff survey 89% of staff considered Hammerson to be serious in its commitment to sustainability.
This score exceeds the survey benchmarks and is indicative of success in embedding sustainability across our teams.
Plans for 2016 include Further senior leaders attending the CISL programme Extending the sustainability training programme to all staff to ensure all teams are sufficiently skilled to support delivery of Positive Places Implementing our volunteering software in France Table 25 OUR SUSTAINABILITY BENCHMARK SCORES 2015 Trend Vigeo Robust FTSE4goodSustainalytics  74 GRESB Green Star76 DJSI 67 Oekom C Prime CDP 77C Carbon Clear FTSE 100 1599 EPRA Best Practice Gold Award POSITIVE PLACES STRATEGY IN ACTION Each sustainability project or activity links directly to at least one of our five Positive Places commitments.
This ensures we focus our attention engagement and resources on activities that address our major impact areas and are relevant to our business activities.
44 44 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 PARTNER AND COLLABORATE Taking a stakeholderled approach to create collaborative projects and evolve from client to partner Collaboration with key stakeholders is fundamental to delivering ambitious innovative sustainability outputs.
In 2015 we Engaged with 54 new suppliers through our Supply Chain survey and published our 2nd Annual Supplier Report Worked closely with key retailers through our retailer forum the Hospitality Forum and through our Positive Growth awards Successfully expanded our investor engagement programme Engaged with 276 local community groups with connections to our assets In 2016 we will Continue to work with retailers through our retailer forum and our retail delivery process to address instore environmental impacts Review and update our Supply Chain survey and publish our 3rd Annual Supplier Report Deliver at least one innovation project with a key supplier Continue to deliver marketleading community engagement activity for all our sites SERVE AND INVEST Delivering social value to the communities we serve measured in jobs skills civic pride and investment Our properties are significant elements of local physical and social infrastructure and the catalyst for important investment in our local communities.
Over 30000 people are employed across the portfolio.
In 2015 we Supported over 4500 people into employment through investment in developments extensions and refurbishments.
These projects are expected to deliver a further 2500 jobs post opening Successfully piloted a new retailfocused apprenticeship scheme at Highcross Leicester see Page 51 Made direct community investments of 2.2 million Made indirect community investments of 350000 During 2016 we will update and expand our True Value of Shopping Centres research originally published in 2013.
This will be used to establish employment and skills baseline data against which we will measure the positive impacts of our investment in local communities on an ongoing basis.
COSTA ECOPOD WREKIN RETAIL PARK TELFORD Net zero energy building EPC rating A 5.
Circa 50% more energy efficient than a comparable unit The combination of enhanced insulation within the shell natural ventilation roof lights and energy efficient lighting reduce the energy consumption of the unit significantly.
Sufficient clean energy is generated by photovoltaic panels on the roof to supply the remaining regulated electricity demand.
We plan to take knowledge gained from this project and use it more widely.
We are already in talks with Costa to deliver a second EcoPod.
REDUCING EXPOSURE TO ENERGY PERFORMANCE CERTIFICATE RISK As minimum energy efficiency standards approach we are working to remove the associated risk from the portfolio.
With over 1000 EPCs across our UK assets this is an extensive project.
Our at risk units have been identified and a programme of work has been put in place to utilise appropriate points in the management cycle to ensure they are upgraded at minimum additional cost.
We are targeting a minimum EPC rating of D for all units as this has been identified as providing protection against early obsolescence of systems and more costeffective energy savings for occupiers than a rating of E.
EcoPod Wrekin Retail Park Telford STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 45 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT SUSTAINABILITY REVIEW Savings from averted landll tax Income from sale of waste UK Shopping Centres
UK Retail Parks UK Shopping Centres
UK Retail Parks Sustainability Review continued OUR JOURNEY IN NUMBERS 2010  2020 Table 26 Chart 29 Likeforlike portfolios GHG emissions 000mtCO MAJOR CHALLENGES IN 2015 Two key areas have been a significant challenge in 2015 water consumption and heating and cooling related energy consumption particularly in France.
Low water costs challenge the business case for extensive metering.
However the increase in restaurants across the portfolio drives up water demand.
In 2016 we will extend the water submetering and monitoring programme to address this.
Gas consumption in the UK and electricity in France is impacted substantially by weather.
Intelligence from our energy audits combined with better understanding of weatherrelated demand fluctuations will be used to prioritise work in this area in 2016.
Chart 27 Likeforlike portfolios electricity consumption 000mWh Chart 28 Group waste management savings 2016 POSITIVE PLACES TARGETS FOR THE MANAGED PORTFOLIOS 6% reduction in electricity consumption 5% reduction in water consumption 3% reduction in CO e emissions 98% diversion of waste from landfill 85% recycling of waste Our 2010  2015 targets Our performance Our 2015  2020 ambitions Reduce likeforlike carbon emissions by 20% v.
2010 baseline by 2015 20% 20% reduction in carbon emissions v 2015 baseline 45% of suppliers by value to be engaged with on sustainability annually 88% Introduce refreshed sustainable supplier survey in 2016 in the UK and France and continue to improve supplier engagement Increase waste recycling to 85% by 2015 76% UK 46% France 100% diversion from landfill in the UK 98% in France Biodiversity action plans at all retail assets by 28 UK 5 France Work with partners to trial pioneering restorative approaches to biodiversity at six managed assets All employees to complete CR training biennially 59% trained  100% of Hammerson employees employed for 12 months or more to receive sustainability training Reduce water consumption from 2010 by 12% by 2015 28% UK 29% France Reduce landlord water intensity by 10% 46 46 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Group emissions mtCO UK emissions mtCO France emissions mtCO Group emissions mtCO em Total GHG emissions metric tonnes mt 36667 28739 7928 172 Scope 1 Direct emissions from ownedcontrolled operations a.
Direct emissions from stationary operations 6032 3342 2690 28 b.
Direct emissions from mobile combustion c.
Direct emissions from fugitive sources Totals 6166 3388 2778 29 Scope 2 Indirect emissions from the use of purchased electricity steam heating and cooling a.
Indirect emissions from purchasedacquired electricity 27447 24203 3244 129 b.
Indirect emissions from purchasedacquired steam c.
Indirect emissions from purchasedacquired heating 1d.
Indirect emissions from purchasedacquired cooling Totals 28530 24293 4237 134 Scope 3 Business travel Waste 1Water Totals 1971 1058 913 9 GHG EMISSIONS ANALYSIS Table 31 REPORTING PERIOD AND METHODOLOGY In line with requirements set out in the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013 this statement reports the Companys GHG emissions for the reporting period 1 October 2014 to 30 September 2015.
A different reporting period from our financial reporting year has been selected in accordance with the DEFRA Environmental Reporting Guidance to avoid the use of estimated utility consumption data.
The data has been calculated and recorded in accordance with the GHG Protocol and ISO 14064.
We are required by the new Scope 2 GHG Protocol to report our Scope 2 emissions using both marketbased and locationbased methods.
However our utility provider has been unable to provide specific emissions factors for our renewable energy contract to calculate emissions using the marketbased approach.
INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE Total Scope 1 Total Scope 2 Total Scope 3 and Total GHG emisssions intensity data have been independently assured by Deloitte LLP who have carried out Limited Assurance in accordance with the International Standards on Assurance Engagements 3000.
Their
Assurance Statement is available on the sustainability pages of our website at www. ustainability.
REPORTING BOUNDARIES We have adopted operational control as our reporting approach.
GHG emissions data is provided for those assets where we have authority to introduce and implement operating policies.
This includes properties held in joint ventures where JV Board approval is required.
We have reported 100% of GHG emissions data for these reported assets.
A detailed basis of reporting statement and full list of operating entities and assets included within the reporting boundary can be found on the Positive Place pages of our website at www. ustainability.
Table 30 GREENHOUSE GAS GHG EMISSIONS 2015 Baseline year 110 12  30 09 13 Boundary summary All assets and facilities under Hammerson direct operational control are included Consistency with financial statements Variations from the financial statements are set out above Emissions factor data source We have sourced our emissions factors from 2015 DEFRA GHG Conversion Factors for Company Reporting and additional sources including but not limited to IEA and Cofely Assessment methodology GHG Protocol and ISO 14064 Materiality threshold Activities generating emissions of 5% relative to total Group emissions have been excluded Intensity ratio Adjusted profit before tax 110 14  30 09 15 Target 20% reduction in likeforlike carbon emissions against 2010 baseline by 2015 Profit before tax derived from unaudited management accounts.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 47 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT SUSTAINABILITY REVIEW CARBON EMISSION INTENSITY 2013  2015 LIKEFORLIKE PORTFOLIOS Calculated in accordance with EPRA Sustainability Best Practice Reporting Standards see page 21 Tabletel 2015 UK shopping centres kgCO e per m common partsyear 108 111 102 UK retail parks kgCO e per car parking spaceyear 94 94 88 French shopping centres kgCO e per m common partsyear 74 59 70 WATER HAMMERSON GROUP
Cost of water for Landlord services 000 1896 1751 1305 717 1617 Investment in water management improvements Estimated water savings 00tel588 535
HAMMERSON GROUP
Operational costs from waste management m 2.0 1.8 2.0 2.1 2.7 Savings from averted landfill tax m 0.5 0.9 1.5 2.1 2.0 Income from sale of waste 00tel155 269 Percentage recycled UK shopping centres % Percentage recycled French shopping centres % Percentage diverted from landfill UK % Percentage diverted from landfill France % Percentage diverted from landfill Global % COMMUNITIES HAMMERSON GROUP
Direct contributions 00tel1700 2158 Indirect contributions 00tel407 383 Number of organisations that benefited from Hammersons direct and indirect contributions  38tel276 INVESTMENT IN EMPLOYEE TRAINING HAMMERSON GROUP
Total expenditure on training 00tel179 289 Total number of hours spent on training Hours 7400 5000 6000 4000 4850
Tableteltel
Number of retail clients we engaged with on sustainability UK na Number of green leases in portfolio UKFR 896 1250 1401 1637 1909
Tableteltel
Percentage of total suppliers by value engaged on sustainability UK% na Number of suppliers over 100k by contract value UK  10tel143 Value of contracts with suppliers we engaged on sustainability UK m INVESTORS HAMMERSON GROUP
Direct number of investors with whom we had collective or individual meetings Total number of shares held by the top 20 investors 31.12.15 million 41tel475 Total number of shares held by those top 20 investors with whom Hammerson engaged on sustainability 31.12.15 million 14tel82 Sustainability performance data continued 48 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 48 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT
During 2015 we continued to invest heavily in developing our managers.
Our Management Development Programme launched in the autumn of 2014 was a major part of this effort with 74 managers across the UK and France participating during the course of the year.
We also continued to focus on management skills when recruiting new managers most notably via our competencybased selection processes.
We successfully recruited 14 new managers in the UK all of whom completed one of our management assessment centres.
Executive coaching and 360degree appraisals remained constant features throughout the year.
To further enhance our training and development offering we entered a partnership arrangement with Capita Learning and Development which gives us access to their extensive suite of management development programmes and materials.
To help meet our Diversity and Inclusion objectives our senior management teams in the UK and France attended workshops on unconscious bias.
The knowledge and insight gained is already helping us to achieve our ambition of creating a more diverse workforce.
CULTURE AND VALUES Our values continued to enhance our culture and influence our actions during 2015.
The most significant event was Junes relocation of our UK headquarters to Kings Cross.
This gave us the opportunity to introduce a more agile and collaborative working environment enabling our London Reading and Paris based teams to work more closely together than ever before.
OUR PEOPLE Talented people Our people are one of our most important assets enabling us to deliver our strategy and create value for our stakeholders.
Through our engaging culture common values and ongoing investment in nurturing talent we create an environment where everybody is able to develop and maximise their contribution.
Chart 40 Our people  Key Facts UK 329 France 144
New joiners % Voluntary staff turnover Internal moves and promotions Headcount figures as at 31 December 2015 France 63 UK 72 France 63 UK 72 France 6.2% UK 11.5% One of our core values is ambition and this was evident throughout the year as we continued to grow in size productivity and efficiency.
The scale of our ambition was best demonstrated by our acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio which will require a new operating platform to be established in Dublin as well as being integrated into the wider Group.
On a more operational level we insourced the management of our shopping centres in France enabling a more aligned management approach and greater financial efficiencies across the portfolio.
We also improved our approach to portfolio based procurement during the year which allowed us to leverage our purchasing power more effectively and to deliver greater consistency across the organisation.
On a daytoday basis we embedded our values ever more deeply within the business.
They are a core component of our performancemanagement processes and the two day Corporate Induction Programme attended by all new employees.
The values continue to drive positive behaviours and outcomes across the Group.
Hammerson office Kings Place STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 49 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 49 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OUR PEOPLE RESOURCING TALENT MANAGEMENT AND SUCCESSION PLANNING As in previous years we successfully retained and developed our talent during 2015 whilst strengthening our teams with the appointment of many experienced and talented individuals.
Voluntary staff turnover in both the UK and France remained low at 11.5% and 6.2% respectively.
However with a number of people leaving the business as a result of us relocating our UK headquarters the progression of our development projects and further investments in our multichannel and IT teams resourcing requirements were high.
135 new people joined the Group during the course of the year many of whom successfully completed a competency based assessment centre.
Our improved approach to senior management succession planning started to pay dividends in 2015.
This involves using job evaluation to help identify possible career paths for high potential employees and engaging with them about their own aspirations and development needs.
As a result we started the process of mapping out structured development plans for all concerned.
We filled all of our senior management vacancies via internal promotion during the year including our new Director of Retail for Ireland.
Launched in 2011 our established UK Graduate Programme continued to flourish in 2015.
One highlight saw Tom Webster who joined the Company in 2012 gain RICS accreditation and move into an asset management role in our UK Retail Parks team.
All senior management vacancies filled via internal promotions in 2015 We conducted our employee survey during 2015 using the globally established Great Place to Work programme.
In the UK we achieved a positive engagement score of just under 70% which is 13% higher than the average for organisations with a similar headcount.
Further analysis showed particularly high levels of engagement in the areas of Strategy and Direction Diversity and Corporate Social Responsibility the latter score exceeding the average of similarly sized organisations by an impressive 34%.
In France employee engagement was even higher and we achieved a positive engagement score of 79%.
In addition 89% of employees responded positively to the statement Taking everything into account I would say this is a great place to work.
In our 2014 Annual Report we stated the clear objective that any gender gap in employee engagement should be no greater than 5%.
This was one of three Diversity and Inclusion targets that we set ourselves to achieve on an ongoing basis.
When considering our combined UK and France results the gender gap in our 2015 employee survey was 4.5%.
Our collaborative and inclusive approach to internal communications was ever present during the course of 2015 enhanced by the greater use of audio visual technology.
Briefings were held regularly throughout the year in order to keep employees updated on key business issues and results.
In addition we further embedded the Group intranet as a key communication tool and developed a new internally branded communication channel Hammerson Inside.
From a reward perspective we continue to offer employees the opportunity to share in the growth and profitability of the Company as we believe this further engages our people.
This is evidenced by the inclusion of the organisations key KPIs in our annual incentive plan and the availability of a number of all employee and restricted share plan schemes.
80% employee participation in the survey Highly engaged teams in the UK and France UK employee engagement far exceeds average of similar sized companies by headcount Engagement scores in France are amongst the highest of companies surveyed Less than 5% gender gap in employee engagement levels Our people continued Tom Webster Asset Manager EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT The Company recognises the benefits of having highly engaged teams as we strive to achieve our business goals.
Our positive culture clarity of strategy and ongoing focus on improving management capability all contribute towards this objective.
50 50 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION We have long understood and embraced the benefits of maintaining and nurturing a diverse workforce.
It is therefore not surprising that 2015 was a year during which we continued to develop our strategy and build on the good practices already in place.
In addition we implemented a number of key initiatives designed to drive meaningful and sustainable change.
Following the success of the unconscious bias workshops attended by our Group Executive Committee in 2014 similar sessions were held for our entire UK and France senior management teams during the first half of the year.
These had the objective of further broadening diversity awareness within the workplace while further engaging senior management in the process of enhancing inclusion.
Diversity training for all employees will be introduced in 2016.
When appointing new talent we continue to base our recruitment decisions on our long established competency based approach to selection.
Of the 135 new employees recruited in 2015 66 were female.
Of
In addition we wrote to all of our recruitment partners stating our diversity and inclusion related aspirations.
In doing so we challenged them to submit more diverse candidate shortlists for all roles including people from ethnic minorities and from backgrounds that are not always associated with the property industry.
In recognising the benefits of gender diversity the Company has previously stated the aspiration that at least 30% of our senior managers should be women.
By the end of 2015 this figure stood at 27%.
Within the UK women occupy 37% of such roles and three of our ten Shopping Centre General Managers are female.
Female representation in senior management roles in France currently stands at just over 7%.
While we are looking to improve this figure over time with the introduction of assessment centres in 2016 anticipated to contribute towards this we are pleased that four of our nine French Shopping Centre General Managers are female.
We have also stated the objective that women should be represented in at least 30% of the roles identified in the Companys senior management succession plan.
The plan considers the key senior management positions across the entire organisation including all Executive Director and Group Executive Committee roles.
By the end of 2015 this figure stood at just over 30% a fact that we find extremely encouraging.
We welcome and fully consider all suitable applications for employment irrespective of gender race ethnicity religion age sexual orientation or disability.
All employees are eligible to participate in career development and promotion opportunities.
Support also exists for employees who become disabled to continue in their employment or to be retrained for other suitable roles.
HIGHCROSS APPRENTICES To attract young people into the property industry from a more diverse range of backgrounds we piloted the British Council of Shopping Centres Retail Trust and National Skills Academy Retail Path apprenticeship scheme at Highcross Shopping Centre in Leicester during 2015.
Five apprentices won 12 month placements giving them shopping centre management experience as well as front of house retail exposure and college based training.
Three of our retailers participated in the pilot scheme TM Lewin Love Aroma and
Each provided valuable training and insight for the apprentices two of whom have now graduated from the scheme winning permanent roles with TM Lewin and Hotel Chocolat.
The three who remain will graduate from the scheme in early 2016.
Everyone involved has been delighted with the success of this initiative in its first year and we intend to run the programme again in 2016 with an extended group of retailers.
Joe Creasey who was an apprentice on the scheme is now a permanent employee at TM Lewin and he said Working as an apprentice has given me more of an insight into the retail business and this has helped me build a greater foundation for a future in Retail Management.
Holly Furnival who is an apprentice with Goldsmiths added The application process was very hard but Im really glad I stuck at it and I love working here.
I never thought it would be as enjoyable but its great being able to help customers and everybody has made me feel really welcome.
Chart 41 All employees Chart 42 Senior management excluding Board Chart 43 Shopping Centre
Chart 45
Chart 44 UK Graduate
Male
Female
Figures as at 31 December 2015 BCSC Retail Path graduation STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 51 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT OUR PEOPLE COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT In line with our corporate values and our commitment to Serve and Invest the communities in which we are located we offer employees three days of paid volunteering a year.
We believe that having the opportunity to participate in voluntary activity generates positive outcomes from team building through to wellbeing and corporate pride.
In 2015 we launched a new approach to volunteering using our own bespoke version of The Butterfly Bank Engagement Platform.
Designed to inspire and reward volunteering this was actively promoted throughout the year in addition to our annual Community Day.
2015 saw our ninth annual Community Day in the UK while our French team ran their third.
In a continued effort to collaborate for greater impact we were joined by colleagues from the British Council of Shopping Centres BCSC and from our waste facilities and security teams across the UK.
In the UK a total of 27 activities were available for employees to choose from ranging from river cleanups to organising a fashion show.
In France nine activities were offered.
63% of employees across the UK and an impressive 82% in France took part in Community Day and as always feedback was extremely positive from both our own people and the organisations we worked with.
As one Hammerson team member said It was a really successful and worthwhile day.
Everyone pulled their weight and was motivated to get the job done in the allotted time but also to do more than anticipated at the start of the day.
It also struck me that this is an environment where teamwork and Hammersons culture and values come to the fore.
Importantly it was also great fun.
Following Community Day we have continued to bring employees opportunities to support local and national organisations.
In October we celebrated volunteering achievements across the Group with the Hammerson Butterfly Banking awards bringing together all our shopping centre teams.
Our employees are enthusiastic about supporting charities and voluntary organisations.
As well as a local charity bursary run by each of our shopping centres we also have national charity partners.
Every two years our employees select two charity partners giving them a real sense of engagement with the chosen charities.
The selected charities receive a cash donation and more importantly the opportunity to develop a relationship with Hammerson our employees and our shopping centre teams.
We feel two years gives us an excellent chance to establish a productive working relationship and provides a great platform for the charities to work from.
The charities selected for 2014  2016 were Samaritans and Elifar the latter of which helps to improve the lives of children and adults with severe learning difficulties and associated physical disabilities.
Samaritans was a new relationship for us which is very exciting.
Elifar is a continuing relationship employees having elected to continue supporting this small but highly impactful charity for a further two years.
Over the course of 2015 the Group contributed more than 150000 to charitable causes 34000 of which went to our two main partners.
Our people continued Over 400 volunteer days delivered by Hammerson employees in 2015 Continued success and high levels of participation in Community Days More than 20 charities supported by Hammerson during 2015 More than 150000 donated to charitable causes Community Day 52 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 52 PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION The information presented in this Financial Review is derived from the Groups financial statements prepared under IFRS.
However management principally reviews the performance of the business on a proportionally consolidated basis including the Groups share of joint ventures and associates but not proportionally consolidating our investments in premium outlets.
We classify the Groups proportionally consolidated joint ventures and associates as Share of Property interests.
Further explanations of terms used in this section are in the Glossary on pages 181 and 182.
To provide a clear explanation of the performance of the business during 2015 the tables in this Financial Review state whether the information has been presented on a proportionally consolidated basis and whether it includes the premium outlet investments.
At 31 December 2015 the property ownership associated with the Irish loan portfolio acquired in October 2015 in a 5050 joint venture had yet to be transferred from the borrowers and these loans are accounted for as current receivables of the joint venture and included within the Group s investment in joint ventures.
Details of the movement in the Group s investment in joint ventures are shown in table 55 on page 59 .
PROFIT FOR THE YEAR The Groups profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders under IFRS was 726.8 million 27 .7 million higher than 2014.
This includes income from operations and financing costs as well as oneoff gains realised on the sale of properties and unrealised property valuation changes.
As with other property companies and in line with EPRA guidance we review the Groups profit on an adjusted basis which best reflects underlying earnings and table 46 shows a reconciliation of IFRS profit to adjusted profit for the year.
Analysis of the Groups income statement under IFRS split between underlying Adjusted profit and Capital and other profit is shown in note 2 to the accounts on page 128 and further details of the EPRA adjustments are provided in note 10A on page 136 to the accounts.
Table 46 Reconciliation of IFRS profit for the year to adjusted profit for the year Proportionally consolidated including premium outlets Year ended 31 December Year ended 31 December IFRS profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders 726.8 699.1
GainLoss on the sale of properties and joint ventures interests 14.9 3.4 Net revaluation gains on property portfolio  367.5 436.8 Net revaluation gains on premium outlet property portfolio 174.1 109.8 Debt and loan facility cancellation costs 13.9 8.7 Change in fair value of derivatives 0.1 13.7 Net oneoff restructuring charge  3.0 Deferred tax  premium outlets 27.6 12.3 Other adjustments 1.0 8.1 Adjusted profit for the year note 10A 210.9 174.3 Adjusted EPS pence 26.9 23.9 Proportionally consolidated.
FINANCIAL REVIEW
A strong set of results 2015 has been another successful year with strong financial results demonstrating our ability to create value from our strategy.
HIGHLIGHTS
PROFIT FOR THE YEAR 726.8 million 4.0% SHAREHOLDERS FUNDS 5517 million 10.9% Attributable to equity shareholders.
ADJUSTED EPS 12.6% EPRA NAV PER SHARE 11.3% DIVIDEND PER SHARE 9.3% TOTAL PROPERTY RETURN 12.4% 2014 13.6% STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 53 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL REVIEW Financial review continued
The Groups adjusted profit for the year in 2015 was 210.9 million 36.6 million higher than in 2014.
Table 47 bridges adjusted profit and adjusted EPS between 2014 and 2015 and the movements are shown at constant exchange rates.
Table 47 Reconciliation of adjusted profit for the year Including premium outlets
Group
Share of joint ventures Share of associates Adjusted profit for the year Adjusted EPS pence Adjusted profit  Year ended 31 December 2014 43.5 114.8 16.0 174.3 23.9 Net rental income increasedecrease Acquisitions 9.3  1.0 10.3 1.3 Disposals 4.1 0.7  4.8 0.6 Development and other 6.0 3.7  9.7 1.2 Likeforlike portfolio 5.5 0.5  6.0 0.8 Acquisition of joint venture interest by Reported Group 9.3 9.3 DecreaseIncrease in net administration costs 0.7 0.5  0.2 Decrease in net finance costs 8.6 3.7  12.3 1.6 Increase in Value Retail and VIA Outlets earnings  5.3 0.6 5.9 0.8 Tax and noncontrolling interests 1.1 0.4  0.7 0.1 Dilution impact of share placing     1.7 Exchange 1.6 1.2 0.5 2.3 0.3 Adjusted profit  Year ended 31 December 2015 76.1 116.7 18.1 210.9 26.9 The increase in adjusted profit was driven by additional net rental income principally from the acquisition of the additional 40% stake in Highcross in September 2014 and income from Les Terrasses du Port which opened in May 2014.
The Groups premium outlet investments in Value Retail and VIA Outlets the latter acquired in July 2014 contributed an additional 5.9 million of earnings.
Lower finance costs reflecting the refinancing activity undertaken to reduce the Groups average cost of debt to 3.8% increased earnings by 12.3 million.
These positive factors were partly offset by the impact of the euro depreciating against sterling during 2015 which reduced earnings by 2.3 million although the Groups hedging strategy provided an approximate twothirds hedge against the adverse currency movement.
Overall the 21.0% increase in adjusted profit resulted in a 12.6% increase in adjusted EPS after taking account of the dilutive effect of the September 2014 share placing.
NET RENTAL INCOME Table 48 Analysis of net rental income Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets
Group
Share of
Share of associates Year ended 31 December Year ended 31 December
Likeforlike investment properties 164.2 102.2  266.4 260.4 6.0 Developments and other 23.4 6.6  30.0 20.3 9.7 Acquisitions 15.7  1.0 16.7 6.4 10.3 Disposals 5.5   5.5 10.3 4.8 Exchange     8.2 8.2 Net rental income 208.8 108.8 1.0 318.6 305.6 13.0 In 2015 net rental income increased by 13.0 million or 4.3% to 318.6 million.
Acquisitions contributed 10.3 million of additional income principally relating to the 180 million acquisition in September 2014 of our former joint venture partners 40% stake in Highcross Leicester.
Disposals reduced net rental income in 2015 by 4.8 million reflecting the 2015 sales of Drakehouse Retail Park Sheffield Bercy 2 Paris and Grand Maine Angers.
Additional net rental income from developments of 9 .7 million mainly relates to Les Terrasses du Port in Marseille which opened in May 2014 and has traded strongly during 2015.
Development income also came from our joint venture property interests in Croydon whilst the major regeneration scheme is progressed.
Net rental income from the likeforlike portfolio increased by 2.3% during the year with the most significant contributions made by rent reviews at Union Square and tenant rotation at Les Trois Fontaines.
Likeforlike income also benefitted from the growth in car park and commercialisation net income which increased by 5% and 24% respectively on a likeforlike basis.
Likeforlike net rental income growth on the Reported Group properties was 3.4% whilst for properties held by the Groups proportionally consolidated joint ventures and associates likeforlike net rental income growth was 0.6%.
Further analysis of net rental income is provided in tables 103 and 104 of the Additional Disclosures on page 167 .
54 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 ADMINISTRATION EXPENSES Table 49 Administration expenses analysis Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets Year ended 31 December Year ended 31 December Employee and corporate costs 48.3 52.1 Management fees receivable 6.0 5.6 Administration expenses 42.3 46.5
Restructuring cost  5.5 Pension curtailment gain  2.5 Oneoff administration expenses  3.0 Underlying administration expenses 42.3 43.5 In 2015 0.3 million 2014 0.9 million of the Group s proportionally consolidated underlying administration expenses related to the Group s share of Property interests.
In 2015 underlying administration expenses net of management fees receivable were 42.3 million a decrease of 1.2 million or 2.7% compared to 2014.
This reduction was associated with costsaving initiatives undertaken since the beginning of 2014 including relocating our London headquarters to Kings Cross additional management fee income principally from the Nicetoile joint venture and favourable foreign exchange movements.
COST RATIO The EPRA cost ratio for the year ended 31 December 2015 was 23.1% an increase of 30bp compared to 2014.
The ratio is calculated on a proportionally consolidated basis excluding premium outlets and reflects total operating costs including the cost of vacancy as a percentage of gross rental income.
The ratio is not necessarily comparable between different companies as business models and expense accounting and classification practices vary.
The calculation methodology has been amended in 2015 to adjust for inclusive lease costs recovered through rent this is in line with EPRA best practice and comparative ratios have been restated.
The cost ratio calculation is included as table 106 of the Additional Disclosures on page 168.
Whilst the ratio of net administration costs to gross rental income fell from 12.8% to 11.8% associated with the cost saving initiatives noted above the ratio of property costs increased from 10.0% to 11.3%.
This reflects additional expenditure associated with vacancy and running costs at properties awaiting redevelopment such as in Croydon as well as the impact of an increased portfolio weighting to shopping centres which have higher running costs than retail parks.
SHARE OF RESULTS OF JOINT VENTURES AND ASSOCIATES INCLUDING INVESTMENTS IN PREMIUM OUTLETS As explained on page 53 for management reporting purposes we proportionally consolidate the results of our investments in joint ventures and associates except for our premium outlet investments in Value Retail and VIA Outlets.
The nature of the control over our premium outlet investments means that VIA Outlets is accounted for as a joint venture whilst Value Retail is accounted for as an associate.
We refer to the Groups proportionally consolidated share of its joint ventures as Share of Property joint ventures.
The operating performance of our investments in Value Retail and VIA Outlets is described on pages 39 to 42 of the Business Review and the aggregated financial contribution to the Group is shown in table 109 of the Additional Disclosures section on page 170.
Share of results of joint ventures including VIA Outlets The Group has interests in 12 joint ventures and the share of results of joint ventures for the year ended 31 December 2015 was 246.8 million 2014 279 .0 million as summarised in table 50.
Further details are provided in note 12 to the accounts.
Table 50 Analysis of share of results of joint ventures Groups share of results including premium outlets Share of
VIA Outlets Year ended 31 December Share of
VIA Outlets Year ended 31 December Net rental income 108.8 9.8 118.6 117.5 2.7 120.2 Net administration expenses 0.3 1.7 2.0 0.9 0.6 1.5 Revaluation gainslosses on properties 122.1 10.4 132.5 165.6 1.3 164.3 Loss on sale of properties  0.8 0.8 Net finance incomecosts 3.1 2.0 1.1 2.1 1.4 3.5 Tax charge  2.6 2.6  0.5 0.5 Share of results of joint ventures 233.7 13.1 246.8 280.1 1.1 279.0 EPRA adjustments 123.1 7.0 130.1 166.2 2.0 164.2 Adjusted profit 110.6 6.1 116.7 113.9 0.9 114.8 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 55 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL REVIEW Financial review continued
The reduction in the share of results of joint ventures of 32.2 million during 2015 was principally due to property revaluation gains from the Groups share of Property joint ventures which were 31.8 million lower in 2015 this is consistent with the yearonyear revaluation gains on the Groups whollyowned property portfolio.
Net rental income from the Groups share of Property joint ventures was 8.7 million lower than in 2014 associated with the acquisition by the Group of the former joint venture partners 40% stake in Highcross Leicester in September 2014.
This was offset by an increase in profit of 14.2 million from VIA Outlets which was acquired in July 2014 of which 11.7 million related to property revaluation gains.
On an adjusted basis profit was 1.9 million higher in 2015.
Share of results of associates including V alue Retail The Group has two associates Value Retail PLC and its group entities VR and a 10% interest in Nicetoile which was acquired in January 2015 and where the Group is the asset manager.
The share of results of associates for the year ended 31 December 2015 was 160.6 million 2014 109 .9 million of which 159 .3 million related to VR and principally related to the property valuation uplift of 163.7 million.
On an adjusted profit basis the results of associates were 18.1 million 2014 16.0 million of which 17 .1 million related to VR.
The additional adjusted profit was due to strong trading particularly at La Valle Paris and the two Spanish Villages La Roca and Las Rozas.
See note 13 of the accounts for further details on the Groups associates.
The Group also provides loans to Value Retail from which the Group received 5.3 million 2014 5.8 million of interest receivable in 2015.
T otal investment in premium outlets In 2015 the Groups two investments in premium outlets contributed 28.5 million to adjusted profit 5.8 million higher than 2014 principally due to a full years profit contribution from VIA Outlets and the continued strong underlying trading performance from Value
Further details of the aggregated profit contribution from our premium outlets investment is provided in table 109 of the Additional Disclosures section on page 170.
FINANCE COSTS Underlying net finance costs comprising gross interest costs less finance income including the Groups share of Property interests were 89 .4 million compared with 108.9 million in 2014 a reduction of 19 .5 million.
During 2015 the Groups weighted average interest rate was reduced to 3.8% compared to 4.7% for 2014.
This was primarily due to the refinancing of the 480 million 4.875% bond redeemed in December 2014 with the issue of the 500 million 2% bond in July 2014.
Finance costs have also reduced due to a new 415 million revolving credit facility RCF signed in April 2015 having an initial margin of 80 basis points which is 70 basis points lower than the previous 505 million facility it replaced.
Finally the increased use of floating rate debt at low rates of interest has also acted to reduce the weighted average cost of borrowing.
There was a 13.9 million 2014 8.7 million exceptional finance cost principally associated with the early redemption of a 272 million 5.25% bond which was due to mature in December 2016.
This is excluded from adjusted profit.
Interest capitalised during the year was 5.3 million and principally related to the Group s developments in Beauvais Leeds Rugby and
This is 3.5 million lower than in 2014 when interest was capitalised on the development of Les Terrasses du Port Marseille.
TAX
The Group is a UK REIT and French SIIC for tax purposes and is exempt from corporation tax on rental income and gains arising on property sales.
The tax charge for 2015 remained low at 1.6 million 2014 1.0 million.
DIVIDEND
The Directors have proposed a final dividend of 12.8 pence per share.
Together with the interim dividend of 9 .5 pence the total for 2015 is 22.3 pence representing an increase of 9 .3% compared with the prior year.
The final dividend is payable on 29 April 2016 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 18 March 2016.
6.4 pence will be paid as a PID  net of withholding tax where appropriate with the balance of 6.4 pence paid as a normal dividend.
The Company will be offering a scrip dividend alternative and for shareholders who elect to receive this the entire dividend will be treated as a normal nonPID dividend.
As the Company is offering a scrip dividend alternative the Dividend Reinvestment Plan DRIP will be suspended.
56 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 NET ASSETS During 2015 equity shareholders funds increased by 543 million or 10.9% to 5517 million at 31 December 2015.
Net assets calculated on an EPRA basis were 5573 million an increase of 11.5% during the year.
On a per share basis net assets increased by 72 pence to 7 .10 and the movement during the year is shown in table 51.
Table 51 Movement in net assets Proportionally consolidated including premium outlets
EPRA net asset adjustments
EPRA NAV pence per share 31 December 2014 4974 25 4999 638 Property revaluation Proportionally consolidated property portfolio 368  368 47 Premium outlet properties 174  174 22 Adjusted profit for the year 211  211 27 Change in fair value of derivatives 2 2 Change in deferred tax 29 29 Dividends 165  165 21 Exchange and other 14  14 3 31 December 2015 5517 56 5573 710 Adjustments in accordance with EPRA best practice as shown in note 10B to the accounts on page 137 .
The increase in EPRA net asset value was principally due to the valuation surplus on the Groups property portfolio including those held in joint ventures and associates due to yield and income improvements.
Further analysis of valuation movements is provided in table 53 on page 58.
Adjusted profit contributed 211 million although this was largely offset by dividend payments totalling 165 million.
INVESTMENT AND DEVELOPMENT PROPERTIES Portfolio V aluation Analysis Table 52 Movement in portfolio value Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets
Group
Share of Property interests
Investment
Development
Portfolio value at 1 January 2015 4427 2279 6706 6498 208 Valuation increase 24tel36 Capital expenditure
Developments
Existing portfolio Other 1 1 2 2 218 9telCapitalised interest 5  5  5 Disposals 170  170 169 1 Transfers 11 11  28 28 Exchange 85 7 92 90 2 Portfolio value at 31 December 2015 4652 2478 7130 6741 389 Includes capitalised tenant incentives and letting fees.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 57 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL REVIEW Financial review continued
V aluation change UK shopping centres UK retail parks France Development and UK other Total portfolio Chart 53 Components of valuation change in 2015 m Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets Yield Income Development and other Total Chart 53 analyses the sources of the valuation change for the property portfolio on a proportionally consolidated basis during 2015.
During 2015 the Groups portfolio excluding premium outlets achieved a revaluation gain of 368 million of which 195 million was from the UK shopping centres and 117 million from our French portfolio.
Improvements in investment yields accounted for 78% of this gain with the remainder of the valuation uplift principally associated with leasing and ERV changes.
For UK shopping centres investment yields fell by an average of 25 basis points contributing 127 million or 65% of the revaluation gain.
The benefit of leasing and market income growth produced a valuation increase of 67 million.
The UK retail parks valuations increased by 19 million associated with an uplift from leasing and ERV changes as yields were virtually unchanged.
In France investment yields reduced by an average of 40 basis points during 2015 generating a 161 million valuation increase.
This uplift was partly offset by a valuation reduction of 15 million associated with reductions in ERVs and 29 million associated with local taxation changes and refurbishment expenditure ahead of retenanting at a number of centres.
Developments and the UK Other portfolio achieved a revaluation gain of 37 million following letting and construction progress at Victoria Gate Leeds and Watermark WestQuay Southampton.
Further valuation and yield analysis is included in tables 107 and 108 in the Additional Disclosures section on page 169 .
RETURNS
Table 54 Returns summary Proportionally consolidated including premium outlets Return % Benchmark % UK portfolio income return 4.8 UK IPD All Retail Universe income return 5.1 UK portfolio capital return 5.2 UK IPD All Retail Universe capital return 3.8 UK portfolio total return 10.2 UK IPD All Retail Universe total return 9.0 Group income return 4.9 Group weighted IPD All Retail Universe income return 4.9 Group capital return 7.1 Group weighted IPD All Retail Universe capital return 4.8 Group total return 12.4 Group weighted IPD All Retail Universe total return 9.9 Total shareholder return over one year 2.4 FTSE EPRANAREIT UK index over one year 12.1 Total shareholder return over three years p.
10.9 FTSE EPRANAREIT UK index over three years p.
Total shareholder return over five years p.
11.4 FTSE EPRANAREIT UK index over five years p.
As Annual IPD indices have yet to be published the benchmark IPD returns shown above have been estimated.
See page 59 for further explanation.
58 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Property returns Table 54 compares the financial returns generated in 2015 with benchmark IPD indices.
The returns include development properties and the Groups returns include those from the properties held through its investments in Value Retail and VIA Outlets.
The Groups weighted IPD All Retail Universe total return benchmark of 9 .9% is weighted 7030 between the UK and French indices.
The All Retail Universe indices includes returns from all types of retail property.
As the Annual IPD benchmarks for both countries are not available until after this Annual Report has been published the benchmarks have been estimated and are subject to revision.
The UK IPD data is based on the Quarterly All Retail Universe to December 2015.
As there is less data available for France for the purposes of calculating the Group IPD benchmarks we have assumed that the French benchmark is equal to the returns generated by our French portfolio.
The Groups total return was 12.4% 250 basis points higher than the estimated benchmark.
The Groups outperformance was driven by the property portfolio held by our premium outlet investments which produced a total return of 23.7%.
The total return for the UK portfolio was 10.2% which was higher than the UK IPD index although the income return was 30 basis points lower reflecting the prime nature of the Groups UK portfolio.
The French portfolio generated a total return of 12.0%.
In 2015 the Reported Group portfolio generated a total return of 10.6% whilst properties held by our joint ventures and associates generated a total return of 14.3%.
Both portfolios exceeded the estimated benchmark the performance of the latter portfolio being boosted by the strong return from premium outlets.
An analysis of the capital and total returns by business segment is included in table 107 on page 169 Shareholder returns For the year ended 31 December 2015 the Groups return on shareholders equity was 14.3% which compares to the Groups estimated cost of equity of 8%.
The income element of the return on equity tends to be relatively low given the prime nature of the property portfolio.
The capital element of the return was driven by the portfolios strong valuation performance during the year.
Hammersons total shareholder return for 2015 was 2.4% which represents an underperformance of the FTSE EPRANAREIT UK index by 970 basis points.
Over the last five years the Groups average annual total shareholder return has been 11.4% compared to 15.0% for the FTSE EPRANAREIT UK index.
INVESTMENT IN JOINT VENTURES AND ASSOCIATES INCLUDING INVESTMENTS IN PREMIUM OUTLETS Investment in joint ventures including VIA Outlets At 31 December 2015 the Groups investment in joint ventures totalled 3214 million compared with 2341 million at the beginning of the year an increase of 873 million.
The key change during 2015 was the acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio in a new 5050 joint venture with Allianz for a cost of 690 million further details of this transaction are given on page 26 of the Business Review.
The movement in investments in joint ventures during 2015 is shown in table 55 and further analysis is provided in note 12D of the accounts.
Table 55 Analysis of movements in investment in joint ventures Groups share of investment including premium outlets Share of Property joint ventures
Outlets
Total
Balance at 1 January 2015 2237 104 2341 Acquisitions 690  690 Capital advances 41 5 46 Transfer to Reported Group 11  11 Share of results of joint ventures Adjusted earnings 111 6 117 Property revaluation 122 10 132 Other results 1 3 2 Distributions and other receivables 85 7 92 Foreign exchange and other movements 3 4 7 Balance at 31 December 2015 3103 111 3214 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 59 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL REVIEW Financial review continued
Investment in associates including V alue Retail The Groups investment in associates principally relates to the Groups investment in Value Retail PLC and its group entities VR and totalled 768 million at 31 December 2015 an increase of 139 million during 2015.
The increase was largely due to the revaluation gain on VRs property portfolio which totalled 164 million of which 42% was due to yield movements and the balance associated with income growth.
During the year acquisitions increased the investment by 37 million of which 24 million related to the acquisition in January of a 10% interest in Nicetoile and the remainder related to an additional VR stake in Kildare Village acquired in December.
Distributions totalled 45 million which principally related to funds received by the Group in December following a debt refinancing by VR in relation to Bicester Village.
Further analysis is provided in note 13 to the accounts on pages 145 and 146.
T otal investment in premium outlets At 31 December 2015 on an EPRA adjusted basis the Groups total investment in premium outlets representing our share of VR and VIA and including the Groups loans to VR and the investment in VR China totalled 1003 million 2014 832 million.
The property portfolios produced a combined valuation surplus of 174 million and produced a combined capital return of 16.4% and a total return of 23.7%.
Further details of the Groups aggregated investment are provided in table 110 of the Additional Disclosures on page 170.
FINANCING AND CASH FLOW Our financing strategy is to generally borrow on an unsecured basis on the strength of the Groups covenant to maintain operational flexibility.
Borrowings are arranged to ensure an appropriate maturity profile and to maintain shortterm liquidity.
Acquisitions may be financed initially using shortterm funds before being refinanced for the longer term when market conditions are appropriate.
Shortterm funding is raised principally through syndicated revolving credit facilities from a range of banks and financial institutions with which we maintain strong working relationships.
Longterm debt mainly comprises the Groups fixed rate unsecured bonds.
Derivative financial instruments are used to manage exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates but are not employed for speculative purposes.
The Board approves financing guidelines against which it monitors the Groups financial structure.
These guidelines together with the relevant metrics are summarised in table 56 which illustrates the Groups robust financial condition.
Table 56 Key financing metrics Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets Guideline 31 December 31 December Net debt m 2968 2265 Gearing % Maximum 85% for an extended period 54 46 Loan to value % No more than 40% for an extended period 38 34 Liquidity m 931 648 Weighted average interest rate % 3.8 4.7 Weighted average maturity of debt years 5.7 6.5 Interest cover times At least 2.0 3.6 2.8 Net debtEBITDA times Less than 10.0 9.6 8.0 FX hedging % 8090% 90 88 Debt fixed % At least 50% 61 79 Includes the Irish loan assets of 690 million within the denominator.
On a proportionally consolidated basis net debt at 31 December 2015 was 2968 million 2014 2265 million reflecting borrowings of 3038 million and cash of 70 million.
During 2015 net debt increased by 703 million and the movement is shown in table 57 .
Table 57 Movement in net debt Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets
Net debt at 1 January 2015 2265 Net cash inflow from operations 191 Acquisitions 822 Disposals 185 Development and other capital expenditure 200 Equity dividends paid 164 Advances and distributions 47 Exchange and other 60 Net debt at 31 December 2015 2968 60 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Chart 58 Debt maturity profile at 31 December 2015 m Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets 600telteltelteltel Euro bonds Secured debt 4tel24tel22 Sterling bonds US Private Placement Bank debt drawn Through active treasury management we have continued to reduce the Groups average cost of debt as well as ensuring a solid funding platform.
Key transactions during 2015 included the signing of a new 415 million unsecured revolving credit facility in April at an initial margin of 80 basis points with a syndicate of nine banks.
The facility has a maturity of five years which may be extended to a maximum of seven years at the Groups request and on each banks approval of their participation.
The new facility replaced the existing 505 million revolving credit facility with an initial margin of 150 basis points which would have matured in April 2016.
The cancellation of this existing facility resulted in a oneoff exceptional interest charge of 1.0 million associated with the writeoff of unamortised fees.
In the second half of the year we undertook a number of financing transactions principally to support the acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio.
To fund the acquisition we raised a new 1.5 billion revolving credit facility of which 1.0 billion matures in March 2017 and 0.5 billion in September 2017 .
This is expected to be refinanced through a 500 million disposal programme of which 200 million has already been contracted.
In October we issued a tenyear 350 million bond at a coupon of 3.5%.
This bond was subsequently swapped into euros resulting in a net coupon cost of 2.5%.
In December we redeemed an outstanding 272 million bond due to mature in December 2016 with a coupon of 5.25% for a total consideration of 284.6 million.
This resulted in a oneoff exceptional finance cost of 12.9 million.
Exposure to exchange translation differences on eurodenominated assets is managed through a combination of euro borrowings and derivatives.
At 31 December 2015 the value of eurodenominated liabilities compared to the value of eurodenominated assets was 90% an increase of 2% from the position at the beginning of the year.
Interest on euro debt also acts as a hedge against exchange differences arising on rental income from our French business.
Approximately twothirds of the relevant income was hedged in this way during 2015 compared to an average of 82% during 2014.
Whilst the overall level of eurodenominated debt grew during 2015 to increase the hedge of assets the reduction in the hedge of income was due to increased rental income from our French business predominantly due to the opening of Les Terrasses du Port in May 2014.
The Groups unsecured bank facilities and the US private placement senior notes contain financial covenants that the Groups gearing defined as the ratio of net debt to shareholders equity should not exceed 150% and that interest cover defined as net rental income divided by net interest payable should not be less than 1.25 times.
The same gearing covenant applies to three of the Companys unsecured bonds whilst the remaining bonds contain a covenant that gearing should not exceed 175%.
These figures are on a proportionally consolidated basis and the bonds have no covenant for interest cover.
Hammersons financial ratios are comfortably within these covenants.
Fitch and Moodys rate Hammersons unsecured credit as A and Baa1 respectively.
Moodys upgraded its rating from Baa2 in February 2015 to recognise Hammersons highquality retail portfolio with a strong focus on outlet retail its progress in reducing leverage and improving fixed charge coverage and the expectation of continued stable performance of its core UK assets and reaffirmed this rating in October following the Irish loan portfolio acquisition.
As explained at the beginning of this Financial Review we do not proportionally consolidate our two premium outlet investments for reporting purposes.
These are financed independently from the rest of the Group and both Value Retail and VIA Outlets utilise a combination of secured borrowings and partner loans as funding.
At 31 December 2015 the Groups share of net debt in VR and VIA totalled 362 million.
Including the Groups share of the net assets of VR and VIA on a proforma basis would increase the Groups gearing from 54% to 60% whilst the loan to value would reduce from 38% to 37%.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 61 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL REVIEW PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES Managing uncertainty Effective risk management underpins our business model.
Our risk management policies are designed to reduce the chances of financial loss protect our reputation and optimise performance when opportunities arise.
The Board assesses and controls the Groups risk appetite and regularly monitors our Risk Management Framework to ensure risks are being appropriately mitigated and new risks identified.
The framework is reviewed by our management teams and communicated to all our staff.
RISK MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES
The responsibility for risk management rests ultimately with the Board.
However the foundations of our approach are instilled in our culture and values.
The relatively low number of personnel across the Group encourages effective collaboration and the flat management structure means that the senior team is actively involved in ensuring adherence to the Groups risk management policies and procedures including risk identification and mitigation.
Chart 59 summarises the key roles and responsibilities for the Groups risk management strategy and demonstrates the interaction between the Board and management teams in ensuring effective risk management is applied across the Groups activities.
The assessment and management of risk underpins our operating financial and governance activities.
AUDIT COMMITTEE GROUP EXECUTIVE
RISK AND CONTROLS
DIVISIONAL MANAGEMENT UK FRANCE AND IRELAND
Overall responsibility for corporate strategy governance performance internal controls and risk management Defines the Groups appetite for risk and monitors risks to ensure these are effectively managed including agreeing actions where necessary Reviews effectiveness of the Risk Management Framework and internal controls on behalf of the Board Ensures compliance with relevant legislation rules and regulations Oversees effectiveness of the Groups internal audit arrangements Management of the business and delivery of strategy Formally reviews the Risk Management Framework including monitoring key risk indicators Responsible for integration of the Risk Management Framework throughout the business Monitors compliance with the Groups internal control systems Management of the internal audit arrangements Responsible for implementation of risk mitigation actions and monitoring compliance with internal controls and procedures at the operational level of the business Formal reviews of the Risk Management Framework to identify risk trends Oversight of project level risk management activities Implementation and compliance responsibility Monitoring and reporting responsibility Chart 59 Key roles and responsibilities for the Groups risk management strategy 62 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 CASE STUDY  HEALTH AND SAFETY IN ACTION We are committed to managing health and safety risks throughout our operations.
The Board approves the health and safety strategy which is administered by the Health and Safety Committee chaired by the Chief Financial Officer.
It is our goal to ensure that we cause no harm to our staff or to visitors to our properties.
We achieve and measure this through maintaining high safety and welfare standards which include The employment of a Chartered Professional Health and Safety Practitioner and specialist team to provide strategic and operational support to all areas of the business Developing a comprehensive safety and emergency preparedness training programme Regular reporting and monitoring of adherence to the Groups health and safety policies including the use of external and internal audits and Accreditation of the Hammerson Health and Safety management system against ISO18001.
This continual focus on health and safety has helped ensure that during 2015 we have maintained a 100% compliance record with all regulatory requirements and had no major injuries to our employees.
W e have also reduced the number of visitor accidents at our portfolio by 16% to 486 which is very low compared to footfall levels and only 32 were RIDDOR reportable incidents.
CRISIS MANAGEMENT The risk of a catastrophic event such as a terrorist incident at one of our properties has increased during 2015.
We have comprehensive emergency plans in place including the formation of a Core Crisis Group CCG to react to a range of major incidents.
During an incident the CCG would provide direction to our propertybased teams as well as managing customer and media relations.
The CCG includes the Executive Directors who are responsible for key decisions within previously agreed strategic principles which place the protection of life above any other consideration.
This team must be properly equipped to address any major incident.
In October we organised an externallyfacilitated exercise to simulate a plausible incident at one of our shopping centres which involved life safety issues disruptions to normal operations and extensive media coverage.
The CCG worked through the scenario whilst receiving additional updates from key external organisations and the media to determine response priorities and organise the responses needed for a full recovery and resumption of business.
The event affirmed the strength of the Groups plans although a number of improvements were identified which are being implemented.
RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK
Our Risk Management Framework is structured around eight principal risk areas contains mitigating actions and allocates management responsibility for each individual risk.
The framework is subject to regular management review including at each Risk and Controls Committee and Audit Committee meeting.
The framework designates a level of residual risk to each principal risk area taking account of mitigation actions and this residual risk is considered in the context of our risk appetite.
During 2015 the Board carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks and determined that the level of residual risk associated with our principal risk areas has generally increased although each remains within our risk appetite.
An assessment of the potential impact and probability associated with each of our principal risks is shown on chart 60.
Note Arrow indicates change in risk assessment during 2015.
1 Business strategy 4 Treasury Catastrophic event 2 Property and corporate investment 6 Tax and regulatory 5 Ownership structures Business organisation and human resources 3 Property development
Medium
High
LOW PROBABILITY HIGH Chart 60 Principal Risks Potential impact and probability assessment LOW IMPACT HIGH STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 63 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT PRINCIPAL RISKS Principal risks and uncertainties continued PRINCIPAL RISKS Further details of the key risks within each of the Groups principal risk areas is shown below.
Risk and impact Mitigation Change during 2015 and outlook BUSINESS STRATEGY Executive responsibility David Atkins Impact Probability Our retail strategy of investing in shopping centres retail parks and premium outlets in selected European countries results in underperformance relative to other sectors or markets eroding shareholder value.
The macroeconomic environment declines impacting consumer spending and property values adversely impacting earnings and net asset value.
Failure to anticipate and address developments in consumer and occupational markets such as multichannel retailing and digital technology results in obsolescence and financial underperformance.
Link to business model We focus on prime shopping centres in the best locations convenient retail parks and premium outlets all with experienced management.
We commission and evaluate research into the economy and investment and occupational markets and use this when preparing our annual Business Plan and regular financial forecasts.
Within our Business Plan we stresstest our projections against a severe downside economic scenario.
This has confirmed that our current and projected financial position is robust.
We have low gearing effective foreign currency hedging longterm secure income streams a good spread of debt maturities and the flexibility to phase or halt our development programme all of which point to resilience to market shocks.
We monitor closely developments in the retail environment and apply our Product Experience Framework to ensure our portfolio remains attractive to both retailers and consumers.
The UK economy has seen solid growth during 2015 although the recovery in France has been less pronounced.
Stock markets have been volatile especially in the second half of 2015 and beginning of 2016 due to a range of conflicting economic data and external shocks.
Whilst growth is forecast in the UK France and Ireland there are downside risks associated with China Brexit and the Middle East which could adversely impact economic stability.
UK and French retail sales have grown during 2015 which has strengthened the occupational retail market.
Retailers continue to seek new space and physical real estate remains central to their plans.
Retailers are concentrating their requirements on properties which can support their multichannel sales offer and are able to attract consumers.
See Our market section on page 14 PROPERTY AND CORPORATE INVESTMENT Executive responsibility David AtkinsPeter Cole Investment decisions result in inadequate returns or the adoption of unforeseen liabilities.
Opportunities to divest of properties are missed or are limited by market constraints which reduces potential returns and adversely impacts the Groups funding strategy.
Link to business model Acquisitions are thoroughly evaluated and are supported by detailed review financial appraisals due diligence and a risk assessment prior to Board approval.
The performance of individual properties is benchmarked against target returns.
Properties are held in a ready for sale state with documentation supporting leases rights and obligations readily accessible.
Our property portfolio is highquality and diversified by market sector and geography reducing the impact of a downturn in a single market.
We have recently completed a number of significant acquisitions principally the Irish loan portfolio and Grand Central in Birmingham.
The performance of these large transactions will be closely scrutinised.
Borrowing levels are forecast to reduce in 2016 through the completion of the major disposals programme announced in September.
Real estate investment demand particularly for prime assets remains strong in the UK France and Ireland.
This is further supported by the continuing low interest rate and inflation environment.
These factors have contributed to a rise in real estate values during 2015.
Future valuation growth is forecast to be more subdued and be driven more by income growth than inward yield movements.
Also any macroeconomic uncertainty could adversely impact investment markets.
See Our market section on page 14 Impact Probability KEY TO PRINCIPAL RISKS TABLE ALIGNMENT TO BUSINESS MODEL Asset management Investment management Developing venues Financial efficiency Change in risk assessment in 2015 Impact Probability
No change
See pages 4 and 5 for Our Business Model Operational activities HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Risk and impact Mitigation Change during 2015 and outlook PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT Executive responsibility Peter Cole Overexposure to developments particularly major longterm schemes increases the impact of an economic downturn which would adversely affect scheme viability and increase financing and cash flow pressures.
Poor development management and inadequate resourcing leads to failed or suboptimal projects.
Increasing construction activity and raw material prices result in construction price inflation adversely impacting the viability and financial returns of projects.
Failure to achieve key project milestones such as planning consents land acquisitions and leasing targets on a timely basis damages project viability and corporate reputation.
Links to business model Our exposure to developments and the phasing of projects is considered as part of our annual Business Plan and reviewed throughout the year.
This process also considers future resourcing requirements.
We produce regular management reporting including risk reporting to enable effective monitoring of development projects.
Multidisciplinary teams are assembled for each development under a designated project owner and these are supported by external expertise.
Detailed analysis including market research is undertaken prior to the approval of expenditure for each key milestone for development projects.
Where possible guaranteed maximum price contracts are agreed with building contractors and fixed prices agreed for other advisers.
Constructive relationships are maintained with local councils and government.
Postcompletion reviews are undertaken for all significant projects and presented to management including the Audit Committee.
These ensure potential improvements to processes are identified and considered for future projects.
During 2015 we have reduced the level of risk associated with developments by progressing the development pipeline and have successfully completed four developments.
At 31 December 2015 two further schemes are onsite and the development portfolio represents only 5% of our property portfolio.
As we approach the commencement of our major development schemes we will only commit when sound financial and risk analysis demonstrates scheme viability and good returns.
The progress made with our three major London schemes during the year coincides with improving demand from retailers for new prime trading locations.
However a number of key milestones including further planning consents anchor tenants agreements and leasing targets are required to bring these schemes to fruition.
We have allowed appropriate cost inflation contingencies within the scheme appraisals and to lock in competitive pricing we will look to secure construction contracts well ahead of schemes going onsite.
Cost inflation should be tempered by the reduction in the oil price and lower global demand for raw materials.
See Business Review on page 34
Executive responsibility Timon Drakesmith Poor treasury planning or external factors including failures in the banking system lead to a liquidity squeeze preventing the refinancing of maturing debt or leading to insufficient liquidity to progress the development programme.
Adverse currency or interest rate movements result in financial losses.
Deterioration in our financial position may result in a breach of borrowing covenants which triggers default and or repayment of facilities or bonds and inhibits corporate strategy.
Links to business model The Board approves our treasury strategy and regularly monitors guidelines for financial ratios.
These guidelines include ensuring we maintain an appropriate debt maturity profile and manage the exposure to fixed and floating interest rates and the level of foreign exchange hedging.
Credit ratings are set and monitored for lending counterparties and we use diverse sources of funding.
The Board approves all major investment decisions which are supported by a financing plan and takes a proactive approach to refinancing.
Our annual Business Plan includes stress tests considering the impact of a significant deterioration in the markets in which we operate.
The high quality and diversification of our portfolio should help to protect our financial position particularly from falling property values.
At
31 December 2015 gearing stood at 54% significantly lower than the Groups most stringent borrowing covenant that gearing should not exceed 150%.
We estimate that property values including premium outlets could fall by 42% from their December 2015 levels before covenants would be endangered.
Our borrowing levels and nearterm refinancing requirements have increased during 2015 principally associated with the Irish loan portfolio acquisition.
However at 31 December 2015 our balance sheet and financial ratios remain robust.
We have access to a wide range of funding sources including bank lending bond and equity market and private placements and we completed a number of significant financing transactions during 2015.
We expect to maintain a strong financial position during 2016 and credit rating agencies have recently reaffirmed our ratings.
The macroeconomic environment has continued to provide historically low interest rates and the financial markets have good levels of liquidity for companies in a strong financial position.
However macroeconomic uncertainties could adversely impact future liquidity and pricing.
Whilst there is an expectation particularly in the UK of future interest rates increases these are forecast to be gradual and dependent on the underlying strength of the wider economy.
Sterling has strengthened by 5% against the euro during 2015 and remains volatile with continued challenges within the eurozone and the current wider global market uncertainties.
However we mitigate our foreign exchange risk by maintaining a high level of currency hedge.
See Financial Review on page 60 Impact Probability Impact Probability STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 65 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT PRINCIPAL RISKS Principal risks and uncertainties continued Risk and impact Mitigation Change during 2015 and outlook OWNERSHIP STRUCTURES Executive responsibility Peter Cole Joint control reduces liquidity and could impact operational effectiveness especially if joint venture partners are not strategically aligned.
Lack of direct control over externally managed premium outlet interests reduces transparency of performance and governance and may result in inconsistent strategies.
Links to business model We undertake an annual liquidity review of all our properties.
We have a diverse range of joint venture partners and documentation is drafted to ensure strategic alignment and to provide liquidity for partners whilst protecting our ownership.
We maintain strong working relationships and hold regular meetings with our partners to proactively manage any issues.
Annual business plans are used to ensure operational and strategic alignment.
We have an increasingly close working relationship and have formal influence over strategy and governance through board representation for both Value Retail and VIA Outlets.
Our investment in VIA Outlets contains provisions to enable effective joint governance and control.
Our premium outlet investments are both subject to external audit and the properties are independently valued for us by Cushman and Wakefield with the valuations reviewed by management and the Audit Committee.
Joint ventures reduce the exposure risk associated with owning major shopping centres and we have a long and successful track record of working effectively with a variety of partners.
During 2015 the proportion of properties held within joint ventures or associates has increased to 45% by value at 31 December 2015 principally due to the sales of whollyowned properties Drakehouse Bercy 2 and Grand Maine.
This figure will increase further in 2016 when the Irish properties are secured and with the completion of the acquisition of Grand Central Birmingham.
We are confident that joint venture ownership structures do not adversely impact liquidity with a number of joint venture stakes successfully traded in the investment market during 2015.
See notes 12 and 13 to the accounts CATASTROPHIC EVENT Executive responsibility David Atkins Our operations reputation or financial security could be significantly affected by a major event such as a terrorist or cyber attack power shortage or civil unrest.
Climate change could adversely impact our operations through an environmental incident such as flooding or changes in consumer or investor behaviour.
Links to business model We have continuity plans at both corporate and individual property levels and have established a Core Crisis Group for dealing with a major incident.
We have enhanced the physical security measures at our properties and maintain an ongoing dialogue with security agencies to assess threat levels and best practice.
Our insurance policies include cover for property damage including from terrorism and climate change such as flooding.
We have a clear sustainability strategy which is integrated within our business model and addresses ongoing climate change matters.
Whilst the overall probability of a major incident at one of the Groups properties remains low the threat level has increased during 2015.
Also the wider use of digital technology across the Group increases the risks associated with cyber security.
We have thoroughly reviewed and improved our processes and procedures to counter the threat of a major incident.
However it is not possible to fully mitigate the risk and impact if an incident were to occur.
See Health and Safety case study on page 63 TAX AND REGULATORY Executive responsibility Timon Drakesmith Loss of taxexempt status due to change in legislation or noncompliance.
EUUK regulation including environmental matters acts as a brake on growth and an administrative burden for the real estate sector.
Links to business model Compliance with rules for maintaining taxexempt status monitored by inhouse tax specialist and external advisers.
Speculation and comment relating to changes in tax regimes in the UK and Europe is monitored with the help of external advisers.
Developments in regulation are monitored and governments and regulators lobbied through representation by UK and European real estate trade bodies.
Monitoring of exposure to key regulations and mitigation planning is undertaken at a portfolio level.
We also undertake active participation in policy consultations and in industryled dialogue with policy makers.
No significant changes during 2015 although governments continue to seek to reduce fiscal deficits.
The real estate sector is sometimes perceived by regulators to be part of the financial services sector rather than as an operating business and the industry could be adversely affected by misdirected regulation designed to stabilise financial markets such as the proposed OECD BEPS project.
Changes in the UK associated with the living wage apprenticeships and business rates whilst not having a significant direct impact on us may have an adverse financial impact in the wider retail sector.
Negotiations associated with Brexit are also likely to impact existing legislation.
See Financial Review on page 56 and note 8 to the accounts Impact Probability Impact Probability Impact Probability 66 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 DAVID ATKINS
TIMON DRAKESMITH
GOING CONCERN The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Business Review the Financial Review and the Principal Risks and Uncertainties sections of the Annual Report.
The financial position of the Group its liquidity position and borrowing facilities are also described on pages 60 and 61 and in notes 17  19 and 20 to the accounts.
The Directors have reviewed the current and projected financial position of the Group making reasonable assumptions about future trading performance.
As part of the review the Directors considered the Groups cash balances its debt maturity profile including undrawn facilities and the longterm nature of tenant leases.
After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
VIABILITY STATEMENT In accordance with provision C.2.2 of the 2014 revision of the Code the Directors have assessed the viability of the Group over a longer period than the 12 months required by the Going Concern provision.
The Board conducted this review taking account of the Groups current position future plans and the potential impact of the Principal Risks documented within this section.
Based on this review the Directors have concluded that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over a fiveyear period to 31 December 2020.
This period was selected for the following key reasons i The Groups annual Business Plan covers a fiveyear period and considers the Groups cash flows and key financial metrics and includes sensitivity analysis to validate the Groups resilience and mitigation options to adverse events. years at 31 December 2015. beyond 2020. the Groups weighted average debt maturity was six years. from those reviews.
The fiveyear strategic review considers the Groups cash flows dividend cover REIT compliance and other key financial ratios over the period.
2015 STRATEGIC REPORT Pages 1 to 67 of this Annual Report constitute the Strategic Report.
It has been approved and signed on behalf of the Board on 12 February 2016.
Risk and impact Mitigation Change during 2015 and outlook BUSINESS ORGANISATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES Executive responsibility David Atkins Management structures or resourcing levels are inappropriate for achieving business objectives.
Failure to recruit and retain key executives and staff with appropriate skills and calibre undermines corporate strategy.
Links to business model A human resources plan is included within the annual Business Plan.
This considers team structures training requirements and talent management.
The Nomination Committee approves succession plans for senior roles.
Significant changes to the management structure are approved by the Board.
We periodically review the remuneration structure including an annual review by the Remuneration Committee and benchmarking against industry or other relevant comparatives.
We have established a management competency framework and management skills are formally assessed within the annual appraisal process.
During 2015 we have successfully completed the relocation of our London headquarters and established our new operations centre in Reading.
We recognise the importance of motivating and developing our staff and have plans in action to help to mitigate the impact of third party recruitment approaches in a strong recruitment market.
We have had improved employee engagement scores from our employee surveys undertaken during the year and will implement a number of enhancements based on the feedback received.
2016 will require significant effort to establish and integrate our new Irish platform with our existing Group structures and processes.
See Our people section on page 49 Impact Probability STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 67 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STRATEGIC REPORT PRINCIPAL RISKS Setting Hammersons values and standards CHAIRMANS LETTER I believe that strong corporate governance underpinned by a sound culture is fundamental to our success and our ability to meet our business goals and generate value over the longer term.
David Tyler
68 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 BOARD EFFECTIVENESS REVIEW Our General Counsel and Company Secretary Sarah Booth facilitated the 2015 Board effectiveness review.
In it Directors discussed various topics focused on themes drawn from the Code.
These included how the Board works together influences Hammersons culture and values sets the Companys strategic aims and assesses risk.
She reviewed the responses and discussed them with me before tabling a report and recommendations to the
Actions were agreed and incorporated where appropriate into the 2016 Board work plan.
These included Further enhancements to our strategic planning process Continued focus on the talentdevelopment aspects of succession planning A presentation by external advisers to the Board on culture and ethics An ongoing programme of engagement and site visits and Preparation of a list of discussion topics for Board dinners.
Progress on the actions arising from the 2014 Board effectiveness review was also considered as part of the 2015 review.
Further details can be found in this report as set out below Succession planning  see Nomination Committee Report page 79 .
Improving the structure of the Board strategy day  see page 76.
Further engagement with colleagues  see page 76.
The next Board effectiveness review will take place in 2016 and will be conducted by an external facilitator.
I would like to conclude by thanking my colleagues on the Board the management team and all our colleagues in the Group for delivering yet another strong performance in 2015.
David Tyler
We have recently seen a much greater recognition among the investor community of the importance of corporate culture in how businesses manage risk and secure a strong performance.
In part this is being driven by the Financial Reporting Council which has a major initiative under way on this topic.
I believe that strong corporate governance underpinned by a sound culture is fundamental to our success and helps ensure we can meet our business goals and generate value over the longer term.
Your Board plays a key role in shaping Hammersons culture both in the boardroom and across the wider organisation.
During the year the Board considered as part of the 2015 Board effectiveness review how effectively it sets the tone from the top.
You can read more about this in the Boards roundtable discussion on page 70.
The Board also had a number of opportunities during the year to engage with colleagues across the business both formally and informally.
These meetings gave Directors further insight into how Hammersons values are embedded in the business and you can read more about this on page 75.
CHANGES TO THE BOARD Effective boards need directors who bring the right balance of skills experience and knowledge enhanced by a range of diverse backgrounds.
During the year we welcomed two new Non Executive Directors to the Board Pierre Bouchut and Andrew
The work associated with making changes to the Board and monitoring succession planning across the business were important elements of the Nomination Committees activity further details can be found on page 78.
Jacques Espinasse will retire from the Board at the conclusion of this years Annual General Meeting after nine years of service as a NonExecutive Director.
He has also been a member of the Audit Committee since 2007  and chaired that Committee since April 2014.
I would like to record my thanks to Jacques for the significant and valuable contribution he has made to the Board and the Company.
Dear Shareholders On behalf of the Board I am pleased to present Hammersons Corporate Governance Report which aims to provide an insight into how the Board spent its time during 2015.
As in previous years details of how we discharged our governance duties and applied the principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code are contained in a separate section from page 102.
COMPLIANCE STATEMENT The Company complied in full with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code published in September 2014 which applied throughout the financial year ended 31 December 2015.
69 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CHAIRMANS LETTER In conversation with the Board Sarah Booth the General Counsel and Company Secretary talks to the Directors about their views on several aspects of the Boards activities.
These include how the Board works together and achieves effective decisionmaking its role in promoting Hammersons culture and values how effectively risk is managed and strategy is set and the Boards input into succession planning.
Sarah Booth Lets start by considering how well you think the Board works together and achieves consensus.
Pierre Bouchut During my first year on the Board I have found the dialogue and debate open and constructive.
Board members bring diversity of talents backgrounds and style but all approach meetings ready to contribute to and challenge the debate.
There is also a balance of interaction between all the Directors and our relationship with management is healthy.
Peter Cole David Tyler encourages a collaborative and collegiate environment on the Board which fosters open discussion.
I find discussion about key risks facing the business the economic environment and the changing nature of occupier and investment demand is very helpful in shaping the Companys investment and development activities.
Andrew Formica I have also recently joined the Board.
During the interview process and in my initial meetings with fellow Directors I was impressed by everybodys collegiate friendly but professional attitude.
The
Board is clearly unified in its thinking around strategy and direction but each Director brings their own experiences and perspectives to the Board table.
Gwyn Burr The Boards diversity helps inform our debates and we have a wide range of experience to draw on.
As newer members of the Board Pierre and Andrew will both add to its capability bringing financial and real estate experience to complement further our existing skills.
David Atkins Discussions are positive transparent and open.
We also use informal Board dinners to discuss wider business topics and we hope to have more opportunities to do so in 2016.
T erry Duddy I agree.
The recent Board discussion on Ireland and the opportunities there was underpinned by very informative papers prepared by management which enabled us to consider the risks involved in what I thought was a wellbalanced way.
This resulted in clear decisionmaking.
The Chairman is skilled at encouraging all members to contribute to the debate and at bringing the discussion to a timely conclusion.
Judy Gibbons Yes that is a good example.
It required the Board to absorb a considerable amount of background information and understand the implications of a major acquisition in a new market.
The
Boards discussion was robust and sufficient time was allowed for everyone to become fullybriefed and have the confidence individually to give their approval to the project.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT Gwyn BurrDavid TylerTimon Drakesmith 70 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Sarah Booth The UK Corporate Governance Code states that one of the key roles for the Board is to establish the culture values and ethics of the Company and to set the tone from the top.
How well does the Board do in this area David Tyler Hammersons values are central to the way we run the business.
We make a point of setting them out clearly ambition responsibility collaboration and respect.
However I recognise that the way we live these values and our behaviours are even more important than the statement of our values.
Hammersons financial success must continue to be built on ethical behaviours.
We deal with our business partners with respect and treat them as we would hope and expect to be treated ourselves.
Andrew Formica As Chief Executive David Atkins provides strong leadership and instils the culture that makes Hammerson such an attractive place to work.
He is ably supported by David Tyler and the rest of the Board who all share his vision.
Timon Drakesmith I agree.
Given his long experience in the property industry and in the Company itself David Atkins is a key culture champion at
I am particularly encouraged by the opportunities we have for NonExecutive Directors to interact with colleagues and set the tone from the top when they visit our assets such as the recent Board visit to Reading.
David Atkins I think we are doing well but there is more work to do to get our values fully embedded through every part of the business.
Engagement between the Board and colleagues throughout the organisation is important and allows everybody to see how the Board works.
For example when colleagues attend Board meetings they are encouraged to explain any problems encountered to take responsibility for outcomes and to share lessons learnt with the Board.
Pierre Bouchut An example of our ethical stance came at a recent Board meeting where we debated an opportunity to accelerate a deal.
There were aspects of the proposed scheme which didnt fit with the Company s values and ethics so we all agreed not to proceed.
This is a good example of where the Company s values influenced our decision.
T erry Duddy The Executive Directors have worked hard and successfully on establishing the vision mission and objectives of the business and the values that underpin our strategy.
The recent office moves in Reading and London have been important in that process and the work involved has been done with substantial and overt encouragement from the Board.
Jacques Espinasse The head office move to Kings Place has enabled a significant shift in culture.
As we look ahead to a more geographically diverse business in the future it will become more important to have a single aligned Hammerson culture and values system.
We will stay vigilant to monitor how wellaligned we are across the whole Group.
Judy Gibbons Yes we have many opportunities to hold informal meetings with management that help us assess the underlying perceptions of our culture and values.
Gwyn Burr I agree  getting out and about more as a Board acts as a cultural barometer and that is a good thing.
The annual colleague survey also gives us a good insight into the tone and culture of the organisation.
Andrew FormicaJudy GibbonsPeter Cole 71 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE IN CONVERSATION WITH THE BOARD Corporate Governance Report continued Sarah Booth Turning to strategy and longterm thinking how well do you think the Board performs in these areas David Atkins The annual strategy day in October included a good balance of opportunities to think in the long and short term as we considered what the retail environment of the future will look like.
We also discussed the development pipeline and opportunities in this area.
We have a clear strategy which is measured by clear targets and
We ensure that new NonExecutive Directors have a sufficiently full understanding of our business assets and competitors to enable them to make a full contribution in all meetings.
Andrew Formica As a new Director I see a consistent message from the Board around Group strategy and direction.
It is apparent that much debate and discussion goes into the formulation of strategy and that every Director is fully committed to its delivery.
David Tyler The Boards thinking on longterm strategy doesnt happen in isolation.
It is influenced by the changing economic backdrop both in the UK and Europe and the fast evolving nature of retail and customer behaviour.
Recently we have also looked at what the impact might be of an exit by the UK from the European Union.
This year we are planning to make a number of disposals from our property portfolio and our programme will of course be influenced by our view of property investment markets in 2016 and beyond.
Peter Cole Setting evolving and changing the Companys strategy is clearly a critical area for Hammersons success.
I find the Board works well in delivering in this area.
As well as the process during formal Board meetings strategy and longterm thinking result from a process of less formal discussion during visits to the Groups offices in Reading and Paris our shopping centres and the focused review and challenge during the course of the Boards annual strategy day.
The introduction of new Directors to the Board ensures that there is fresh thinking and challenge in our discussions.
It is particularly in areas like strategy where the individual experience and specialist skills of the NonExecutives allow them to make a significant contribution.
Pierre Bouchut We are focused on the longer term and consider key questions that will affect the longterm sustainability of the business model  the impact of online and ecommerce development and the digitalisation of retail for example.
The Group is developing digital tools which are being implemented in our centres.
I am sure there will be a further comprehensive review of digital developments to assess future opportunities.
Gwyn Burr The nature of the business is longterm investment and I think we do take a longterm view.
Our developments in Croydon and Brent Cross are good examples of this.
We have extended opportunities to assess our strategic aims at our annual strategy day where there is usually a vigorous debate including senior managers who also attend.
Judy Gibbons Yes we have a wellarticulated strategy which is well understood by the Board.
I think we are effective at discerning whether a proposal is aligned with our strategy and then moving to review the proposal.
Sarah BoothJeanPhilippe MoutonPierre Bouchut 72 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Sarah Booth In terms of risk management how well does the Board assess the risks we are taking  To what extent do we apply sufficient challenge to major proposals Timon Drakesmith This is a positive area for management reporting and Board engagement.
I feel that we do a good job of highlighting the issues and debating the range of outcomes.
In this years Annual Report we have enhanced our risk reporting by introducing a risk heat map to show how risks changed during 2015.
Peter Cole In our capital allocation and particularly when considering major developments or investment acquisitions the risks involved are a key area of challenge and debate.
For example the acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio in 2015 was preceded by a number of strategic discussions involving both internal and external input relating to the assessment of the risks involved.
These included moving into a new territory the loan structure the assets themselves and the potential impact on the Company of financing decisions.
Jacques Espinasse We take a robust approach to all aspects of risk management giving it an appropriate level of weight when making major decisions.
The process is wellframed and quantified and it is regularly updated as the business evolves and develops.
David Atkins While we always do a thorough evaluation we naturally recognise that we cannot eliminate all risk although we hope we always identify the risks we take and are confident these are within our risk appetite.
Sarah Booth Lets move on to succession planning.
How confident are we that we have identified a talent pipeline below the Board David Tyler As Chairman there is nothing more important to me than the people agenda.
Our aim is for Hammerson to have the most talented people in the sector.
I make a point of frequently meeting senior members of the management team and I know my fellow Directors do so as well.
With my colleagues I ensure that we review the performance of the whole management cadre regularly to ensure that we identify and give our many talented people an opportunity to develop within the business.
T erry Duddy Yes we have a very solid and detailed succession planning and talent review discussion at the Nomination Committee.
All
NonExecutive Directors attend this giving them the opportunity to voice their views and air any concerns.
Judy Gibbons I think the process for identifying talent below Board level is a solid one.
In 2016 we will work on reviewing progress on the development of key individuals and their ability to move into their next roles.
At the entry level its good to see the investment in the graduate programme is giving such a positive outcome.
Gwyn Burr We are seeing much more evidence than in the past of deep thinking about our colleagues and their development needs and opportunities.
We should maintain a good level of visibility in this area to facilitate continued informed debate.
JeanPhilippe Mouton The annual review of succession planning down to senior managers is thorough.
Identifying gaps is positive as it encourages talented individuals across the Group to consider new opportunities in the Company.
Jacques Espinasse The size of the Company is such that we cannot always have ready successors for every role but we do focus on a couple of levels below the Board.
I feel that succession planning is carried out in an appropriate manner for the size of our Company.
David AtkinsJacques EspinasseTerry Duddy 73 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE IN CONVERSATION WITH THE BOARD Your Boards year This section of the Corporate Governance Report focuses on the activities of the Board during the year highlighting key activities and events.
It should be read in conjunction with the section on the UK Corporate Governance Code on pages 102 to 105 which explains how the Board complied with the Code during the year.
THE ACQUISITION OF A LOAN PORTFOLIO SECURED AGAINST RETAIL ASSETS IN DUBLIN IRELAND The Board regularly reviews potential acquisition opportunities.
In April following early monitoring by the UK New Business team the Board began considering a potential opportunity to acquire a portfolio of loans secured against prime Dublin retail property.
These included Dundrum Town
The portfolio offered a compelling blend of bestinclass shopping centres with opportunities for asset improvement and development.
The Board considered the investment opportunity in June and reviewed key considerations including The quality of the retail assets connected with the potential acquisition The strategic fit of the potential acquisition within the Group The Irish economy and real estate investment market The likely sale process and Potential joint venture partners.
Management produced a number of detailed papers to help the Board consider the various aspects of the acquisition opportunity.
In particular the Board assessed various options for funding the acquisition a risk analysis how the assets would be integrated into the Groups portfolio and expected returns.
A number of Board meetings were held to discuss and review the progress of the acquisition project and to approve the next steps.
In between meetings the Chief Executive and other members of senior management kept the Board fully informed of developments.
The Board challenged and scrutinised the rationale for the acquisition and whether it was a good strategic fit considered investor views reviewed pricing and financing assessed the likely approach from other potential bidders and assessed the potential financing and resourcing impact of the transaction on the Group as a whole.
The Board had oversight of the work carried out by the project teams.
This enabled them to ensure to their satisfaction that the underlying assumptions relating to due diligence market conditions and taxation were robust.
The Board approved the recommendation that the Company should acquire the loan portfolio.
During the project Hammersons UK New Business team was supported by the Groups property and operational colleagues as well as internal legal tax treasury and finance functions.
Hammersons external legal team valuer tax advisors and corporate brokers also provided advice and guidance.
On 29 September 2015 the Company announced the jointventure acquisition together with Allianz Real Estate of the Irish loan portfolio for 1.23 billion Corporate Governance Report continued Dundrum Town Centre Dublin 74 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 BOARD VISITS As an important part of the Boards work plan in 2015 two Board meetings were scheduled at locations away from the Companys head office in London  in Leeds in June and in Reading in October.
Such meetings provide an important opportunity for the Board to see the Groups portfolio firsthand and to engage formally and informally with colleagues.
They help the NonExecutive Directors in particular to deepen their knowledge of the Groups operations.
In Leeds the Directors began their visit with a tour of Victoria Quarter and the Victoria Gate development project.
At the meeting the Board received a project update from the projects asset management and development teams.
The background to the project was explained in the presentation providing context and detailing how the strategic decision to create a premium destination influences all design and leasing decisions.
The Board reviewed the timetable and key risks concerning the targeted completion date and letting.
As well as the assets brand plans they also reviewed further opportunities to enhance the development and ensure that the centre opens with an experience NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ENGAGEMENT Following the Board effectiveness review in 2014 it was agreed that there should be as many opportunities as possible for colleagues at all management levels in the Group to meet the NonExecutive Directors.
During 2015 a number of such opportunities allowed the NonExecutive Directors to meet with management and colleagues both formally and informally.
In June the NonExecutive Directors joined the head office team at a celebratory event to mark the opening of the new head office at Kings
The entire Leeds project team attended the Board dinner and site visit during the Boards visit to Leeds in June.
The Oracle shopping centre team attended the Boards site visit when it visited Reading in October and the Board also met the full Reading team at a buffet lunch.
Colleagues from management have also attended and presented at Board meetings enabling the NonExecutive Directors to engage with colleagues across the business.
Overall getting out and about in the business and listening to colleagues talking outside the Board room has given the NonExecutive Directors a useful cultural barometer and an insight into the business that they could get no other way.
Framework.
The day ended with a dinner where the Board and wider team were able to engage informally.
In October the Board held its meeting at the Companys new offices at Aquis House in Reading followed the next day by the annual Board strategy day.
The visit included a tour of the Oracle shopping centre a presentation from the asset and leasing team and centre manager covering the centres history and the vision for its future Product Experience Framework initiatives and sustainability plans marketing opportunities and operations.
The Board also saw a presentation on the project to relocate the head office finance and IT teams to Aquis House in Reading covering how the project was planned and executed and how effectively risks were managed and lessons learnt.
A lunch at the new Reading offices enabled local colleagues to meet and talk to the Board informally.
The Group Executive Committee and a number of senior managers attended a Board dinner in the evening where the Board was able to meet colleagues informally.
The Boards site visit to Victoria Gate Leeds 75 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE YOUR BOARDS YEAR DAVID ATKINS PERSPECTIVE My aim in preparing for this years annual Board strategy day was to get the Board prepared and thinking in advance about key topics for discussion by providing targeted reading material focusing particularly on performance to date and options and trends for the business.
This years strategy day was held in our new offices at Aquis House Reading which gave the Board and especially the NonExecutive Directors an opportunity to meet new colleagues see the style of the new offices and similarities with our London headquarters and get an opportunity to see one of our centres.
Visiting the Oracle shopping centre added an important dimension to the days activities and allowed the Directors to see strategy in action including marketing digital initiatives and new retailer formats and simply experiencing a busy shopping centre firsthand.
Our discussions were structured with pauses for reflection and focused questions to prompt and guide the Directors and provide further support and challenge to the debate.
Important elements of the days debate were an opportunity to look into the future and consider the Irish business environment.
What if scenarios were discussed and we were able to consider the possible consequences of future technological advances on our business and the risks of major disruption to our business model.
In light of our recent Irish acquisition we had a very fruitful discussion led by an invited speaker with expertise in the political economic and business environment in Ireland.
The feedback on the format of this years strategy day was favourable and all the Directors found it useful.
Exploring and challenging different options for the business can be quite tactical but also allows strategic thinking about what could or might happen and how we could orientate the business accordingly.
I think we were all energised by the opportunity to discuss ideas together and importantly the day also helped support working relationships on the Board.
It provided an opportunity for Directors to work together which is harder to replicate in a routine Board meeting.
BOARD STRATEGY DAY Ensuring that the Company delivers its mission to create desirability for its consumers and commercial partners and positive value for all stakeholders depends on the successful implementation of the strategy set by the Board.
While the Groups strategy is continuously discussed and refined throughout the year the Board takes time out of its regular schedule every year to debate and reflect on broader strategic issues.
The objective of the 2015 strategy day was to discuss and evaluate the key decisions which will be required to be made during 2016 in order for the Group to deliver on its stated strategic objectives over the next three to five years.
The agenda for the day included A review of progress against strategy over the last year Corporate Governance Report continued A market overview and latest forecasts for the investment and consumer markets Opportunities arising from emerging trends and technologies Priorities and opportunities for deploying capital and likely challenges and An overview of the Irish market.
In response to comments received in last years Board effectiveness review the structure of the day was refined.
In addition a number of key questions were posed to enable the Board to focus its thinking on specific areas and encourage active discussion.
Insights and ideas generated in this way were further debated and refined and incorporated into the Business Plan for 2016.
Positive feedback was received from the Directors on the structure of the days activities.
The Oracle Reading 76 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 HAMMERSONS APPROACH TO SHAREHOLDER
The Company has a comprehensive investor relations programme.
The Chief Executive the Chief Financial Officer and the Head of Investor Relations meet regularly with institutional shareholders to discuss strategic issues and present the Companys results.
The Company also engages with all shareholders through regular communications the Annual General Meeting and investor relations activities.
The Chairman and the General Counsel and Company Secretary also each have an annual engagement with major shareholders.
BOARD OVERSIGHT The Board is committed to ensuring that the Company engages with shareholders and other key market participants such as research analysts to learn and understand their views.
The Board reviews an investor relations report at each Board meeting.
The
Group Executive Committee also reviews these matters at its monthly meetings.
The investor relations report includes details of The latest share price performance benchmarked against peers Recently published analyst research including analyst views and any changes in analyst forecasts for the Company Any significant changes to the shareholder register Recent investor relations activity such as road shows and conferences and Feedback from institutional investors.
The Chairman also meets with shareholders independently of the Executive Directors.
In April 2015 he met institutional shareholders in London and Amsterdam.
Topics discussed included strategic goals the geographical focus of the Companys portfolio the appropriate size of the Company and governance topics such as the composition of the Board.
Shareholder feedback from these meetings was positive.
The General Counsel and Company Secretary also acts as a focal point for communications on corporate governance matters.
She met or spoke with a number of major shareholders during 2015 to discuss corporate reporting and governance matters.
INVESTOR RELATIONS PROGRAMME The Company continues to make full and transparent disclosure despite the decision taken in 2015 to cease publishing quarterly Interim Management Statements.
As well as the fullyear and halfyear results the Company publishes Regulatory News Service RNS announcements and continues to run a comprehensive investor relations programme.
The Company believes the new approach has worked well and will continue it in 2016.
Hammersons investor relations programme includes the following activities Biannual investor roadshows after fullyear and halfyear results Industry conferences in UK Europe and US Onetoone meetings with management at the request of institutional shareholders Meetings on sustainability with Socially Responsible Investment fund managers Salesforce briefings at leading equities brokers Investor tours of assets organised as necessary accompanied by centre managers and other colleagues Panel discussions with executive management at investor conferences and events An annual Capital Markets Day An annual sustainability report and investor webinar and Bespoke research into themes and trends in the retail sector.
In 2015 the annual Capital Markets Day involved a trip to Elliotts Field Rugby and Victoria Gate Leeds.
It included presentations on how the Company is performing against strategy and progress onsite at Victoria Gate as well as a thorough discussion of the dynamics in the UK retail parks market.
Investor
The Companys website is an important means of communication and a key source of information for shareholders and prospective investors.
It contains RNS announcements a live share price feed and other information including an archive of published results and reports press releases details about the Groups assets and contact information for the Companys operational teams.
Webinars which include the fullyear and halfyear results are streamed live to shareholders and analysts and are available for playback on the website.
In October the Company launched a dividend reunification programme with its registrar Capita.
The programme has successfully reunited a number of shareholders with their unclaimed dividends.
The Company plans to launch a sale and purchase programme during 2016 for shareholders holding small numbers of shares.
The Annual General Meeting provides all shareholders with an important forum where they can put questions to the Board.
The proxy voting results are available shortly after the meeting and are published at site CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 77 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS DEAR SHAREHOLDERS I am pleased to present the Nomination Committee Report which summarises our work during the year.
This report should be read in conjunction with the separate report on page 102 which describes our compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
CHANGES TO THE BOARD A number of Board changes took place during the year.
Pierre
Bouchut was appointed to the Board as a NonExecutive Director in February 2015.
His appointment process led by the Committee was described in last years Annual Report.
Following the Annual General Meeting Tony Watson stepped down after nine years on the Board.
Terry Duddy took on Tonys former role as Senior Independent Director.
In November 2015 the Board was further strengthened by the appointment of Andrew Formica as a NonExecutive Director and he also joined the Audit and Nomination Committees.
The
Committee led the process which resulted in Andrew Formicas appointment.
Spencer Stuart was appointed to facilitate and advise in the process.
Spencer Stuart has no other connection with the Group and is a signatory to the Voluntary Code of Conduct of Executive Search Firms.
Andrews appointment was the culmination of a process which began following the 2013 Board external effectiveness review when the Board concluded that the next two Board appointments should bring further European experience and investment and banking skills to the
The Committee believes this has been achieved with the appointments of Pierre Bouchut and Andrew Formica who bring a range of skills including financial experience to strengthen existing expertise on the Board.
Jacques Espinasse will retire from the Board following the 2016 Annual General Meeting.
The Committee has considered a successor for Jacques role as Chairman of the Audit Committee and decided that Pierre Bouchut has the right mix of skills and experience for the role and recommended Pierres appointment to the Board.
Pierre has confirmed that he is able to make the time commitment required as Audit Committee Chairman and will assume the role following the Annual General Meeting.
BOARD BALANCE AND ARRAY OF SKILLS This year as it does annually the Committee has also reviewed the composition of the Board.
As part of this review the Committee Considered the number of Executive and NonExecutive Directors on the Board and whether the balance is appropriate Reviewed the membership of the Committees Considered the background professions and core skills and experience of the Directors to ensure the right mix of skills Considered and confirmed that all the NonExecutives remain independent and Considered diversity including gender.
Following this review the Committee has concluded that the Board continues to have an appropriate mix of skills and experience to operate effectively.
The Directors collectively bring a range of expertise and experience of different business sectors to Board deliberations which helps to ensure constructive and challenging debate around the boardroom table.
This array of skills is illustrated in chart 61 on the next page.
NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT Ensuring balance and diversity NOMINATION COMMITTEE MEMBERS David Tyler Chairman Pierre Bouchut appointed 13 February 2015 Gwyn Burr Terry Duddy Jacques Espinasse Andrew Formica appointed 26 November 2015 Judy Gibbons Anthony Watson retired 22 April 2015 78 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 SUCCESSION PLANNING Succession planning was a particular area of focus for the Committee during 2015.
The Committee reviewed a formal report on the subject in respect of the Executive Directors and senior colleagues subsequently receiving an update on progress during the year.
Considerations included a review of the Companys plans aiming to ensure that key roles at Board and Group Executive Committee level can be filled by other colleagues on an interim basis.
A review of the talent in the Company was also considered to identify those individuals with the potential to fill more senior roles over the medium and long term.
The Committee acknowledges the size of the organisation means there are not obvious successors for every senior role.
Discussions were also held about more junior individuals with high potential and plans were reviewed to help with their development.
The Committee will continue to focus on this area during 2016.
Chart 64 Annual succession planning process The Committee receives updates on progress during the year.
Executive Directors discuss their longerterm career aspirations with the Chief Executive.
Further opportunities for expanded roles and responsibilities are explored if appropriate.
An annual review of Executive Director and Group Executive Committee GEC roles is undertaken to ensure interim shortterm cover is available in the business for these roles.
Medium and longerterm successors are identified for roles where possible.
The Chief Executive presents a discussion paper to the Committee on the longerterm career aspirations of the Executive Directors.
A review of talent in the wider business is undertaken and GEC members engage with high potential individuals to discuss their career aspirations.
Personal development plans are drawn up.
The Committee reviews succession plans.
High potential individuals are noted and the Committee takes opportunities to get to know these individuals.
Chart 61 Board experience by sector Finance banking fund management Property regeneration projects French market international business Customer service customer behaviours
Digital technology marketing David Tyler Chairman of the Nomination Committee
There are currently two female Directors on the Board representing 18% of its composition.
This will increase to 20% when Jacques Espinasse steps down at the Annual General
As previously stated our aim is to maintain at least this level of female representation on the Board.
However the paramount consideration is to maintain the right mix of skills knowledge independence and experience on the Board.
For that reason recommendations for any future appointments will always be made on merit.
You can read more about the Companys diversity and inclusion strategy on page 51 of the Our People section of the Strategic Report.
NonExecutive Director Executive Director Chart 62
Chart 63 Board balance Note As at 31 December 2015 Female 2 Male 9
Executive 4 NonExecutive 7
BALANCE
79 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE NOMINATION COMMITTEE AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT Overseeing effective controls DEAR SHAREHOLDERS I am pleased to present this report on behalf of the Audit Committee for the year ended 31 December 2015.
This should be read in conjunction with the report on how we have complied with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code which is on page 102.
This is my last report as Chairman of the Committee as I shall be stepping down from the Board at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting on 25 April 2016.
Pierre Bouchut who fulfils the Code requirement of having recent and relevant financial experience will succeed me as Chairman of the Committee.
He has also confirmed that he is able to make the necessary time commitment to the role.
In addition the other members of the Committee also combine knowledge and experience of financial matters financial reporting risk management and internal controls.
The Committee met four times in the year with the meetings at appropriate times in the Companys financial and regulatory reporting cycle.
As I mentioned in the 2014 Annual Report an additional meeting was included in January to allow the Committee extra time to scrutinise and debate the valuation process by the Companys external valuers DTZ Debenham Tie Leung Limited and Cushman and Wakefield LLP the Valuers.
The Committee met privately with the Companys internal and external auditors during the year.
I also met privately with the Valuers to ensure that they were comfortable with the 2015 year end valuation process.
The Executive Directors and other senior managers were invited to attend as appropriate to provide updates on various matters participate in debate and answer questions posed by the Committee.
During the year the Committee paid particular attention to the significant financial judgements in relation to the financial statements and how they were addressed.
Their impact on the Groups results and the remuneration of senior management makes the significant financial judgements particularly important.
The main areas of focus and how the Committee addressed those issues are set out in table 64 on page 81.
Another important aspect of the Committees work during 2015 was to approve an approach and managements plan for tendering for the external auditor which will not include the incumbent auditor Deloitte LLP Deloitte as a participating firm in the process.
Further details of the approach and timetable are provided on page 83 of this report.
The Company is mindful of the Codes new requirements in relation to risk and the monitoring of internal control systems.
During 2015 the Committee and the Board reviewed the Groups Risk Management Framework thoroughly at each Committee meeting.
Having monitored the Groups risk management and internal controls system and having reviewed the effectiveness of material controls the Committee has not identified any significant failings or weaknesses in the Groups control structure during the year.
A further new reporting requirement for 2015 is the Viability
During the year the Committee considered and discussed the requirements for the statement and further details are provided on page 67 in the Strategic Report and on page 83 of this report.
The Committee undertook its annual performance and effectiveness review based on a questionnaire which was completed by the Committee and regular attendees.
The results indicated that the Committee was effective and carrying out its duties.
I am confident that the Committee continues to play a key role in ensuring that the appropriate governance and challenge around risk and assurance is embedded throughout the Group.
I would like to extend my personal thanks to my fellow Committee members for their support.
I would also like to thank Deloitte on behalf of the Board for the continuing high quality of the audit services they have provided to the Group during the year.
Jacques Espinasse Chairman of the Audit Committee AUDIT COMMITTEE MEMBERS Jacques Espinasse Chairman Pierre Bouchut appointed 13 February 2015 Gwyn Burr Andrew Formica appointed 26 November 2015 Judy Gibbons Anthony Watson retired 22 April 2015 80 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 SIGNIFICANT FINANCIAL JUDGEMENTS During the year the Committee considered the appropriateness of significant financial judgements made in connection with the financial statements as set out below Table 64 Significant financial judgement considered How the Committee addressed the issue Valuation of the Group s property portfolio including properties held by joint ventures and associates The valuation of the Groups property portfolio including properties held in the Groups joint ventures or associates is a key risk due to its significance in the context of the Groups net asset value.
Although valuations are conducted by the Valuers and thoroughly reviewed by the auditor the valuation process requires a number of key judgements which are inherently subjective.
The Valuers also value the Groups development properties and these are subject to the same level of review as the investment portfolio.
The Committee has a robust process to satisfy itself that the external valuation of the Groups property portfolio is appropriate.
The Committee recognises that the Group operates in liquid and mature markets in which there are wellestablished valuation practices.
The Committee is also familiar with the processes by which management provides information to the
The Committee reviewed the outcomes of the Valuers valuations challenged their assumptions and was satisfied that the procedures and methodologies used were appropriate.
Current market conditions and recent transactions were reviewed to provide context.
The Valuers were asked to highlight any significant judgements and disagreements with management and the Committee satisfied itself of the Valuers independence.
The
Committee was satisfied that the valuation of the Groups portfolio was prudent and reasonablybased.
Accounting for acquisitions and disposals During the year the Group made a number of acquisitions and disposals including interests in joint ventures and associates.
There are risks in the accounting process for these complex transactions.
The Committee reviewed and challenged managements accounting proposals and key judgements in relation to acquisitions and disposals in particular the acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio see below.
The
Committee was satisfied that the approach adopted was appropriate.
Accounting for premium outlet investments Value Retail and VIA Outlets The Groups premium outlet interests are through investments in Value Retail and VIA Outlets.
These investments are externally managed and due to the complexity of the underlying structures there is a risk of inaccurate and inconsistent reporting.
The Committee reviewed managements paper explaining the accounting treatment for the two investments which is based on the nature of the Groups control over those investments.
For Value Retail VR the Group is able to exert significant influence through its VR Board representation and through the terms of its loan agreements to VR and hence accounts for the investment as an associate.
VIA Outlets is accounted for as a joint venture as the terms of the partnership agreement provide the Group with joint control.
The paper explained managements approach to consolidating the financial information received and the complexities and judgements required to produce the information to incorporate into the Group accounts.
The Committee also reviewed the valuations see above and results of the two investments and was satisfied that the investments had been recognised appropriately.
Accounting for the acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio In October 2015 the Group acquired a portfolio of Irish loans.
The loans were acquired in a 5050 joint venture with Allianz with the Groups total cost being 690 million.
The accounting for this large transaction required consideration of both the Group level and joint venture level accounting for incorporation into the Group accounts.
The Committee reviewed managements paper explaining the proposed accounting treatment for the transaction.
For Group accounting purposes given the control provisions in the joint venture agreement the acquisition is to be equityaccounted as an investment in a joint venture.
The value at 31 December 2015 would be based on the Groups share of the net asset value of the joint venture.
For joint venture accounting purposes the loans are accounted in accordance with IAS39 Financial Instruments  Recognition and Measurement being initially recognised at fair value equating to the cost of the acquisition and subsequently measured at amortised cost.
The Valuers provided a valuation of the secured property assets and the Committee was satisfied with the proposed accounting treatment and in particular that there were no indicators of impairment requiring a full impairment test.
The description of the significant financial judgements above should be read in conjunction with the Auditors Report on page 114 and the significant accounting policies disclosed in note 1 to the accounts on pages 124 to 127 81 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AUDIT COMMITTEE Audit Committee Report continued REVIEW OF EFFECTIVENESS OF THE INTERNAL AUDIT PROCESS As noted in last years Annual Report the Committee determined to carry out a formal review of the effectiveness of the internal auditor EY during 2015.
The internal audit function has been outsourced since 2006 with EY providing internal audit services to the Group for the past two years.
In the second half of 2015 a detailed questionnaire was issued to members of the Committee senior management and those other managers involved in the internal audit procedure.
As part of this review EY and Deloitte were also asked to provide feedback on the Groups current internal audit arrangements.
Questions covered the following areas Understanding and experience Planning and communications and Audit work and reporting.
Responses to the questionnaire were collated and reviewed at the Risk and Controls committee and at the Audit
While the outcome of the review was positive given the increasing scale of the Group the Committee approved a proposal to adopt a new hybrid internal audit provision overseen by a new Risk and Compliance manager.
The new internal audit arrangements will utilise a combination of internal and external resource to enhance and monitor the Groups internal audit procedures.
Each of these audits confirmed that appropriate controls were in place in these areas.
Recommendations for improvement were agreed by management and assigned for implementation.
When
EYs experience of best practice enabled the identification of potential enhancements to existing processes or procedures these were reviewed by the Risk and Controls committee before being approved by the Audit Committee.
FAIR BALANCED AND UNDERSTANDABLE One of the key compliance requirements of a groups financial statements is for the Annual Report to be fair balanced and understandable.
The process for the 2015 Annual Report was enhanced with the establishment of an editorial team made up of members drawn from Group Finance the Company Secretariat Corporate Communications and Marketing all responsible for reviewing the Report.
Regular meetings were held during the preparation and compilation period to ensure balanced reporting and that there were appropriate links between the various sections of the Annual Report.
Extensive verification was carried out to ensure accuracy.
Drafts were reviewed by senior management followed by reviews by the Audit Committee in both January and February 2016.
This provided an opportunity to challenge the fair balanced and understandable assessment and test whether there was an appropriate balance throughout the Annual Report.
Following further discussion the Committee and then the Board were able to confirm that the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable.
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED The Risk and Controls committee sets the internal audit programme by reviewing potential audit topics before they are presented to the Audit Committee for approval.
The Risk and Controls committee supports the Audit Committee as part of the Groups risk management strategy and more information on this committee can be found in the Strategic Report on page 62 and on page 105 in the Code compliance section of this Annual Report.
The internal audit programme for 2015 was compiled by reviewing key risk areas in the Group s risk management framework to determine which would most benefit from a review.
Proposals were debated at the November 2014 Risk and Controls committee and it was agreed that particular attention in 2015 should be focused on areas of change and key business areas.
The Committee then approved the internal audit programme.
The Committee was satisfied that the programme resulted from a thorough review of the Group s key business activities and addressed a number of related topical risk areas.
During the year the Committee monitored the internal audit process through management updates and reviewing reports prepared by the internal auditor Ernst and Y oung LLP EY.
During 2015 audits were carried out on The effectiveness of governance risk management and reporting controls in relation to UK and French development projects The effectiveness of key controls for UK shopping centre operations The controls within the new inhouse property management function in France The effectiveness of key financial controls following the relocation of head office finance and IT functions to Reading and Activities in relation to the Group s digital engagement activities.
82 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 THE VIABILITY STATEMENT The UK Corporate Governance Code has introduced a new requirement for the Board to consider the period over which it is able to conclude that the Company will remain viable.
In developing the Viability Statement the Committee reviewed with management the appropriateness of the Companys choice of and reasons for a fiveyear assessment period.
The Groups current position future plans and potential impact of risks to the business were reviewed including the rationale for the Viability Statement assessment period which was based on The Companys fiveyear planning period A clear strategic focus on retail which has traditionally been less volatile than other property sectors The geographical diversity of the Groups property portfolio Fiveyear timescales which support major developments A stable income stream A strong capital base and Leases which contain a fiveyear rent review pattern.
Having reviewed and considered the proposed draft Viability Statement the Committee approved it for inclusion in the 2015 Annual Report.
The Viability Statement together with further details of the Groups approach and the Going Concern statement appear on page 67 of the Strategic Report.
December 2015  April 2016 Meetings with audit firms to determine their capabilities and prospective audit partners.
May 2016 Confirmation of participation by audit firms.
Agreement of short list of audit firms by the selection subcommittee.
June 2016 Issue of tender documents and supporting information to the participating firms.
Management meetings and site visits in the UK and France with prospective firms.
August  September 2016 The selection subcommittee to evaluate tender documents and receive presentations from prospective firms.
Recommendation of the new auditor by the subcommittee to the Audit Committee.
October 2016 Recommendation for appointment of the new auditor to the Board for approval.
Induction period commences with successful firm shadowing Deloitte during 2016 year end process.
EXTERNAL AUDIT TENDERING APPROACH AND PLAN Over recent years there has been a significant change to the rules regarding the provision of external audit services for listed companies.
In the new regulations under the transitional arrangements the latest date by which the Company is required to tender and appoint a new external auditor is for the financial year beginning 1 January 2021.
Deloitte or its predecessor firms have been the Companys external auditor since the Company was founded in 1942.
In last years Annual Report the Company stated that management and the Committee were satisfied with both Deloittes quality of service and their independence and objectivity.
During 2015 the Committee considered tendering and rotation options in advance of the required rotation date of 2021.
Following a decision to undertake a tender process in 2016 management presented a proposed plan which the Committee approved and recommended to the Board.
The Committee recommended that a tender process should be undertaken in 2016 to align with the current Deloitte audit partner rotation and strategic priorities of the Group.
The new appointment would be effective for the 2017 audit.
Having complied with the requirement to undertake a tender process for the provision of the external audit the Companys statement of compliance with the Competition and Markets Authority Order can be found on page 111.
AUDIT TENDER PROCESS  TIMELINE During the Committee meeting in November key steps in the timetable for the audit tender plan were agreed and approved including the appointment of a selection subcommittee of the Audit Committee to lead the process chaired by Pierre Bouchut.
The key steps in the timetable are set out below.
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE EXTERNAL AUDIT PROCESS The Committee recognises the importance of having a high calibre external audit.
It therefore assessed the effectiveness of the external audit process during the year monitoring Deloittes fulfilment of the agreed audit plan and its reports on the conclusions of the arising significant financial judgements.
The
Committee received regular feedback from management on the level of support provided by Deloitte and it determined that Deloitte provides an appropriate level of service.
In forming its opinion of the independence and objectivity of Deloitte the Committee reviewed The independence safeguards operating within Deloitte Deloittes Audit Transparency Report for the year ended 31 May 2015 and The extent of nonaudit services provided by Deloitte.
The Committee has concluded that the external audit was carried out effectively and efficiently with the necessary objectivity and independent challenge in respect of the 2015 financial year and it has recommended to the Board the reappointment of Deloitte at the 2016 Annual General Meeting.
NONAUDIT SERVICES The Committee recognises the need for objective and independent auditors and how such objectivity might be or appear to be compromised through the provision of nonaudit services.
Details of the policy on the provision of nonaudit services are included in the section of the Annual Report on compliance with the Code on page 106 and the full policy is available at site Details of Deloittes remuneration including remuneration for nonaudit services are also on page 106.
83 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AUDIT COMMITTEE DEAR SHAREHOLDERS I am pleased to present the Directors Remuneration Report for the year ending 31 December 2015.
REMUNERATION OUTCOME AIP You will have read earlier in this Annual Report that the Company delivered another strong performance in 2015 with adjusted earnings per share growing to 26.9 pence up 13% on the prior year.
Although the Company has final information on its own Total Property Return TPR the Remuneration Committee Committee uses estimated information regarding benchmark performance for the purposes of reporting the likely bonus AIP payment and based on these estimates TPR is showing a strong performance against that benchmark.
No AIP payments for TPR are made until the actual benchmark data becomes available and we have included in the implementation report the final outturn on this measure for 2014 AIP .
AIP is also payable in respect of the Group operational targets of growth in likeforlike net rental income and reduction in the cost to income ratio.
The final component of AIP is personal performance which is assessed not only for specific personal objectives but also includes an assessment of behaviours based on the Companys values as well as how each Executive Director has led and maximised the contribution of colleagues.
The average pay out for AIP for 2014 was 66% and using estimated information for TPR the strong financial performance of the Company in 2015 is reflected in a higher average pay out of 77%.
One of the responsibilities of the Committee is to ensure that Executive Directors remuneration reflects achievements against longterm strategic success.
Table 65 at the end of this letter shows the aggregate of short and longterm variable reward taken home by each Executive Director in 2015.
This consists of the AIP for 2014 that was paid in 2015 and the 2011 Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP awards that vested in 2015.
These amounts differ from the statutory disclosure in table 66 which includes within it elements earned but not paid in 2015.
Also shown in table 65 is the ontarget and maximum opportunity for each of these areas of variable reward.
Although Executive Directors had an opportunity to earn substantial variable reward in 2015 the actual amount earned generally represented approximately 88% of on target and 32% of maximum.
It is worth noting that table 87 on page 97 shows the remuneration of the Chief Executive over the last seven years.
In the last four years the average amount earned represented 72% of maximum for AIP and 26% of maximum for LTIP .
REMUNERATION OUTCOME LTIP It was disappointing to note that yet again there was no material vesting of the LTIP in 2015.
One of the reasons for this was that the LTIP awards made in 2011 measure TPR relative to an All Property Index although the Company disposed of its nonretail assets in 2012.
The Committee debated in April 2015 whether it was appropriate to amend the TPR performance measures for the 2011 and 2012 LTIP awards to reflect this but concluded that there should be no change to those performance measures.
It is likely that the 2012 LTIP also will not vest under the TPR performance measure although there will be a partial vesting under the Absolute Net Asset Value performance measure.
The TPR performance measure was changed for awards made from 2013 onwards and the Committee is hopeful that LTIPs will start to vest under the TPR performance measure reflecting the steady performance of the Company in delivering total property returns to shareholders.
Rewarding longterm performance
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE MEMBERS Gwyn Burr Chairman Terry Duddy Judy Gibbons David Tyler Anthony Watson retired 22 April 2015 84 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 2016 PAY APPROACH With effect from 1 April 2016 and after no increases in 2015 Executive Director base salaries will increase by 2.5% in line with that of colleagues generally.
One particular point to note is that you will have read in the Strategic Report that during 2015 the Company acquired a portfolio of loans secured on various Irish retail properties.
At the time of this report the timetable to convert these loans to direct ownership and management of the real estate was not agreed.
The
Committee considered how it could measure property returns for assets in Ireland and decided that there was no appropriate Irish benchmark.
As such it has decided to measure the performance of Irish assets against the same index used for UK assets but will review and if it considers appropriate exercise its discretion in the 2016 AIP and 2016 LTIP if it considers that comparison of Irish assets against a UK index has led to an unintended outcome.
REMUNERATION REVIEW IN 2016 The current LTIP was approved by shareholders in 2007 and expires in May 2017 .
In the period since its approval the Company has changed its focus to retail property and shareholders and institutional groups have provided greater and more specific insight into their views on appropriate structures for overall executive reward.
During 2016 the Committee will review the rules of the LTIP scheme and prepare a new scheme for approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting AGM in 2017 .
The Remuneration Policy is in the third year of its operation and will also be reviewed and will require to be presented for approval by shareholders at the AGM in 2017 .
In both cases we will consult with major shareholders and appropriate institutional groups.
I hope that you will agree with the Committee that the outturn for Executive Directors reflects the performance of the Company and that you will support the Directors Remuneration Report at the AGM.
Gwyn Burr Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Table 65 Variable reward taken home by Executive Directors in 2015 The table below shows the total variable remuneration received by Executive Directors during 2015.
It compares this with the ontarget and maximum opportunities for the Annual Incentive Plan AIP that was paid in 2015 and the Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP that vested in 2015.
The table is provided for illustrative purposes only and should be considered in conjunction with the explanatory footnotes.
Explanatory footnotes Actual AIP corresponds to the Executive Directors single figure remuneration table for 2014 table 66 on page 86.
Actual LTIP corresponds to the LTIP that vested in 2015 table 72 on page 90 and is different to the numbers shown in table 66 which shows some elements earned but not paid in 2015.
The AIP maximum opportunity has been calculated as 200% of 2014 base salary.
The ontarget opportunity is calculated as 50% of the maximum.
The LTIP maximum opportunity has been calculated by multiplying the aggregate of the shares that vested and lapsed in 2015 refer to tables 80 to 83 from page 94 by the relevant share price.
The relevant share prices used in the calculation are 672.80 pence for David Atkins Peter Cole and JeanPhilippe Mouton and 654.40 pence for Timon Drakesmith.
The ontarget opportunity is calculated as 25% of the maximum.
David Atkins Peter Cole
Drakesmith
JeanPhilippe
Mouton
AIP
Ontarget opportunity 59telMaximum opportunity 119telActual 77telLTIP Ontarget opportunity 37telMaximum opportunity 1478 1061 932 414 Actual   96
Ontarget opportunity 96telMaximum opportunity 2672 1931 1748 1072 Actual 77tel85 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS SINGLE FIGURE REMUNERATION TABLE Table 66 below shows the remuneration of the Executive Directors for the year ended 31 December 2015 and the comparative figures for the year ended 31 December 2014.
Table 66 Executive Directors single figure remuneration table Salary Benefits Annual bonus AIP Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP Pension Total David Atkins 597 594 15 2tel 179 177 2162 1568 Peter Cole 435 431 13 2tel 131 203 1573 1182 Timon Drakesmith 408 406 15 1tel177 82 81 1538 1262 JeanPhilippe Mouton 296 329 23 2tel Total 1736 1760 66 88 2681 2307 129tel6237 4867 Salary JeanPhilippe Moutons base salary for 2014 and 2015 was 408000.
Benefits Taxable benefits available to all Executive Directors include a company car or a car allowance and private medical health insurance.
JeanPhilippe Mouton receives a seniority allowance and welfare contribution.
UK Executive Directors are entitled to participate in the Companys allemployee share plan arrangements SIP and
JeanPhilippe Mouton participates in a profitsharing scheme in France and receives an employers contribution to a French employee savings scheme.
During the year no payments were made to Executive Directors for expenses other than those incurred wholly and directly in the course of their employment.
AIP Achievements against Company financial targets and personal objectives for 2015 resulted in an average entitlement for Executive Directors of approximately 77% of the maximum bonus opportunity.
However the data above estimates the Total Property Return TPR outcome because not all relevant data was available for that measure at the date of this report.
Further information concerning the annual bonus outcomes for 2015 can be found on page 89 .
In the 2014 Annual Report the TPR element was estimated at IPD1.1% resulting in a payout level estimated at 40% for that measure.
The final closing measurement for TPR during 2014 was IPD1.09% resulting in a final payout level of 39 .75%.
The data for 2014 has therefore been updated to reflect the actual TPR outcomes.
LTIP 2014 figures in the 2014 Annual Report included estimated numbers for the TPR performance measure as final data was not available at the date of that report.
The estimated value was nil.
The 2014 figures reflect the actual outcome using final TPR data.
The actual outcome was nil.
The basis for calculating the values attributable to the 2014 and 2015 LTIP figures above is set out in table 67 on page 87 .
Estimates are for reporting purposes only.
Final figures for 2015 will be presented in the 2016 Annual Report.
Pension Details of pension provision and the method for calculating the pension figures above can be found on page 92.
Other David Atkins has external nonexecutive appointments disclosed in the Directors Biographies on page 108.
He does not receive a fee for any of these appointments.
Timon Drakesmith acts as the Companys representative as a nonexecutive director of Value Retail PLC.
He does not receive a fee for this appointment.
JeanPhilippe Moutons salary benefits annual bonus and pension contributions are paid in euro.
This data has been converted into sterling using the average exchange rate for 2015 1 1.378.
Equivalent data for 2014 has been converted at the exchange rate for that year 1 1.241.
For further details see note 1 to the accounts on page 125.
2015 DIRECTORS REMUNERATION IMPLEMENTATION REPORT denotes audited information 86 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Basis for calculating the values attributable to each performance measure for the L TIP Table 67 provides a breakdown of the values attributable to each of the performance measures that when aggregated produce the single figure for the LTIP column in the Executive Directors single figure remuneration table on page 86.
The basis for each assumption used is also detailed.
Details of the LTIP award that vested in 2015 can be found in table 72 on page 90.
Table 67 Values attributable to each performance measure in the LTIP Total Shareholder Return
Total Property Return
Absolute Net Asset Value Absolute NAV Total David Atkins     449  449 Peter Cole     322  322 Timon Drakesmith 96 177   307  403 177 JeanPhilippe Mouton     121  121 TSR The 2015 figure for Total Shareholder Return TSR is for the 2011 LTIP awards that vested in 2015.
The performance period for awards to David Atkins Peter Cole and JeanPhilippe Mouton ended on 1 April 2015.
Performance conditions for this measure were not satisfied resulting in a nil vesting.
For Timon Drakesmith the performance period for the 2011 LTIP award ended on 6 June 2015 and vested on 8 June 2015.
Performance conditions for this measure were partially satisfied.
The value is calculated using actual performance and the share price on the date of vesting.
TPR The 2015 figures for Total Property Return TPR are estimated values for the 2012 LTIP awards scheduled to vest in 2016 where the performance period ended on 31 December 2015 as final IPD data was not available at the date of this report.
The estimate compares the Companys actual TPR figures with the best available information.
The estimated vesting for TPR is 0%.
Final IPD data will be available in April 2016 and the award will vest in that month.
The actual 2015 TPR figure will be reported in the 2016 Annual Report.
The 2014 figures for TPR where the performance period ended on 31 December 2014 were estimated nil in the 2014 Annual Report as some IPD data was not available at the date of that report.
When IPD data became available the performance conditions for this measure resulted in a nil vesting.
Absolute
NAV
The 2015 figures for Absolute Net Asset Value Absolute NAV are the values for the 2012 LTIP awards that are scheduled to vest in 2016 where the performance period ended on 31 December 2015.
This measure is calculated to vest at 70.4%.
The 2015 figure has been estimated using the average share price over the three months prior to 31 December 2015.
BASE SALARY In February 2016 the Remuneration Committee determined that an increase in base salaries of 2.5% was appropriate for Executive
This increase is broadly in line with increases in salaries awarded across the Group.
A number of factors influenced this decision including the effect of inflation and evidence of salaries within the real estate sector.
Executive remuneration benchmarking data was also considered in making the decision to approve the increase which takes effect from 1 April 2016.
Table 68 Executive Directors base salary 2016 and 2015 David Atkins 612 597 Peter Cole 446 435 Timon Drakesmith 418 408 JeanPhilippe Mouton 303 296 87 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ANNUAL INCENTIVE PLAN AIP Table 69 details the performance measures and composition of financial targets for the AIP .
This is the Companys annual bonus scheme which is awarded as a mixture of cash and deferred shares.
The deferred shares element of the AIP is granted as an award under the Deferred Bonus Share Scheme DBSS which is not subject to further performance conditions.
Further details on the AIP and the DBSS are in the Remuneration Policy summary on page 174.
AIP awards partly reflect the Companys performance with reference to a number of financial Key Performance Indicators KPIs.
Further detail on the KPIs can be found in the section Delivering value for our stakeholders on page 18.
Table 69 AIP targets performance measures and composition of financial targets Year of award Maximum award potential Proportion of award paid in cash Proportion of award paid as deferred shares Weighting of performance measures Composition of financial targets 2016 award to be paid in 2017 Up to 200% of salary 60% 40% subject to a twoyear vesting period 70% for Group financial targets 25% based on adjusted Group earnings per share 25% based on Total Property Return relative to IPD 10% based on growth in Net Rental Income 10% based on Cost ratio 30% for personal objectives 2015 award to be paid in 2016 Up to 200% of salary 60% 40% subject to a twoyear vesting period 70% for Group financial targets 25% based on adjusted Group earnings per share 25% based on Total Property Return relative to IPD 10% based on growth in Net Rental
10% based on Cost ratio 30% for personal objectives 2014 award paid in 2015 Up to 200% of salary 60% 40% subject to a twoyear vesting period 70% for Group financial targets 30% based on adjusted Group earnings per share 30% based on Total Property Return relative to IPD 5% based on growth in Net Rental
5% based on Cost ratio 30% for personal objectives
Ontarget opportunity is 50% of the maximum opportunity.
For awards made in 2016 IPD is the Investment Property Databanks aggregate fullyear UK Retail Property 75% and France Retail Property 25% indices.
Net Rental Income NRI is the percentage growth in the Group net rental income calculated on a likeforlike basis.
Cost ratio is the Groups total operating costs as a percentage of gross rental income.
In the opinion of the Board AIP performance conditions and personal objectives for 2016 are commercially sensitive.
They are therefore not disclosed here but will be described in the 2016 Annual Report.
The 2015 performance conditions and personal objectives are not considered commercially sensitive and are set out in tables 70 and 71 on page 89 .
For awards made in 2014 and 2015 IPD is the Investment Property Databank s aggregate fullyear UK Retail Property 70% and France Retail Property 30% indices.
2015 Directors remuneration implementation report continued 88 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 AIP BONUS OUTCOME PERFORMANCE CONDITIONS FOR 2015 Details of the AIP outcome for 2015 are provided in table 70 below.
The TPR performance is measured relative to the IPD UK Retail Property 70% and France Retail Property 30% indices.
Annual data for the IPD UK Retail Property and IPD France Retail Property index is not available at the date of this report.
Accordingly the closing measurement for TPR for the year to 31 December 2015 is based on managements best estimate using available data see pages 58 and 59 for property returns data.
Table 70 AIP outcomes for 2015 Performance measure and description Entry threshold condition to earn any bonus % of vesting for that condition achieved at entry threshold 2015 target to achieve full vesting for that condition closing performance payout level Adjusted EPS 23.9p 20% 27.2p 26.9p 85% TPR estimated outcome IPD0.5% 25% IPD2.5% IPD2.5% 100% NRI 1.5% 0% 3.5% 2.3% 40% Cost ratio 22.0% 0% 21.4% 23.1% 0% The element of bonus determined for each performance measure is calculated by interpolating the actual performance achieved for each measure against the scale between entry threshold for vesting and the target to achieve full vesting.
AIP EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS PERSONAL OBJECTIVES Executive Directors are able to earn up to 30% of the maximum award for achieving personal objectives.
These are designed to focus not only on the delivery of the Business Plan and strategic priorities for 2015 refer to Our business model in action on pages 6 and 7 but also include an assessment of behaviours based on the Companys values as well as each Executive Directors capability in managing colleagues to maximise their contribution.
Where it is possible to apply a meaningful measurement personal objectives incorporate environmental social and governance parameters.
The personal objectives for each Executive Director during 2015 were not disclosed in the 2014 Annual Report as the Board considered them to be commercially sensitive.
Payout levels were 90% for David Atkins 90% for Peter Cole 90% for Timon Drakesmith and 90% for JeanPhilippe Mouton.
Table 71 Executive Directors personal objectives The Executive Directors are responsible for the leadership of the Company and management of colleagues to ensure that the actual financial performance of the Group meets the expectations of the Board set at the start of the year.
Executive Directors were responsible in 2015 for the following significant strategic priorities Identifying and executing opportunities for acquisition including in relevant new territories and premium outlets Recycling capital by disposal of identified assets Completing four developments and progressing key London pipeline developments Continuing focus on asset management and developing venues in line with Product Experience Framework Reinforcing Culture and Values and finalisation and roll out of rebrand exercise Optimising the funding structure to support the growth plans and Ensuring that the portfolio is managed in a sustainable manner consistent with the Sustainability Strategy.
89 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS LONG TERM INCENTIVE PLAN LTIP The structure of the LTIP awards as well as the performance measures and conditions attached to them is closely aligned with the Companys strategic focus.
The awards incorporate a balance of relative and absolute measures and the Remuneration Committee believes that this balance remains appropriate.
Table 72 below provides a breakdown of the value of the LTIP awards that vested in 2015.
The number of shares vested includes notional dividend shares accruing to the date of vesting.
Further details on the LTIP structure are set out in tables 73 to 75 below.
Table 72 LTIP awards vested in 2015
TPR
NAV
Vesting date Share price on vesting
Number of shares vested Value of award that vested
Number of shares vested Value of award that vested
Number of shares vested Value of award that vested
David Atkins 01042015 Peter Cole 01042015 Timon Drakesmith 08062015 642.00 31.4% 14896 96       96 JeanPhilippe Mouton 01042015
The performance period for TSR for David Atkins Peter Cole and JeanPhilippe Mouton ended on 1 April 2015 and for Timon Drakesmith on 6 June 2015.
The value of the TSR measure in respect of 2015 is included in the single figure remuneration table for 2015 table 66 on page 86.
The performance period for TPR and Absolute NAV ended on 31 December 2014.
The value of these measures is included in the single figure remuneration table for 2014 table 66 on page 86.
L TIP structure summary and details of performance measures and conditions The structure of the 2016 awards remains the same as in 2015 with awards returning to the normal level of 200% of salary as specified in the Remuneration Policy.
The comparator group for the Total Shareholder Return TSR measure focuses on major European retail real estate companies.
The Total Property Return TPR measure compares performance against a retailonly property index.
With regard to the absolute performance measure earnings per share EPS continues to align the interests of Executive Directors with those of shareholders.
Table 73 LTIP structure summary Year of grant Level of award
Performance measures Weighting of performance measures TSR comparator group 2016 200% of salary
TSR
TPR
EPS
33.33% 33.33% 33.33% Altarea British Land Capital and Regional Intu Properties Eurocommercial Klpierre Land Securities London Metric Segro Shaftesbury Unibail Rodamco New River Retail Wereldhave and the FTSE 100 Index 2015 150% of salary
TSR
TPR
EPS
33.33% 33.33% 33.33% Altarea British Land Capital and Regional Intu Properties Eurocommercial Klpierre Land Securities London Metric Segro Shaftesbury Unibail Rodamco New River Retail and the FTSE 100 Index 2014 100% of salary
TSR
TPR
EPS
33.33% 33.33% 33.33% Altarea British Land Capital and Regional Intu Properties Corio Eurocommercial Klpierre Land Securities London Metric Segro Shaftesbury UnibailRodamco Wereldhave and the FTSE 100 Index 2013 200% of salary
TSR
TPR
EPS
33.33% 33.33% 33.33% Altarea British Land Capital and Regional Intu Properties Corio Eurocommercial IVG Klpierre Land Securities London Metric Segro Shaftesbury UnibailRodamco Wereldhave and the FTSE 100 Index 2012 200% of salary
TSR
TPR
Absolute NAV 33.33% 33.33% 33.33% British Land Capital and Regional Intu Properties Corio Derwent London Great Portland Estates IVG Klpierre Land Securities Quintain Estates Segro Shaftesbury St Modwen Properties UnibailRodamco and the FTSE 100 Index
Corio merged with Klpierre on 31 March 2015 and delisted from Euronext Amsterdam.
For the purposes of the TSR comparator group Corio is retained with performance measured to the date of delisting.
The EPRA NAREIT Developed Europe Index is substituted for Corio from the date of its delisting to the end of the performance period.
2015 Directors remuneration implementation report continued 90 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Table 74 LTIP performance measures TSR Performance is measured over the fouryear period from the date of grant in comparison with a comparator group including some European real estate companies.
See table 73 on page 90 for details.
TPR Performance is measured over the four financial years commencing with the year of grant and in comparison with a composite index For awards granted from 2013 Investment Property Databanks UK Annual Retail Property Index and France Annual Retail Property Index.
For awards granted in 2012 Investment Property Databanks UK Annual All Property Index and France Annual All Property Index.
The relative composition of the indices may vary with each grant to ensure that it reflects the Groups portfolio.
EPS
Absolute
NAV
Performance is measured over the four financial years commencing with the year of grant.
It is calculated with reference to the European Public Real Estate Association EPRA Best Practices recommendations For awards granted from 2013 the performance measure is EPS growth above the benchmark.
From 2015 the benchmark is a blend of UK and French Consumer Price Inflation CPI whereas in 2012 to 2014 the benchmark was Retail Price Inflation RPI.
For awards granted in 2012 the performance measure is Absolute NAV growth above the benchmark.
Absolute NAV is calculated as adjusted shareholders funds divided by the adjusted number of shares in issue.
The relative composition of the indices may vary with each grant to ensure that it reflects the Groups portfolio.
Table 75 LTIP performance conditions TSR Vesting threshold 0% 25% 100% All award years Less than TSR of medianranked entity in comparator group Equal to TSR of medianranked entity in comparator group Equal to TSR of upper quartileranked entity in comparator group Vesting for intermediate performance between median and upper quartileranked entities is on a linear scale between 25% and 100%.
For awards made from 2014 onwards interpolation is between the TSR of the median and upper quartileranked companies on a straightline basis on performance of those positions between 25% and 100%.
Vesting under the TSR performance condition is subject to the Remuneration Committees satisfaction that the Companys underlying performance has been satisfactory in comparison with that of the FTSE Real Estate sector.
TPR Vesting threshold 0% 25% 55% 85% 100% All award years Less than
Equal to
Index 0.5% average p.
Index 1.0% average p.
Index 1.5% average p.
Vesting for intermediate performance between these levels will be prorated on a straightline basis between 25% and 100%.
EPS
Absolute
NAV
Vesting threshold 0% 25% 100% 2015 and 2016 awards EPS measure Less than a UK and French CPI blend 3.0% p.
Equal to or more than a UK and French CPI blend 3.0% p.
Equal to or more than a UK and French CPI blend 7 .0% p.
2013 and 2014 awards EPS measure Less than RPI 3.0% p.
Equal to or more than RPI 3.0% p.
Equal to or more than RPI 7 .0% p.
2012 award Absolute NAV measure Less than RPI 3.0% p.
Equal to or more than RPI 3.0% p.
Equal to or more than RPI 7 .0% p.
Vesting for intermediate performance between these levels will be prorated on a straightline basis between 25% and 100%.
91 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS PENSION Executive Directors receive a salary supplement in lieu of pension benefits.
Salary supplements for the year ended 31 December 2015 are detailed in table 76 below and are reflected in the single figure remuneration table on page 86 table 66.
All salary supplements paid to Executive Directors in lieu of pension benefits are subject to deductions as required for income tax and social security contributions in the UK and France.
JeanPhilippe Mouton also participates in a legacy collective supplementary defined contribution pension scheme operated by Hammerson Asset Management France which is the French company that employs him and which makes employer contributions at the annual statutory limit.
Salary supplements received by all Executive Directors and the pension benefit received by JeanPhilippe Mouton do not qualify for AIP purposes or entitlements under the LTIP .
Table 76 Salary supplements in lieu of pension benefits David Atkins 179 177 Peter Cole 131 203 Timon Drakesmith 82 81 JeanPhilippe Mouton 67 74
David Atkins and Peter Cole each receive a salary supplement of 30% of base salary.
Timon Drakesmith receives a salary supplement of 20% of base salary.
JeanPhilippe Mouton receives a salary supplement of 80000 2014 80000 and a legacy collective supplementary defined benefit scheme contribution of 12264 2014 12105 which is included in his total shown above.
Executive Directors deferred pension benefits Following the closure of the Companys defined benefit pension scheme Scheme in 2014 David Atkins and Peter Cole remain eligible for a deferred pension based on their pensionable salary and service at the point they ceased to accrue further benefits in the Scheme.
The normal retirement age under the Scheme is 60 members may draw their pension from the age of 55 subject to actuarial reduction and the Trustees consent.
Further information concerning the Scheme can be found in note 6 to the accounts on page 133.
Table 77 below shows the total accrued benefit at 31 December 2015 representing the annual pension that is expected to be payable on retirement given the length of pensionable service and salary of each Executive Director at the date each ceased to accrue further benefits under the Scheme.
The increase in accrued benefit earned during the year represents the statutory increase applied as a result of changes in the Consumer Price Index CPI.
Such increases are subject to statutory limits.
Table 77 also shows the transfer values of Executive Directors accrued entitlements under the Scheme calculated under the Companies Act 2006.
The figures represent the value of assets that the Scheme would need to transfer to another pension provider on transferring the Schemes liability in respect of each Executive Directors pension benefits.
The figures do not represent sums paid or payable to individual Executive Directors but represent a potential liability of the Scheme.
The statutory disclosures are based on required assumptions.
Any increase or decrease in transfer value over the year represents a change in the transfer value assumptions that the Scheme applies.
Table 77 Executive Directors accrued pension benefits and transfer values Total accrued benefit at 31 December Transfer value at 31 December of total accrued benefit David Atkins 83 82 1497 984 Peter Cole 248 245 5342 3744 2015 Directors remuneration implementation report continued 92 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS SINGLE FIGURE REMUNERATION TABLE Table 78 below shows the remuneration of NonExecutive Directors for the year ended 31 December 2015 and the comparative figures for the year ended 31 December 2014.
No payments were made during the year to NonExecutive Directors for expenses other than those incurred wholly and directly in the course of their appointment.
The benefits disclosed in table 78 below relate to the reimbursement of travel and accommodation expenses incurred in attending Board meetings.
The gross value has been disclosed.
In accordance with the Remuneration Policy the tax arising will be settled by the Company.
Table 78 NonExecutive Directors remuneration for the year ended 31 December 2015 Committee Membership and other responsibilities Fees Benefits Total Audit Committee
Committee
Remuneration
Committee Other David Tyler Chairman Member Chairman 320 320 2  322 320 Pierre Bouchut Member Member 53  5  58 Gwyn Burr Member Member Chairman Terry Duddy Member Member Senior Independent Director 67 60   67 60 Jacques Espinasse Chairman Member Andrew Formica Member Member 6    6 Judy Gibbons Member Member Member John Hirst Anthony Watson Member Member Chairman Senior Independent Director Total Notes Appointed 13 February 2015.
Replaced Anthony Watson as Senior Independent Director from 22 April 2015.
Appointed 26 November 2015.
Retired 23 April 2014.
Anthony Watson retired from the Board on 22 April 2015 and received a departing gift which cost 4150 within the limits of the Remuneration Policy.
The value above is the gross value.
FEES PAYABLE TO NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Table 79 below shows the annual fees payable to NonExecutive Directors.
No additional fees are payable for chairing or becoming a member of the Nomination Committee.
The Chairman does not receive any additional fee for being a member of any of the Committees.
Where changes occur to a NonExecutive Directors appointment status or responsibility fees are prorated.
This is reflected in the single figure remuneration table.
NonExecutive Directors fees were last increased in July 2013.
It is anticipated that the Company will review Chairman and NonExecutive Director fees during 2016.
Table 79 NonExecutive Director fees for 2015 and 2016 Base fees 000 Additional fees 000 Year Chairman
Director base fee
Independent
Director
Chair of
Committee
Audit
Committee member Chair of
Committee
Remuneration
Committee member 2015 and ACTUAL AGGREGATE TOTAL REMUNERATION ALL DIRECTORS The figures shown in the single figure remuneration table for Executive Directors in table 66 on page 86 and for NonExecutive Directors in table 78 above have been rounded to the nearest thousand.
The actual aggregate total remuneration being salaryfees benefits and bonus for all Executive Directors and NonExecutive Directors during 2015 was 5180388 2014 4844153.
93 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS SHARE PLAN INTERESTS INCLUDING SHARE OPTIONS Tables 80 to 83 below set out the Executive Directors interests under the Deferred Benefit Share Scheme DBSS the Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP and the Sharesave scheme.
Awards under the DBSS and Sharesave scheme are not subject to any performance conditions other than continued employment on the vesting date.
The LTIP awards are subject to performance conditions details of which can be found on page 91.
The TPR element of any bonus payment to Executive Directors including the deferred shares element awarded under the DBSS is made only when all IPD index data is available for calculation of actual performance against the TPR performance measure.
The DBSS B award below is that part of the award payable when final TPR data is available.
Face values shown in tables 80 to 83 below are calculated by multiplying the number of shares granted during 2015 by the relevant share price.
For the DBSS the average share price for the three business days preceding the award is used.
For the LTIP  the average share price for the five business days preceding the award is used.
Notional dividend shares accruing are not included in the face value calculations for either scheme.
Face value for the Sharesave scheme is calculated by reference to the exercise price of options granted in 2015.
Awards to UK Executive Directors under the DBSS and since 2012 for the LTIP are made in the form of nil cost share options.
All awards up to and including those made in 2013 accrue notional dividend shares to the date of transfer.
Awards made from 2014 onwards accrue notional dividend shares to the date of vesting.
The Sharesave scheme does not accrue notional dividend shares.
For French tax reasons LTIP awards granted to JeanPhilippe Mouton are in the form of conditional awards of free shares.
Notional dividend shares accrue to the date of vesting in respect of 2014 LTIP awards and subsequent awards.
For the DBSS notional dividend shares accrue to the date of transfer in respect of 2013 awards and to the date of vesting for subsequent awards.
Table 80 Date of original award Date from which options exercisable Expiry date Held at 1 January
Notional dividend shares accrued during 2015
Lapsed or forfeited during 2015
December
Grant price in pence exercise price for
Face value of awards granted during 2015 David Atkins DBSS 11032013 Mar15 Mar20 85537  2482 DBSS 03032014 Mar16 Mar21 46926  1362 DBSS A 03032015 Mar17 Mar22  37 334 1083   38417 678.00 253 DBSS B 28042015 Apr17 Apr22  8437 97   8534 675.00 57 183258 310 LTIP 01042011 na na 3724  219700
02042012 Apr16 Apr19 303807  8816   312623 LTIP 02042013 Apr17 Apr20 255363 7 410   262773 LTIP 01042014 Apr18 Apr21 108748 3155   111903 LTIP 26032015 Mar19 Mar22  130901 1515   132416 684.10 895 819715 895 Sharesave 05042012 May15 Oct15 2735   2735 Sharesave 27 032015 May 18 Oct18  1665    1665 540.40 9 Table 81 Peter Cole DBSS 12032012 Mar15 Mar20 48175  1398   49573
11032013 Mar15 Mar20 63485 1842   65326 DBSS 03032014 Mar16 Mar21 33690 978   34668 DBSS A 03032015 Mar17 Mar22  24893 DBSS B 28042015 Apr17 Apr22  6148 181401 210 LTIP 01042011 na na 155059 2674  157733 LTIP 02042012 Apr16 Apr19 218117 6330   224447 LTIP 02042013 Apr17 Apr20 183336 LTIP 01042014 Apr18 Apr21 79237 LTIP 26032015 Mar19 Mar22  95380 591125 652 Sharesave 10 042010 May15 Oct15 4980   4980 2015 Directors remuneration implementation report continued 94 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Table 82 Date of original award Date from which options exercisable Expiry date Held at 1 January
Notional dividend shares accrued during 2015
Lapsed or forfeited during 2015
December
Grant price in pence exercise price for
Face value of awards granted during 2015 Timon Drakesmith
12032012 na na 38478  663 39141
11032013 Mar15 Mar20 58486  1009 59495 DBSS 03032014 Mar16 Mar21 32086  931 DBSS A 03032015 Mar17 Mar22  28403 824   29 227 678.00 193 DBSS B 28042015 Apr17 Apr22  5766 66   5832 675.00 39 68076 231 LTIP 06062011 na na 139952 2413 14896 127469 LTIP 02042012 Apr16 Apr19 207730 6028   213758 LTIP 02042013 Apr17 Apr20 174606 LTIP 01042014 Apr18 Apr21 74319 LTIP 26032015 Mar19 Mar22  89460 560402 612 Sharesave 05042012 May17 Oct17 4588     4558 Table 83 JeanPhilippe Mouton DBSS 11032013 Mar15 Mar20 18633 322 18955 DBSS 03032014 Mar16 Mar21 24331 706   25037 DBSS A 03032015 Mar17 Mar22  12278 DBSS A 12032015 Mar17 Mar22  6337 DBSS B 28042015 Apr17 Apr22  4125 48363 153 LTIP 01042011 na na 61483    61483 LTIP 02042012 Apr16 Apr19 84426     84426 LTIP 02042013 Apr17 Apr20 138717     138717
01042014 Apr18 Apr21 61421 1782   63203 LTIP 26032015 Mar19 Mar22  65905 762 353013 450
The opening balance for awards held at 1 January 2015 has been adjusted to account for a rounding error in calculating the number of notional dividend shares that accrued during 2014.
The opening balance for awards held at 1 January 2015 has been adjusted to reflect an administrative error whereby notional dividend shares were not accrued during 2014 in respect of the dividend paid in August 2014.
JeanPhilippe Moutons entitlement to awards arising under the LTIP and DBSS is calculated in euro.
The prevailing exchange rate at grant is used to determine the number of shares to award.
On 12 March 2015 JeanPhilippe Mouton was granted an additional award under 2015 DBSS A award to correct an administrative error made in the original award.
The opening balance for the award held at 1 January 2015 has been adjusted to reflect an administrative error whereby notional dividend shares were not accrued during 2014.
95 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Executive Directors SIP interests at 31 December 2015 The Executive Directors interests in ordinary shares of the Company under the Share Incentive Plan SIP at 31 December 2015 are shown in table 84 below.
The shares are held under a SIP trust.
JeanPhilippe Mouton is not eligible to participate in the SIP .
Table 84 Executive Directors SIP interests Total SIP shares 1 January 2015
Matching shares awarded Free shares awarded
Total SIP shares 31 December David Atkins 12154    353 12507 Peter Cole 13480    391 13871 Timon Drakesmith 4678 280 280  143 5381
Due to an administrative error the number of Peter Coles SIP interests at 31 December 2014 was understated in the 2014 Annual Report.
The reconciliation resulted in a restatement of SIP shares accruing to Peter Cole.
Accordingly the opening figure for 1 January 2015 has been corrected.
Partnership shares may be purchased by means of a lump sum or by regular monthly investment during 2015.
Timon Drakesmith purchased partnership shares through regular monthly investment.
DIRECTORS SHAREHOLDINGS Tables 85 and 86 show the beneficial interests in the ordinary shares of the Company held by all Directors who were in office during the year ended 31 December 2015.
For Executive Directors the table also shows actual share ownership compared with the share ownership guidelines full details of which can be found in the Remuneration Policy summary on page 174.
NonExecutive Directors are encouraged to acquire a shareholding in the Company.
Table 85 Executive Directors shareholdings 1 January 31 December 12 February Guideline on share ownership as % of salary Actual beneficial share ownership as % of salary Guideline met David Atkins 363968 367056 367056 150% 369% Yes Peter Cole 272072 277461 277461 100% 383% Yes Timon Drakesmith 219313 280080 280184 100% 412% Yes JeanPhilippe Mouton 249767 240891 240891 100% 488% Yes
As at and based on the share price of 600 pence on 31 December 2015.
The change in share interests for Timon Drakesmith from 31 December 2015 to 12 February 2016 is due to share purchasesawards made under the SIP on 4 January 2016 52 shares and 4 February 2016 52 shares.
Table 86 NonExecutive Directors shareholdings 1 January 31 December David Tyler 25000 25000 Pierre Bouchut na Gwyn Burr 5000 5000 Terry Duddy 40000 40000 Jacques Espinasse 17235 17884 Andrew Formica na 15000 Judy Gibbons 4000 4115 Anthony Watson 12000 na
Between 1 January 2015 and 12 February 2016 the serving NonExecutive Directors beneficial interests above remained unchanged.
Andrew Formicas holding was purchased on 24 November 2015 prior to his appointment as a Director.
Anthony Watson retired on 22 April 2015.
His beneficial interest at that time was 12000 shares.
In addition he had an interest as at 22 April 2015 of 60000 nominal 6.875% sterling bonds due 2020.
2015 Directors remuneration implementation report continued 96 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 OTHER DISCLOSURES CONCERNING REMUNERATION Remuneration of the Chief Executive over the last seven years Table 87 shows the remuneration of the holder of the office of Chief Executive for the period from 1 January 2009 to 31 December 2015.
Table 87 Chief Executives remuneration history Year Notes Total remuneration
LTIP vesting 2015 1 2162 77.3% 2014 2 1568 65.3% 2013 2216 56.2% 51.6% 2012 2451 88.9% 52.6% 2011 1515 51.7% 2010 1594 68.2% 2009 David Atkins 3 242 55.0% 2009 John Richards 4 895 48.8% 49.4%
The total remuneration and annual bonus figures for 2015 include certain estimated values for the LTIP and AIP vesting.
See the Executive Directors single figure remuneration table 66 on page 86 for details.
The total remuneration reported in the 2014 Annual Report contained estimates the numbers given here are the actual values.
See table 66 on page 86.
David Atkins became Chief Executive on 1 October 2009  having been an Executive Director since 2007 .
The figure for 2009 has been prorated accordingly.
John Richards retired as Chief Executive on 30 September 2009 .
All numbers are expressed as a percentage of the maximum that could have vested in that year.
Remuneration for the Chief Executive compared with all other employees of the Hammerson group Table 88 shows the percentage change from 31 December 2014 to 31 December 2015 in base salary taxable benefits and bonus for the Chief Executive compared with all other employees of the Hammerson group.
Table 88 Percentage change in the Chief Executives base salary taxable benefits and bonus Change % Notes Salary Benefits Annual bonus Total David Atkins 12 0.5% 0.2% 19.0% 10.9% Total Group 123 3.7% 0.6% 5.4% 1.8%
The percentage movement in annual bonus is based on calculations that incorporate an estimated value for the TPR performance measure within the AIP .
The calculation of the percentage change in total remuneration excludes pensions and LTIP .
David Atkins has been excluded from the Group calculation.
Data for the Group calculation includes all employee bonuses.
Payments in euro have been converted at a constant exchange rate of 11.378.
The Group calculation uses a weighted average headcount for the year.
Employees received an average salary increase of 2% during 2015.
T otal Shareholder Return Chart 89 below shows the total shareholder return in respect of the Companys ordinary shares of 25 pence each for the seven years ended 31 December 2015 against the return of the FTSE EPRANAREIT UK Index which comprises shares of the Companys peers.
The total shareholder return is rebased to 100 at 31 December 2008.
The other points plotted are the values at intervening financial year ends.
Chart 89 Total Shareholder Return 31 Dec 2008 Hammerson plc 5tel250 31 Dec 2009 31 Dec 2010 31 Dec 2011 31 Dec 2012 31 Dec 2013 31 Dec 2014 31 Dec 2015 FTSE EPRANAREIT UK Source Thomson Reuters 31 December 2008  100 97 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Relative importance of spend on pay Table 90 below shows the Companys total employee costs compared with dividends paid.
The Company did not buy back any of its own shares during 2015.
Table 90 Total employee costs compared with dividends paid Employee costs
2015 48.8m 165.2m 2014 44.7m 139.5m Difference 9.2% 18.4%
These figures have been extracted from note 4 Administration expenses to the accounts on page 132.
These figures have been extracted from note 9 Dividends to the accounts on page 135.
Payments to past Directors There were no payments to past Directors in 2015.
Payments for loss of office There were no payments for loss of office to past Directors in 2015.
Anthony Watson received a discretionary gift on retiring as a Director as detailed in the NonExecutive Directors single figure remuneration table 78 on page 93.
Directors service agreements and letters of appointment Executive Directors service agreements are terminable on 12 months notice by either party.
Dates of service agreements for UK Directors are David Atkins 11 January 2008 Peter Cole 28 February 2002 and Timon Drakesmith 18 January 2011.
JeanPhilippe
Mouton was appointed as an Executive Director on 1 January 2013.
His service agreement is dated 25 March 2013.
Further details on the terms of the Executive Directors service agreements can be found in the Remuneration Policy which was approved by shareholders at the 2014 Annual General Meeting.
A copy of the Remuneration Policy is available on the Companys website at site NonExecutive Directors are appointed by letters of appointment.
Appointments are terminable on three months notice by either party.
Jacques Espinasse has announced his intention to retire at the 2016 AGM.
All Directors are subject to election or reelection at the Annual General Meeting.
Table 91 NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment NonExecutive Director Date of original appointment to the Board Commencement date of current term Unexpired term as at April 2016 David Tyler 12 January 2013 12 January 2016 2 years 8 months Pierre Bouchut 13 February 2015 13 February 2015 1 year 9 months Gwyn Burr 21 May 2012 21 May 2015 2 years Terry Duddy 3 December 2009 3 December 2015 2 years 7 months Jacques Espinasse 1 May 2007 1 May 2013 1 month Andrew Formica 26 November 2015 26 November 2015 2 years 7 months Judy Gibbons 1 May 2011 1 May 2014 1 year 2015 Directors remuneration implementation report continued 98 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 ADVISORS A number of advisors provided services to the Remuneration Committee during the year.
FIT Remuneration Consultants LLP FIT was appointed by the Remuneration Committee on 17 August 2011.
FIT provides advice on reward structures and levels and other aspects of the Companys remuneration policy.
FIT is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and complies with their code of conduct.
However to avoid any conflict of interest the terms of engagement available on request to shareholders specify that FIT will only provide advice expressly authorised by or on behalf of the Remuneration Committee.
Additionally where instructions are taken from Company employees on behalf of the Remuneration Committee FIT ensures that the Remuneration Committee is kept informed of their broad scope.
The fees paid to FIT during 2015 which were charged on their standard terms were 68127 excluding VAT 2014 84277  excluding VAT.
FIT did not provide any other services to the Company during 2015.
The Remuneration Committee remains satisfied that all advice was objective and independent.
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP HSF provides the Company with legal advice and Lane Clark and Peacock LLP LCP provides actuarial advice to the Company.
Advice from both firms is made available to the Remuneration Committee where it relates to matters within its remit.
The Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer and Human Resources Director attend meetings by invitation.
They are not present during discussions concerning their own remuneration.
The General Counsel and Company Secretary is the Secretary to the Remuneration
The Chief Executive senior Human Resources staff and the General Counsel and Company Secretary provided advice to the Remuneration Committee on matters relating to the Remuneration Policy and Company practices.
STATEMENT OF VOTING AT ANNUAL GENERAL MEETINGS Table 92 below shows votes cast by proxy at the Annual General Meetings AGM held on 22 April 2015 in respect of the Directors Remuneration Report and on 23 April 2014 in respect of the Directors Remuneration Policy.
Shareholders raised no issues concerning remuneration during either Annual General Meeting.
Table 92 Statement of voting on remuneration 2014 AGM and 2015 AGM Votes For Votes Against Total votes cast Votes withheld
Number of shares % of shares voted
Number of shares To receive and approve the 2014 Directors Annual
Remuneration Report 2015 AGM
580955686 98.98% 5957192 1.02% 74.83% 2481061 To receive and approve the Directors Remuneration Policy 2014 AGM 534234020 97.11% 15898048 2.89% 77.17% 175583
Based on issued share capital of 784311111 ordinary shares on 20 April 2015 which was the record date for the 2015 AGM and 712902066 ordinary shares on 17 April 2014 which was the record date for the 2014 AGM.
Represents 0.32% of the issued share capital on the record date for the 2015 AGM and 0.02% of the issued share capital on the record date for the 2014 AGM.
99 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS IMPLEMENTATION OF REMUNERATION POLICY IN 2016 Shareholder approval for the Remuneration Policy was received at the 2014 Annual General Meeting and the Company is not making changes to the Remuneration Policy that require shareholder approval at the 2016 Annual General Meeting.
A statement on the implementation of the Remuneration Policy during 2016 is presented in table 93.
The remuneration scenarios shown in the Remuneration Policy have been updated on page 101 of this Annual Report to reflect planned implementation for 2016.
For ease of reference a summary of the main provisions of the Remuneration Policy can be found on pages 174 to 177 .
The objective of the Remuneration Committee in implementing the Remuneration Policy during 2016 is to ensure that the design of Executive Directors remuneration promotes the longterm success of the Company and that all performancerelated elements are transparent stretching and rigorously applied.
This is in line with Main Principle D .1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
The variable pay arrangements reflect the Companys strategic priorities taking suitable account of environmental social and governance risk and corporate social responsibility factors.
Variable pay structures include provision for malus and clawback.
In implementing the Remuneration Policy the Remuneration Committee will continue to take into account factors such as remuneration packages available within comparable companies the Company s overall performance internal relativities achievement of corporate objectives individual performance and experience published views of institutional investors and general market trends and performance.
Table 93 Summary of planned implementation of the Remuneration Policy during 2016 Policy element Implementation of the Remuneration Policy during 2016 Base Salary Details on page 87 Increases to current salaries for the Executive Directors will take effect from 1 April 2016.
Pension
Details on page 92 All Executive Directors will receive a salary supplement by way of pension provision.
Benefits No changes to current arrangements are proposed for 2016.
Annual Incentive Plan AIP and deferral under the Deferred Bonus Share Scheme DBSS Details on page 88 The AIP maximum for Executive Directors in 2016 will remain at 200% of base salary.
Performance measures for the AIP in 2016 remain weighted 70% towards Group financial targets and 30% towards personal objectives.
Group financial targets comprise 25% adjusted Group earnings per share 25% Total Property Return relative to IPD 10% the percentage growth in likeforlike Group Net Rental Income and 10% Cost ratio.
40% of AIP vesting for 2016 will be deferred by making an award of shares under the DBSS with a deferral period of 2 years.
Long Term Incentive Plan Details on page 90 Award levels for Executive Directors for 2016 will reflect the normal Remuneration Policy level of 200% of base salary.
Performance measures for LTIP awards to be granted in 2016 are unchanged.
Allemployee arrangements The opportunity to participate in allemployee arrangements continues on the same basis as all staff in the UK or France as appropriate.
Share Ownership
Remain at 150% of base salary for the Chief Executive and 100% of base salary for all other Executive Directors.
Chairman s and
Directors fees Chairmans fee  320000 p.
NonExecutive Directors fees  55000 p.
There are additional fees paid to the Senior Independent Director the Chairmen of the Audit and Remuneration Committees and to the members of these
It is anticipated that the Company will review Chairman and NonExecutive Director fees during 2016.
2015 Directors remuneration implementation report continued 100 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Table 95 Assumptions 2016 Executive Director remuneration scenario
Fixed  Compares base salary benefits pension and participation in the UK allemployee share plans.
Base salary is prorated for 2016 incorporating the increase to be applied from 1 April 2016.
Benefits are as shown in the single figure remuneration table for 2015 table 66 on page 86.
However the amount received by JeanPhilippe Mouton under the profit sharing plan has been excluded from his 2015 benefits figure for these purposes see OnTarget and Maximum below.
Pensions reflect salary supplements in lieu of pensions based on prorated 2016 base salary for UK Executive
The pension figure for JeanPhilippe Mouton is as shown on the single figure remuneration table on page 86.
Base Salary
Pension
Total Fixed David Atkins Peter Cole Timon Drakesmith JeanPhilippe Mouton OnTarget Based on the reward that the Executive Director would receive if performance was in line with expectation excluding share price appreciation and dividends AIP consists of ontarget levels equal to 50% of bonus maximum.
LTIP consists of the threshold level of vesting being 25% of the face value of the award.
France profit sharing JeanPhilippe Mouton only consists of ontarget levels equal to 50% of the current capped vesting level of 18774.
Maximum Based on the maximum remuneration receivable excluding share price appreciation and dividends AIP consists of the maximum bonus 200% of base salary.
LTIP assumes maximum vesting of awards 200% of base salary for 2016.
France profit sharing JeanPhilippe Mouton only assumes maximum vesting at the current capped vesting level of 18774.
By order of the Board Sarah Booth General Counsel and Company Secretary 12 February 2016 Fixed On target Maximum Fixed On target Maximum Fixed On target Maximum Fixed On target Maximum 100% 47% 35% 18% 25% 37% 38% 100% 47% 35% 25% 37% 38% 100% 45% 37% 24% 38% 38% 18% 18% 18% 100% 45% 37% 24% 39% 37% Chart 94 Scenarios 2016 Implementation David Atkins Peter Cole Timon Drakesmith JeanPhilippe Mouton Fixed remuneration Annual variable remuneration Longterm incentives 101 HAMMERSON.
OM
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS This section of the Corporate Governance Report details the Companys compliance with the Principles set out in the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code published on 17 September 2014 which is available at www. rc.
Report as a whole which is set out on pages 69 to 111.
The Company has complied in full with the requirements of the Code during 2015.
A.
LEADERSHIP
A.1 The role of the Board The Board is collectively responsible to the Companys shareholders for the Companys longterm success and the delivery of its longterm strategic and operational objectives.
The Board sets the strategic direction governance and values of the Group and has ultimate responsibility for its management direction and performance.
The Board operates through a sound risk management and internal control system details of which can be found on pages 62 to 63 and 104 to 105 The Board has a formal schedule of matters specifically reserved for its decision which can be accessed at site The Board has regular scheduled meetings throughout the year.
It held six of these in 2015.
Additional Board conference calls are held between the formal Board meetings as required.
The table below includes details of attendance at formal Board meetings and three scheduled Board conference calls during 2015.
NonExecutive Directors are encouraged to communicate directly with Executive Directors and senior management between formal Board meetings.
All Directors are expected to Attend all meetings of the Board and of those Committees on which they serve Attend the Annual General Meeting AGM and Devote sufficient time to the Companys affairs to enable them to fulfil their duties as Directors.
A.2 Division of responsibilities The Chairman and Chief Executive have separate roles and responsibilities which are clearly defined documented and approved by the Board.
The Chairman David Tyler is responsible for the operation of the Board.
The Chief Executive David Atkins is responsible for leading and managing the business within the authorities delegated by the Board.
A.3 The Chairman The Chairman sets the Boards agenda and ensures that important matters  strategic issues in particular  receive adequate time and attention at meetings.
The annual Board strategy day is dedicated to considering the future direction of the Company at the start of the businessplanning process.
Further details of the 2015 Board strategy day can be found on page 76 When he became Chairman in 2013 David Tyler was considered independent.
In accordance with the Code the continuing test of independence for the Chairman is not necessary.
COMPLIANCE WITH THE UK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE Table 96 Board and Committee meetings attendance Board Audit Remuneration Nomination David Tyler 99  55 22 David Atkins 99 Peter Cole Timon Drakesmith 99 JeanPhilippe Mouton Gwyn Burr 99 44 55 22 Pierre Bouchut Terry Duddy 99 44 55 22 Jacques Espinasse 99 44  22 Andrew Formica Judy Gibbons Anthony Watson Peter Cole was unable to attend one Board conference call due to a clash of meetings.
JeanPhilippe Mouton was unable to attend one Board meeting due to family commitments.
Pierre Bouchut was appointed to the Board on 13 February 2015.
He was unable to attend one Board meeting due to prior business commitments.
Andrew Formica was appointed to the Board on 26 November 2015.
He was unable to attend one Audit Committee and one Nomination Committee meeting due to travel disruption.
Judy Gibbons was unable to attend one Audit Committee meeting due to a conflicting prior commitment.
Anthony Watson resigned following the AGM on 22 April 2015.
102 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 A.4 NonExecutive Directors The Senior Independent Director Terry Duddy is available to address shareholders concerns on governance.
When and if necessary he can also address concerns on other issues that have not been resolved through the normal channels of communication with the Chairman Chief Executive or Chief Financial Officer or in cases when such communications would be inappropriate.
He can also deputise for the Chairman in his absence act as a sounding board for the Chairman and advise and counsel all Board colleagues.
The Senior Independent Director also chairs an annual meeting of Executive and NonExecutive Directors without the Chairman to appraise the Chairmans performance and address any other matters which the Directors might wish to raise.
The Senior Independent Director conveys the outcome of these discussions to the Chairman.
Anthony Watson retired from the Board following the 2015 AGM when Terry Duddy succeeded him as Senior Independent Director.
The Chairman meets with the NonExecutive Directors as necessary but at least twice a year without the Executive Directors present.
If any Director has concerns about the running of the Company or a proposed action which cannot be resolved these will be recorded in the Board minutes.
No such concerns arose in 2015.
B.
EFFECTIVENESS
B.1 The composition of the Board During the year the Board reviewed the overall balance of skills experience independence and knowledge of the Board and Committee members.
The Board is satisfied that the NonExecutive Directors each of whom is independent from management and has no material or other connection with the Company are able to exercise independent judgement.
The Board reviews the independence of its NonExecutive Directors each year in accordance with the criteria set out within the Code.
Jacques Espinasse will retire following the 2016 AGM.
There are currently seven NonExecutive Directors including the Chairman and four Executive Directors on the Board.
B.2 Appointments to the Board The Nomination Committee which is chaired by the Chairman and comprises all NonExecutive Directors leads the process for Board appointments and makes recommendations to the Board.
The Committees terms of reference can be found at site Further details of the work of the Nomination Committee can be found on pages 78 to 79 Disclosures on diversity can be found on pages 51 and 79 During the year the Nomination Committee appointed an independent executive search firm Spencer Stuart which has no other connection with the Company to identify nonexecutive director candidates.
Following a thorough search and interview process Pierre Bouchut and Andrew Formica were identified as potential candidates and recommended to the Board by the
Pierre Bouchut was appointed as a NonExecutive Director and member of the Audit and Nomination Committees on 13 February 2015.
Andrew Formica was appointed as a NonExecutive Director and member of the Audit and Nomination Committees on 26 November 2015.
B.3 Commitment The Board is satisfied that all the NonExecutive Directors are able to devote sufficient time to the Companys business.
NonExecutive Directors are advised when appointed of the time required to fulfil the role and asked to confirm that they can make the required commitment.
Each individuals commitment to their role is reviewed annually as part of their annual appraisal.
Letters of appointment for the NonExecutive Directors are available for inspection at the AGM.
Positions held by NonExecutive Directors are set out on pages 108 and 109 All Executive Directors are encouraged to take a nonexecutive position in another company or organisation.
These appointments are subject to the approval of the Board which considers particularly the time commitment required.
B.4 Development All Directors receive an induction programme when appointed to the Board which takes into account their qualifications and experience.
All Directors are kept informed of changes in relevant legislation and regulations and of changing financial and commercial risks.
Where appropriate the Companys legal advisors and external auditor assist in this regard.
Executive
Directors are also subject to the Companys annual performance development review process in which their performance is reviewed against predetermined objectives and their personal and professional development needs are considered.
The Chairman undertakes an annual appraisal of NonExecutive Directors performance in which their training and personal development requirements are reviewed and agreed.
NonExecutive Directors are also encouraged to attend seminars and undertake external training at the Companys expense in areas considered appropriate for their professional development.
These include issues relevant to the Board and the Committees to which they belong.
103 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE COMPLIANCE WITH THE CODE B.5 Information and support The Directors have access to independent professional advice at the Companys expense as well as to the advice and services of the General Counsel and Company Secretary who advises the Board on corporate governance matters.
The Board and its Committees receive highquality uptodate information for them to review in good time before each meeting.
The General Counsel and Company Secretary ensures that Board procedures are followed and that the Company and the Board operate within applicable legislation.
The General Counsel and Company Secretary is also responsible for facilitating Directors induction assisting with identifying and enabling appropriate training and Board performance evaluation.
The appointment and removal of the General Counsel and Company Secretary is a matter requiring Board approval.
B.6 Evaluation The General Counsel and Company Secretary undertook an internal performance evaluation of the Board and its Committees in 2015.
The next externally facilitated performance evaluation of the Board and its Committees will take place in 2016.
The Chairman carries out a formal performance evaluation individually with each NonExecutive Director every year to review whether the NonExecutive Director continues to contribute effectively and demonstrates commitment to the role.
The NonExecutive Directors led by the Senior Independent Director are responsible for the annual evaluation of the Chairmans performance.
The Chairmans performance evaluation for 2015 was carried out in early 2016 and the Board was subsequently updated.
Following the internal Board effectiveness review in 2015 the Directors concluded that the Board and its Committees operate effectively and that each Director continues to contribute effectively and demonstrates commitment to the role.
More details of the internal Board effectiveness review are provided on page 69 B.7 Election and reelection All Directors are subject to election at the first AGM following their appointment.
Andrew Formica will stand for election at the AGM in April 2016 and the Board recommends his election.
It is planned that Jacques Espinasse will retire from the Board at the conclusion of the AGM in April 2016.
All other Directors who are subject to annual reelection are submitting themselves for reelection at the 2016 AGM.
Biographical details for all Directors are on pages 108 and 109 and also in the Notice of Meeting for the 2016 AGM Further discussion on the balance of skills and experience on the Board is provided on page 78
ACCOUNTABILITY
C.1 Financial and business reporting The Board considers that the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
An explanation of the Groups strategy and business model is available on pages 1 to 48 A statement of the Directors responsibilities regarding the financial statements is set out on page 113 C.2 Risk management and internal control The Board has established processes for monitoring sound risk management and internal control which allow it to review the effectiveness of the systems in place within the Group.
A robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company has been carried out during the year.
The Directors have assessed the prospects of the Company over a fiveyear period and have a reasonable expectation that the Company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of this assessment.
Further details about the Viability Statement can be found on pages 67 and 83 The Going Concern Statement is on page 67 An assessment of the principal risks facing the Company is set out on pages 64 to 67 and performance metrics are set out on pages 18 to 20 Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code continued 104 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 The Groups risk management and internal control systems are designed to Safeguard assets against unauthorised use or disposition Ensure the maintenance of proper accounting records Provide reliable information Identify and as far as possible mitigate potential impediments to the Group achieving its objectives and Ensure compliance with relevant legislation rules and regulations.
It must be recognised that the Groups internal controls provide reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Management has established a risk management framework and put in place sufficient procedures necessary to enable the Directors to report in compliance with the Code on internal controls.
These involve the analysis evaluation and management of the key risks to the Group including a review of all material controls.
They also include plans for the continuity of the Companys business in the event of unforeseen interruption.
Having monitored the Groups risk management and internal controls and having reviewed the effectiveness of material controls the Audit Committee has not identified any significant failings or weaknesses in the Groups internal control structure during the year.
The Risk and Controls committee supports the Audit Committee.
It is not a committee of the Board but of executives from across the business and is chaired by the Chief Financial Officer.
The committee reports its activities to the Group Executive
The committees role is to Promote the application of the risk management framework throughout the business Encourage proactive discussion of risk around the business Manage the annual internal audit programme Consider the results and recommendations of reviews and Monitor the implementation of recommendations.
The Audit Committee regularly reports to the Board on key risks to the Group.
The Board allocates responsibility for the management of each key risk to the Executive Directors and senior executives across the Group.
The Audit Committee assists the Board in fulfilling its responsibilities relating to the adequacy and effectiveness of the control environment and the Groups compliance.
Throughout the year the Committee monitored the effectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control systems including material financial operational and compliance controls.
In particular the Committee reviewed The external auditors management letters Internal Audit reports including monitoring the implementation of recommendations arising from them Reports on the system of internal controls and the risk management framework The Companys approach to compliance with legislation and the prevention of fraud Business continuity and cyber risk and Gifts and entertainment and expenses registers.
Further explanation of the Companys approach to risk management is on pages 62 to 67 105 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE COMPLIANCE WITH THE CODE C.3 Audit Committee and Auditors The Audit Committee comprises five independent NonExecutive
It holds four scheduled meetings per year organised around the Companys reporting schedule.
During 2015 the Audit Committee met four times.
The Audit Committee Chairman regularly reports details of the work carried out by the Audit Committee to the Board in accordance with its terms of reference.
Jacques Espinasse the Chairman of the Audit Committee has been determined by the Board to have recent and relevant financial experience as required by the Code.
Jacques Espinasse will retire as Chairman of the Audit Committee and as a Non Executive Director at the conclusion of the 2016 AGM.
He will be succeeded by Pierre Bouchut.
The Chairman of the Board the Chief Executive the Chief Financial Officer and other members of the senior finance management team together with senior representatives of Deloitte LLP Deloitte are invited to attend all or part of meetings as appropriate.
In order to fulfil its duties as defined in its terms of reference the Audit Committee receives presentations and reviews reports from the Groups senior management consulting as necessary with Deloitte.
The Audit Committee meets at least once a year with Deloitte and with the internal auditor Ernst and Young LLP EY which undertakes the majority of the Companys internal audit reviews with no Company management present.
DTZ Debenham Tie Leung Limited and Cushman and Wakefield LLP the Valuers and Deloitte have full access to one another and the Chairman of the Committee meets with the Valuers and Deloitte as part of the halfyear and yearend valuations to ensure each is satisfied that there has been a full and open exchange of information and views.
The Audit Committee has regard to the recommendations of the Financial Reporting Council on regular and open communications between audit committees and external auditors and it has concluded that the relationship with Deloitte meets these recommendations.
Details of the composition of the Audit Committee are set out on page 80 The experience and background of members of the Audit Committee are on pages 108 to 109 The Audit Committee assists the Board in fulfilling its responsibilities in relation to Ensuring that management has systems and procedures in place to ensure the integrity of financial information Reviewing the Companys internal audit arrangements Maintaining an appropriate relationship with the Groups external auditor Deloitte and Reviewing the effectiveness objectivity and independence of Deloitte including the scope of work and the fees paid to Deloitte.
The Committee is responsible for developing implementing and monitoring the Groups policy on the engagement of the external auditor to supply nonaudit services.
The principal requirements of the policy are that The external auditor may not provide a service which places it in a position where it may be required to audit its own work such as book keeping or valuation services and Some services may be provided in specific or exceptional circumstances and may include tax compliance work due diligence and propertyrelated consultancy.
Each occasion is specifically assessed and authorised by an Executive Director up to a limit of 50000 and above that level by the Chairman of the Audit Committee.
Deloittes remuneration for the year ended 31 December 2015 was Consideration is given to the nature of and remuneration received for other services provided by Deloitte to the Company.
Confirmation is also sought that the fee payable for the annual audit is sufficient to enable Deloitte to perform its obligations in accordance with the scope of the audit.
See note 4 to the accounts on page 132 for further information on Deloittes remuneration During 2015 nonaudit services provided by Deloitte to the Company included acting as reporting accountants for taxrelated work and reviewing the Groups sustainability reporting.
Fees for nonaudit services provided to the Company by Deloitte for the year ended 31 December 2015 were 0.1m.
The Audit Committee considered the reappointment of Deloitte and recommended it to the Board.
Deloitte is willing to be reappointed as the external auditor to the Company and a resolution concerning Deloittes reappointment will be proposed at the 2016 AGM.
Further details are provided in the terms of reference for the Audit Committee and the full policy on nonaudit services available at site The Committee oversees and monitors the policies and procedures which form the core components of the Groups adequate procedures under the Bribery Act including the Code of Conduct and Whistleblowing policy.
The Code of Conduct explains how employees are expected to fulfil their responsibilities by acting in the best interests of the Group and in line with its corporate and financial objectives.
A summary of the Code of Conduct is available at site The Whistleblowing policy sets out the procedures for employees to report any suspicions of fraud financial irregularity or other malpractice.
No reports of any such matters were received during the year.
The Company subscribes to the independent charity Public Concern at Work so that employees may have free access to its helpline.
Details of how the Audit Committee has discharged its responsibilities during the year are provided in the Audit Committee Report on pages 80 to 83 Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code continued 106 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 D.
REMUNERATION
D .1 The level and components of remuneration The principal responsibility of the Remuneration Committee is to determine and agree with the Board the overall remuneration principles and the framework for remuneration of the Executive Directors the General Counsel and Company Secretary and the other members of the Group Executive Committee.
The terms of reference for the Committee are reviewed annually.
The Chairman of the Committee reports regularly on the Committees activities at Board meetings.
The Directors Remuneration Report can be found on pages 84 to 101 D .2 Procedure When determining policy on executive remuneration the Remuneration Committee takes into account all factors which it deems necessary.
These include Relevant legal and regulatory requirements The provisions of the Code and Associated guidance.
Further details are provided in the terms of reference for the Remuneration Committee which are available at site Details of the composition of the Remuneration Committee are on page 84 Details of advisors who provided services to the Remuneration Committee during the year are on page 99 During 2015 no individual was present when his or her own remuneration was being determined.
E.
RELATIONS WITH SHAREHOLDERS E.1 Dialogue with shareholders The Company actively engages with shareholders.
Throughout 2015 the Company attended a wide variety of meetings presentations and road shows.
The Board receives reports of meetings with institutional shareholders together with regular market reports and brokers reports which enable the Directors to understand the views of shareholders.
The Board takes account of corporate governance guidelines of institutional shareholders and their representative bodies such as the Investment Association and the Pensions and Life Savings Association formerly National Association of Pension Funds or NAPF.
Hammersons website contains information of interest to both institutional and private shareholders.
Further details about relations with shareholders can be found in the Corporate Governance Report on page 77 and in the Directors Remuneration Policy available at site E.2 Constructive use of general meetings At general meetings the proxy appointment form gives shareholders options either to direct their proxy vote for each resolution or against the resolution or to withhold their vote.
The Company will ensure that the proxy appointment form and any announcement of the results of a vote will make it clear that a vote withheld is not a vote in law it will therefore not be counted when calculating the proportions of votes that were for and against the resolution.
All valid proxy appointment forms are properly recorded and counted.
After the vote has been counted information is given on the number of proxy votes for and against each resolution and the number of shares representing withheld votes both at the general meeting and on the Companys website.
Notice of a general meeting is despatched to shareholders at least 14 days in advance.
Separate resolutions are proposed on each substantially separate issue.
When the Board is of the opinion that a significant proportion of the votes at any general meeting is cast against a resolution the Company will explain when announcing the results of the vote the actions it intends to take to gain an understanding of the reasons behind the result.
107 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE COMPLIANCE WITH THE CODE David Tyler Chairman age 63 Appointed to the Board 12 January 2013 and appointed Chairman on 9 May 2013.
Committee membership Remuneration Committee and Chairman of the Nomination Committee.
Other appointments Chairman of J Sainsbury plc and Domestic and General Insurance plc.
Past appointments Finance director of GUS plc and senior financial and general management roles with Christies International plc County NatWest Limited and Unilever PLC.
Chairman of 3i Quoted Private Equity plc and Logica plc.
Nonexecutive director of Burberry Group plc Experian plc and Reckitt Benckiser Group plc.
David Atkins Chief Executive age 49 Appointed to the Board 1 January 2007 and appointed Chief Executive on 1 October 2009 .
Other appointments Member of the executive board of the European Public Real Estate Association.
Member of the British Council of Shopping Centres BCSC executive board and trustee of the BCSC Educational Trust.
Member of the policy committee of the British Property Federation.
Director and Trustee of the Reading Real Estate Foundation.
Peter Cole Chief Investment Officer age 57 Appointed to the Board 1 October 1999 .
Past appointments President and general council member of the City Property Association.
Timon Drakesmith Chief Financial Officer age 50 Appointed to the Board 30 June 2011.
Other appointments Nonexecutive director of Value Retail
Chairman of VIA Outlets advisory and investment committees and of the British Property Federations finance committee.
Past appointments Finance director of Great Portland Estates plc and the MK Electric division of Novar plc and group director of financial operations of Novar plc.
Other financial roles at Credit Suisse Barclays and Deloitte Haskins and Sells.
JeanPhilippe Mouton Executive Director age 54 Appointed to the Board 1 January 2013.
Past appointments Director of strategic planning at Disneyland Paris and roles at The Walt Disney Company and Standard Chartered Bank.
Pierre Bouchut NonExecutive Director age 60 Appointed to the Board 13 February 2015.
Committee membership Audit Committee and Nomination
Other appointments Executive vice president and chief financial officer of Delhaize Group SA.
Nonexecutive director of La Rinascente SpA.
Nonexecutive member of the advisory boards of Qualium Investissement and Lombard Odier Asset Management Switzerland SA.
Past appointments Executive director growth markets zone and chief financial officer of Carrefour SA.
Chief financial officer and member of the management board of Schneider Electric SA.
Chief executive officer and member of the Board of Casino GuichardPerrachon SA.
Gwyn Burr NonExecutive Director age 53 Appointed to the Board 1 May 2012.
Committee membership Audit Committee Nomination Committee and Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
Other appointments Member of board remuneration committee and chairman of nominations committee of Sainsburys Bank plc.
Nonexecutive director of Just Eat plc Metro AG and DFS Trading Limited.
Past appointments Senior roles in marketing customer service and financial services at Asda plc.
Customer service and colleague director at J Sainsbury plc.
Nonexecutive director of the Principality Building Society.
Director of the Incorporated Society of British Advertisers.
Chair of Business in the Community community investment board.
DIRECTORS BIOGRAPHIES 108 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 T erry Duddy NonExecutive Director and Senior Independent Director age 59 Appointed to the Board 3 December 2009 .
Committee membership Nomination Committee and Remuneration Committee.
Other appointments Chairman of Retail Trust and nonexecutive director of Debenhams plc.
Past appointments Chief executive of Home Retail Group plc.
Director of DSG Retail Limited and trustee of Education and Employers Taskforce.
Jacques Espinasse NonExecutive Director age 72 Appointed to the Board 1 May 2007 .
Committee membership Nomination Committee and Chairman of the Audit Committee.
Other appointments Nonexecutive director and member of the audit and remuneration committees of SES.
Nonexecutive director and chairman of the audit committee of AXA Belgium.
Chairman of the Fondation JEDBelgique.
Past appointments Chief financial officer of Vivendi.
Non executive director of Canal France Maroc Telecom SFR and Universal Music Group.
Nonexecutive director and member of the audit and remuneration committees of La Banque Postale Asset
Nonexecutive director and chairman of the audit committee of AXA Holdings Belgium and AXA Bank Europe.
Andrew Formica NonExecutive Director age 44 Appointed to the Board 26 November 2015.
Committee membership Audit Committee and Nomination
Other appointments Chief executive of Henderson Group plc and director of The Investment Association.
Past appointments Nonexecutive director of TIAA Henderson Real Estate Limited.
Judy Gibbons NonExecutive Director age 59 Appointed to the Board 1 May 2011.
Committee membership Audit Committee Nomination Committee and Remuneration Committee.
Other appointments Nonexecutive director of Guardian Media Group plc Michael Kors Holdings Limited and Virgin Money Giving Limited.
Chairman of Refresh Mobile Limited.
Past appointments Nonexecutive director of O2 plc.
Corporate vicepresident of Microsoft Corporation.
Venture partner of Accel
Senior roles in marketing and product development at Apple Inc. and HewlettPackard.
Sarah Booth General Counsel and Company Secretary age 49 Appointed March 2010.
Past appointments General counsel at Sodexo legal and corporate development director at Christian Salvesen PLC and trained as a solicitor at Dickson Minto WS.
See the Nomination Committee Report on page 79 for further details on Directors skills and expertise 109 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS BIOGRAPHIES This report Report forms part of the management report as required under Disclosure and Transparency Rule DTR 4.
The
Strategic Report on pages 1 to 67 includes an indication of future likely developments in the Company details of important events since the year ended 31 December 2015 the Companys business model and strategy.
The Corporate Governance Report on pages 68 to 109 is incorporated in this Report by reference.
COMPANYS ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
The Articles may be amended by special resolution in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 Act and are available at site
Details of the Companys French branch are provided on page 178.
DIRECTORS
Details of the Directors who served during the year are set out on pages 108 to 109 .
Anthony Watson served as a NonExecutive Director until 22 April 2015 when he retired.
Directors are appointed and replaced in accordance with the Articles the Act and the UK Corporate Governance Code.
The powers of the Directors are set out in the Articles and the Act.
DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION TO AUDITORS Each of the persons who is a Director at the date of approval of the Directors Report has confirmed that So far as she or he is aware there is no relevant information of which the Companys external auditor is unaware and She or he has taken all the steps that she or he ought to have taken as a Director in order to make herself or himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys external auditor is aware of that information.
DIVIDEND
Details of the recommended final dividend can be found on page 56.
EMPLOYEES
Details of the Companys policies regarding the employment of disabled persons and its engagement with employees are provided on pages 50 and 51.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Details of the Groups financial risk management in relation to its financial instruments are available on pages 149 to 155.
GOING CONCERN AND VIABILITY STATEMENTS The Companys Going Concern statement and Viability statement are on page 67 .
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REPORTING Information regarding the Companys greenhouse gas emissions can be found on page 47 .
INDEMNIFICATION OF AND INSURANCE FOR DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS The Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance which is reviewed annually.
The Companys Directors and officers are adequately insured in line with best practice.
Directors are indemnified under the Articles.
LISTING RULE 9.8.4R DISCLOSURES Table 97 sets out where disclosures required in compliance with Listing Rule 9 .8.4R are located.
Table 97
Interest capitalised and tax relief 134 Publication of unaudited financial information na Details of longterm incentive schemes 84  101 and Waiver of emoluments by a director na Waiver of future emoluments by a director na Non preemptive issues of equity for cash na Non preemptive issues of equity for cash by major subsidiary undertakings na Parent company participation in a placing by a listed subsidiary na Contracts of significance na Provision of services by a controlling shareholder na Shareholder waivers of dividends 111 Shareholder waivers of future dividends 111 Agreements with controlling shareholders na POST BALANCE SHEET EVENTS Details of the post balance sheet events can be found in note 11 on page 138.
PROVISIONS ON CHANGE OF CONTROL Five of the six outstanding bonds issued by the Company contain covenants specifying that the bondholders may request repayment at par if the Companys credit rating is downgraded to below investment grade due to a change of control and the rating remains below investment grade for a period of six months thereafter.
In addition under the Companys credit facilities and private placement notes the lending banks or holders may request repayment of outstanding amounts within 30 and 52 days respectively of any change of control.
PURCHASE OF OWN SHARES At the 2015 Annual General Meeting AGM the Company was granted authority by shareholders to purchase up to 78430004 ordinary shares 10% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital as at 20 February 2015.
This authority will expire at the conclusion of the 2016 AGM at which a resolution will be proposed for its renewal or if earlier 22 June 2016.
DIRECTORS REPORT 110 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 REAPPOINTMENT OF EXTERNAL AUDITOR Details of the reappointment of the external auditor and disclosure of information are provided on page 106.
RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT The Directors responsibility statement is set out on page 113.
SHARE CAPITAL AND SUBSTANTIAL
Details of the Company s capital structure are set out on pages 155 to The rights and obligations attached to the Company s shares are set out in the Articles.
There are no restrictions on the transfer of shares except the UK Real Estate Investment Trust restrictions.
At 31 December 2015 the following interests in voting rights over the issued share capital of the Company had been notified in accordance with DTR 5 Table 98 Ordinary shares of 25p each At 31 December 2015 percentage of total voting rights APG Algemene Pensioen Groep
68227094 9.57% BlackRock Inc.
50223602 7.05% Merrill Lynch International 52216411 6.66% Rockcastle Global Real Estate Company Limited 39300000 5.01% Legal and General Investment Management Ltd 25717804 3.61% On 22 January 2016 Merrill Lynch International notified the Company that it had decreased its share holding to below 3% of the total voting rights.
No other changes to table 98 have been disclosed to the Company between 31 December 2015 and 12 February 2016.
SHARES HELD IN THE EMPLOYEE SHARE OWNERSHIP PLAN The Trustees of the Hammerson Employee Share Ownership Plan hold Hammerson plc shares in trust to satisfy awards under the Companys employee share plans.
The Trustees have waived their right to receive dividends on shares held in the Company.
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE COMPETITION AND MARKETS AUTHORITY CMA
The Company confirms that it has complied with The Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014 Article 7 .1 published by the CMA on 26 September 2014.
Sarah Booth General Counsel and Company Secretary 12 February 2016 111 HAMMERSON.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REPORT Financial statements Directors responsibilities 113 Independent auditors report 114 Primary financial statements 118 Notes to the accounts 124 Company primary statements 158 Notes to the Company accounts 160 OTHER INFORMATION Additional disclosures 166 Tenyear financial summary 173 Summary of Directors remuneration policy 174 Shareholder information 178 Glossary 181 Index 183 112 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES STATEMENT
OM 113 DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES IN RESPECT OF THE PREPARATION OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors are required to prepare the Group financial st atements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and have elected to prepare the parent company financial statements in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 FRS101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the accounts unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and of the profit or loss of the Company for that period.
In preparing the parent company financial statements the Directors are required to Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently Make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent State whether Financial Reporting Standard 101 FRS101 Reduced Disclosure Framework has been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and Prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
In preparing the Group financial statements International Accounting Standard 1 requires that Directors Properly select and apply accounting policies Present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant  reliable comparable and understandable information Provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRSs are insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of partic ular transactions other events and conditions on the entitys financial position and financial performance and Make an assessment of the Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reas onable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT We confirm that to the best of our knowledge The financial statements prepared in accordance with the relevant financial reporting framework give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole The Strategic Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face and The Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
By order of the Board David Atkins Chief Executive 12 February 2016 Timon Drakesmith Chief Financial Officer 12 February 2016 113 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF HAMMERSON PLC HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 OPINION ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF HAMMERSON PLC In our opinion The financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2015 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended The Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union The parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including Financial Reporting Standard 101 FRS101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The financial statements comprise the Consolidated Income Statement the Consolidated Stat ement of Comprehensive Income the Consolidated and Company Ba lance Sheets the Consolidated and Company Statement of Changes in Equity the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement and the related notes 1 to 28 for the consolidated financial statements and the related notes A to H for the parent company financial statements.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group financial statements is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the parent company financial statements is applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including Financial Reporting Standard 101 FRS101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
GOING CONCERN AND THE DIRECTORS ASSESSMENT OF THE PRINCIPAL RISKS THAT WOULD THREATEN THE SOLVENCY OR LIQUIDITY OF THE GROUP As required by the Listing Rules we have reviewed the Directors Statement contained on page 124 regarding the appropriateness of the going concern basis of accounting contained within note 1 to the financial statements and the Directors statement on the longer term viability of the Group contained within the Strategic Report on page 67.
We have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to The Directors confirmation on page 63 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity The disclosures on pages 62 to 67 that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated The Directors statement in note 1 to the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups ability to continue to do so over a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements The Directors explanation on page 67 as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We agreed with the Directors adoption of the going concern basis of accounting and we did not identify any such material uncertainties.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
INDEPENDENCE
We are required to comply with the Financial Reporting Councils Ethical Standards for Auditors and we confirm that we are independent of the Group and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We also confirm we have not provided any of the prohibited nonaudit services referred to in those standards.
OUR ASSESSMENT OF RISKS OF MATERIAL
The key risks we identified were Valuation of the property portfolio Accounting for the acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio Accounting for the investment in Value Retail There has been no significant change in the Groups operations and our assessed risks of material misstatement described on page 115 which are those that had the greatest effect on the audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
We do however note the complex nature of the transaction to acquire the 50% intere st in the Irish loan portfolio and have included detail on how th e scope of our audit addressed the specific risks relevant to that transaction within the Accounting for the acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio risk on page 115.
All other risks are the same as the prior year.
The description of risks on page 115 should be read in conjunction with the significant issues cons idered by the Audit Committee discussed on page 81 and the significant accounting policies disclosed in note 1 of the financial statements.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audi t of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
114 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF HAMMERSON PLC HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 OPINION ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF HAMMERSON PLC In our opinion The financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2015 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended The Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union The parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including Financial Reporting Standard 101 FRS101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The financial statements comprise the Consolidated Income Statement the Consolidated Stat ement of Comprehensive Income the Consolidated and Company Ba lance Sheets the Consolidated and Company Statement of Changes in Equity the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement and the related notes 1 to 28 for the consolidated financial statements and the related notes A to H for the parent company financial statements.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group financial statements is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the parent company financial statements is applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including Financial Reporting Standard 101 FRS101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
GOING CONCERN AND THE DIRECTORS ASSESSMENT OF THE PRINCIPAL RISKS THAT WOULD THREATEN THE SOLVENCY OR LIQUIDITY OF THE GROUP As required by the Listing Rules we have reviewed the Directors Statement contained on page 124 regarding the appropriateness of the going concern basis of accounting contained within note 1 to the financial statements and the Directors statement on the longer term viability of the Group contained within the Strategic Report on page 67.
We have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to The Directors confirmation on page 63 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity The disclosures on pages 62 to 67 that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated The Directors statement in note 1 to the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups ability to continue to do so over a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements The Directors explanation on page 67 as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We agreed with the Directors adoption of the going concern basis of accounting and we did not identify any such material uncertainties.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
INDEPENDENCE
We are required to comply with the Financial Reporting Councils Ethical Standards for Auditors and we confirm that we are independent of the Group and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We also confirm we have not provided any of the prohibited nonaudit services referred to in those standards.
OUR ASSESSMENT OF RISKS OF MATERIAL
The key risks we identified were Valuation of the property portfolio Accounting for the acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio Accounting for the investment in Value Retail There has been no significant change in the Groups operations and our assessed risks of material misstatement described on page 115 which are those that had the greatest effect on the audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
We do however note the complex nature of the transaction to acquire the 50% intere st in the Irish loan portfolio and have included detail on how th e scope of our audit addressed the specific risks relevant to that transaction within the Accounting for the acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio risk on page 115.
All other risks are the same as the prior year.
The description of risks on page 115 should be read in conjunction with the significant issues cons idered by the Audit Committee discussed on page 81 and the significant accounting policies disclosed in note 1 of the financial statements.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audi t of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
HAMMERSON.
OM 115 OUR ASSESSMENT OF RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT CONTINUED
How the scope of our audit responded to the risk Valuation of the property portfolio Hammerson plc Hammerson owns a portfolio of retail property assets valued at 7255.8 million at 31 December 2015 31 December 2014 6849.4 million of which 4652.1 million are held by subsidiaries 31 December 2014 4427.3 million and 2603.7 million by joint ventures 31 December 2014 2422.1 million.
The valuation of the portfolio including a number of development properties is a significant judgement area and is underpinned by a number of assumptions.
The Group uses professionally qualified external valuers to fair value the Groups portfolio at sixmonthly intervals.
The portfolio excluding development properties is valued using the investment method of valuation in which the principal assumptions are estimated rental values and capitalisation yields.
Development properties are valued by applying the same methodology but with a deduction for all future costs necessary to complete the development together with an allowance for remaining risk developers profit and purchasers costs the residual method.
Please see notes 11 and 12 to the financial statements.
We assessed managements review of the work of the external valuer and development appraisals We met with the external valuers of the portfolio to discuss and challenge the valuation process performance of the portfolio and significant assumptions and critical judgement areas including estimated rental values and capitalisation yields.
We benchmarked these assumptions to relevant market evidence including specific property sales and other external data For development properties we assessed future costs to complete on a sample of development pr operties based on development appraisals.
We assessed the classification of development properties and whether the methodology applied i. residual method was appropriat e.
We also challenged the allowances in the valuation for developers profit We assessed the competence independence and integrity of the external valuer and We performed audit procedures to assess the integrity of information provided to the independent valuer including agreement on a sample basis back to underlying lease agreement.
Accounting for the acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio Hammerson continued to implement its strategy of capital recycling with a number of acquisitions and disposals completing during the year the most significant of which was the acquisition of a 50% interest in an Irish loan portfolio at a cost of 690.2 million.
The loan portfolio which is in default is secured on a number of prime Irish retail properties.
Negoti ations to secure the consensual conversion of the loan portfolio into the retail properties are ongoing.
The acquisition was undertaken by a joint venture set up by Hammerson and Allianz to acquire the Irish loan portfolio.
The
Group funded the acquisition through a loan provided to the joint venture of 690.2 million.
Hammersons accounting policy in respect of the transaction is detailed in note 1 on page 125.
The complexity of the transaction together with the unique nature of the asset from the Groups perspective result in increased ri sk of inaccurate presentation of the transaction.
This includes initial recognition of the loans including interest and transaction costs at fair value together with accounting for credit risk and impairment indicators.
In respect of the acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio we have reviewed the terms of the loan instruments acquired and assessed whether the Groups accounting policy for the acquisition of the loans is in accordance with IAS39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
This included assessing on acquisition the initial fair valu e of the loans of the Irish loan portfolio and the loan provided to fund the acquisition.
We also assessed the loan provided by the Group to the joint venture for credit risk and impairment indicators based on the valuation of the underlying properties and We tested the accuracy and completeness of the disclosures in the financial statements.
Accounting for the investment in Value Retail Hammersons interest in Value Retail carrying value of 743.8 million 31 December 20 14 628.8 million is equity accounted as an associate.
The valuation of the Groups investment in Value Retail is primarily driven by the valuation of the Value Retail property portfolio of 3333.1 million 31 December 2014 2835.4 million of which Hammersons share is 1095.0 million 31 December 2014 884.7 million.
This is subject to similar judgements to those of the Groups property portfolio above including future net operating income and capitalisation yields.
Other key balances which impact the valuation of the Groups investment in Value Retail incl ude borrowings deferred tax and derivative financial instruments.
Please see note 13 to the financial statements.
We planned the scope of the audit and instructed the auditor of Value Retail accordingly We met with the auditor Value Retail management and the external valuer of the Value Retail property portfolio to discuss and challenge the valuation assumptions including future net operating income and capitalisation yields We assessed the competence independence and integrity of the external valuer and We assessed the quality of the work performed by the auditor of Value Retail in the areas of borrowings deferred tax and derivative financial instruments.
115 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Independent Auditors report to the members of Hammerson plc continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 OUR APPLICATION OF MATERIALITY We determined materiality for the Group to be 40 million 2014 30 million We reported all audit differences in excess of 0.8 million 2014 0.6 million We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality b oth in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
We determined materiality for the Group to be 40 million 2014 30 million which is below 1% 2014 below 1% of shareholders equity.
We determined materiality based on shareholders equity as net asset value is a key performance indicator as it takes into consideration the valuation of the Groups property portfolio and the investment in premium outlets.
In addition to net assets we cons ider EPRA Adjusted Profit Before Tax as a critical performance measure for the Group and a measure used within the Real Estate industry.
We applied a lower threshold of 10.9 million 2014 7.8 million which equates to 5.1% 2014 4.5% of that measure for testing all balances impacting that measure.
Group and component materiality We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in ex cess of 0.8 million 2014 0.6 million as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
AN OVERVIEW OF THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT We performed a full scope audit on the UK and French components.
Value Retail and VIA Outlets were subject to audit of specific account balances.
There is no change from 2014 All components were audited to component materiality which ranged from 10 million to 22 million December 2014 12.6 million to 16.5 million Together these four components account for 99% of the Groups net assets and 100% of profit before tax Our group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its environment including groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the group level.
Based on that assessment we focused our group audit scope primarily on the audit work at fo ur significant components being the UK France Value Retail and VIA Outlets VIA 2014 four.
Together these components comprise 99% 2014 99% of the Groups net assets and 100% 2014 100% of profit before tax.
The UK and French components were subject to a full scope audit whilst Value Retail accounted for as an associate and audited by EY and VIA accounted for as a joint venture were subject to an audit of specified account balances where the extent of our testing was based on our assessment of the risks of material misstatement and of the materiality of the Groups operations at those components.
The UK and French components account for 85% of net assets.
Our audit work on Value Retail is specified in the assessment of the risks of material misstatement section above.
Our audit work at the four locations was executed at levels of materiality applicable to each in dividual entity which were lower than group materiality and ranged from 10 million to 22 million 2014 12.6 million to 16.5 million.
For those balances impacting Adjusted Profit Before Tax the materiality range was 2.6 million to 6.0 million 2014 3.2 million to 4.35 million.
The group audit team continued to follow a programme of planned visits that has been designed so that the Senior Statutory Auditor or a senior member of the group audit team visits each of the locations where the group audit scope is focused at least once every two years.
In years when we do not visit a significant component we will include the component audit team in our team briefing discuss their risk assessment and review documentation of the findings from their work.
At the parent entity level we also tested the consolidation process and carried out analytical procedures to confirm our conclusion that there were no significant risks of material misstatement of the aggregated financial information of the remaining components not subject to audit or audit of specified account balances.
We have obtained an understanding of the Gr oups system of internal controls and undertaken a combination of procedures all of which are designed to target the Groups identified risks of material misstatement in the most effective manner possible.
5586m Group net assets Group materiality 40m Component materiality 10m to 22m Audit Committee reporting threshold 0.8m 116 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Independent Auditors report to the members of Hammerson plc continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 OUR APPLICATION OF MATERIALITY We determined materiality for the Group to be 40 million 2014 30 million We reported all audit differences in excess of 0.8 million 2014 0.6 million We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality b oth in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
We determined materiality for the Group to be 40 million 2014 30 million which is below 1% 2014 below 1% of shareholders equity.
We determined materiality based on shareholders equity as net asset value is a key performance indicator as it takes into consideration the valuation of the Groups property portfolio and the investment in premium outlets.
In addition to net assets we cons ider EPRA Adjusted Profit Before Tax as a critical performance measure for the Group and a measure used within the Real Estate industry.
We applied a lower threshold of 10.9 million 2014 7.8 million which equates to 5.1% 2014 4.5% of that measure for testing all balances impacting that measure.
Group and component materiality We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in ex cess of 0.8 million 2014 0.6 million as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
AN OVERVIEW OF THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT We performed a full scope audit on the UK and French components.
Value Retail and VIA Outlets were subject to audit of specific account balances.
There is no change from 2014 All components were audited to component materiality which ranged from 10 million to 22 million December 2014 12.6 million to 16.5 million Together these four components account for 99% of the Groups net assets and 100% of profit before tax Our group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its environment including groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the group level.
Based on that assessment we focused our group audit scope primarily on the audit work at fo ur significant components being the UK France Value Retail and VIA Outlets VIA 2014 four.
Together these components comprise 99% 2014 99% of the Groups net assets and 100% 2014 100% of profit before tax.
The UK and French components were subject to a full scope audit whilst Value Retail accounted for as an associate and audited by EY and VIA accounted for as a joint venture were subject to an audit of specified account balances where the extent of our testing was based on our assessment of the risks of material misstatement and of the materiality of the Groups operations at those components.
The UK and French components account for 85% of net assets.
Our audit work on Value Retail is specified in the assessment of the risks of material misstatement section above.
Our audit work at the four locations was executed at levels of materiality applicable to each in dividual entity which were lower than group materiality and ranged from 10 million to 22 million 2014 12.6 million to 16.5 million.
For those balances impacting Adjusted Profit Before Tax the materiality range was 2.6 million to 6.0 million 2014 3.2 million to 4.35 million.
The group audit team continued to follow a programme of planned visits that has been designed so that the Senior Statutory Auditor or a senior member of the group audit team visits each of the locations where the group audit scope is focused at least once every two years.
In years when we do not visit a significant component we will include the component audit team in our team briefing discuss their risk assessment and review documentation of the findings from their work.
At the parent entity level we also tested the consolidation process and carried out analytical procedures to confirm our conclusion that there were no significant risks of material misstatement of the aggregated financial information of the remaining components not subject to audit or audit of specified account balances.
We have obtained an understanding of the Gr oups system of internal controls and undertaken a combination of procedures all of which are designed to target the Groups identified risks of material misstatement in the most effective manner possible.
HAMMERSON.
OM 117 OPINION ON OTHER MATTERS PRESCRIBED BY THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 In our opinion The part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in acco rdance with the Companies Act 2006 and The information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements.
MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT BY EXCEPTION Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion We have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or Adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or The parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration have not been made or the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited is not in agreement with th e accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report arising from these matters.
Corporate Governance Statement
Under the Listing Rules we are also required to review the part of the Corporate Governance Statement relating to the Companys compliance with certain provisions of the UK Corporate Governance
We have nothing to report arising from our review.
Our duty to read other information in the Annual Report Under International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion information in the Annual Report is Materially inconsistent with the information in the audited financial statements or Apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group acquired in the course of performing our audit or Otherwise misleading.
In particular we are required to consider whether we have identified any inconsistencies between our knowledge acquired during the audit and the Directors statement that they consider the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable and whether the Annual Report appropriately discloses those matters that we communicated to the Audit Committee which we consider should have been disclosed.
We confirm that we have not identified any such inconsistencies or misleading statements.
RESPECTIVE RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTORS AND
As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practi ces Boards Ethical Standards for
We also comply with International Standard on Quality Control 1 UK and Ireland.
Our audit methodology and tools aim to ensure that our quality control procedures are effective understood and applied.
Our quality controls and systems include our dedicated professional standards review team and independent partner reviews.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
SCOPE OF THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL
An audit involves obtaining ev idence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fr aud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups and the parent companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financia l statements.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the co urse of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Ian Waller Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditor London United Kingdom 12 February 2016 117 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2015 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015
Gross rental income 2 236.0 206.5 Operating profit before other net gains and share of results of joint ventures and associates 2 166.8 142.5 Other net gains 2 258.6 264.7 Share of results of joint ventures 12A 246.8 279.0 Share of results of associates 13A 160.6 109.9 Operating profit 2 832.8 796.1 Finance costs Debt and loan facility cancellation costs Change in fair value of derivatives Finance income Net finance costs 7 101.2 93.0 Profit before tax Tax charge 8A 1.6 1.0 Profit for the year Attributable to Equity shareholders Noncontrolling interests 28C 3.2 3.0 Profit for the year Basic earnings per share 10A 92.8p 95.7p Diluted earnings per share 10A 92.6p 95.7p Adjusted earnings per share 10A 26.9p 23.9p 118 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2015 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015
Gross rental income 2 236.0 206.5 Operating profit before other net gains and share of results of joint ventures and associates 2 166.8 142.5 Other net gains 2 258.6 264.7 Share of results of joint ventures 12A 246.8 279.0 Share of results of associates 13A 160.6 109.9 Operating profit 2 832.8 796.1 Finance costs Debt and loan facility cancellation costs Change in fair value of derivatives Finance income Net finance costs 7 101.2 93.0 Profit before tax Tax charge 8A 1.6 1.0 Profit for the year Attributable to Equity shareholders Noncontrolling interests 28C 3.2 3.0 Profit for the year Basic earnings per share 10A 92.8p 95.7p Diluted earnings per share 10A 92.6p 95.7p Adjusted earnings per share 10A 26.9p 23.9p CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2015
OM 119 Items that may subsequently be recycled through the income statement Foreign exchange translation differences 107.5 136.4 Net gain on hedging activities 81.9 103.8 Items that may not subsequently be recycled through the income statement Revaluation lossesgains on participativ e loans within investment in associates 1.0 0.6 Net actuarial losses on pension schemes 0.3 11.5 Total other comprehensive income 26.9 43.5 Profit for the year Total comprehensive income for the year 703.1 658.6 Attributable to Equity shareholders 703.5 660.9 Noncontrolling interests 0.4 2.3 Total comprehensive income for the year 703.1 658.6 119 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2015 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015
Noncurrent assets Investment and development properties 11 4652.1 4427.3 Interests in leasehold properties Plant and equipment Investment in joint ventures 12A 3213.6 2341.5 Investment in associates 13C 768.0 628.8 Other investments Receivables 14 92.1 79.3 8770.3 7516.5 Current assets Receivables 15 118.0 86.5 Restricted monetary assets 16 34.0 11.3 Cash and deposits 17 37.0 28.6 Total assets 8959.3 7642.9 Current liabilities Payables 18 235.5 204.4
Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 19A 3028.1 2287.1 Deferred tax Obligations under finance leases 21 32.5 33.0 Payables 22 75.7 72.5 3136.8 2393.1 Total liabilities 3373.0 2597.8 Net assets 5586.3 5045.1
Share capital 23 196.1 196.1 Share premium 1223.3 1222.9 Translation reserve Hedging reserve Merger reserve Other reserves Retained earnings 3696.5 3136.2 Investment in own shares Equity shareholders funds 5517.3 4973.7 Noncontrolling interests 28C 69.0 71.4 Total equity 5586.3 5045.1 Diluted net asset value per share 10B 7.03 6.35 EPRA net asset value per share 10B 7.10 6.38 These financial statements were approved by th e Board of Directors on 12 February 2016.
Signed on behalf of the Board David Atkins
Timon Drakesmith
Registered in England No.
120 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2015 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015
Noncurrent assets Investment and development properties 11 4652.1 4427.3 Interests in leasehold properties Plant and equipment Investment in joint ventures 12A 3213.6 2341.5 Investment in associates 13C 768.0 628.8 Other investments Receivables 14 92.1 79.3 8770.3 7516.5 Current assets Receivables 15 118.0 86.5 Restricted monetary assets 16 34.0 11.3 Cash and deposits 17 37.0 28.6 Total assets 8959.3 7642.9 Current liabilities Payables 18 235.5 204.4
Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 19A 3028.1 2287.1 Deferred tax Obligations under finance leases 21 32.5 33.0 Payables 22 75.7 72.5 3136.8 2393.1 Total liabilities 3373.0 2597.8 Net assets 5586.3 5045.1
Share capital 23 196.1 196.1 Share premium 1223.3 1222.9 Translation reserve Hedging reserve Merger reserve Other reserves Retained earnings 3696.5 3136.2 Investment in own shares Equity shareholders funds 5517.3 4973.7 Noncontrolling interests 28C 69.0 71.4 Total equity 5586.3 5045.1 Diluted net asset value per share 10B 7.03 6.35 EPRA net asset value per share 10B 7.10 6.38 These financial statements were approved by th e Board of Directors on 12 February 2016.
Signed on behalf of the Board David Atkins
Timon Drakesmith
Registered in England No.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2015
OM 121
Share premium
Hedging reserve
Other
Retained earnings
Equity shareholders funds
Total equity Balance at 1 January 2015 Issue of shares  0.4       0.4  0.4 Share issue costs     0.1    0.1  0.1 Sharebased employee remuneration      4.8   4.8  4.8 Cost of shares awarded to employees      2.9  2.9 Transfer on award of own shares to employees      0.2 0.2 Proceeds on award of own shares to employees       0.2  0.2  0.2 Foreign exchange translation differences   103.9      103.9 3.6 107.5 Net gain on hedging activities    81.9     81.9  81.9 Revaluation losses on participative loans within investment in associates       1.0  1.0  1.0 Net actuarial losses on pension schemes       0.3  0.3  0.3 Profit for the year       726.8  726.8 3.2 730.0 Total comprehensive incomeloss for the year   103.9 81.9   725.5  703.5 0.4 703.1 Balance at 31 December 2015 196.1 1223.3 135.1 125.6 374.1 21.7 3696.5 3.9 5517.3 69.0 5586.3 Investment in own shares is stated at cost.
121 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2014 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015
Share premium
Hedging reserve
Other
Retained earnings
Equity shareholders funds
Total equity Balance at 1 January 2014 178.2 1222.4 370.1 311.3  17.2 2588.2 4.9 4059.9 76.7 4136.6 Issue of shares 17.9 0.5   381.4 Share issue costs Sharebased employee remuneration      5.1 Cost of shares awarded to employees      3.6  3.6 Transfer on award of own shares to employees      0.9 0.9 Proceeds on award of own shares to employees       0.2 Purchase of own shares        5.5 5.5  5.5 Dividends       139.5 Foreign exchange translation differences   131.1 Net gain on hedging activities    103.8 Revaluation gains on participative loans within investment in associates       0.6 Net actuarial losses on pension schemes       11.5 Profit for the year       699.1 Total comprehensive incomeloss for the year   131.1 103.8   688.2 Balance at 31 December 2014 196.1 1222.9 239.
Investment in own shares is stated at cost.
122 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2014 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015
Share premium
Hedging reserve
Other
Retained earnings
Equity shareholders funds
Total equity Balance at 1 January 2014 178.2 1222.4 370.1 311.3  17.2 2588.2 4.9 4059.9 76.7 4136.6 Issue of shares 17.9 0.5   381.4 Share issue costs Sharebased employee remuneration      5.1 Cost of shares awarded to employees      3.6  3.6 Transfer on award of own shares to employees      0.9 0.9 Proceeds on award of own shares to employees       0.2 Purchase of own shares        5.5 5.5  5.5 Dividends       139.5 Foreign exchange translation differences   131.1 Net gain on hedging activities    103.8 Revaluation gains on participative loans within investment in associates       0.6 Net actuarial losses on pension schemes       11.5 Profit for the year       699.1 Total comprehensive incomeloss for the year   131.1 103.8   688.2 Balance at 31 December 2014 196.1 1222.9 239.
Investment in own shares is stated at cost.
CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2015
OM 123
Operating activities Operating profit before other net gains and shar e of results of joint ventures and associates 2 166.8 142.5 Increase in receivables Increase in restricted monetary assets Increase in payables Adjustment for noncash items 25 6.3 12.2 Cash generated from operations Interest paid Interest received Tax paid Distributions and other receivables from joint ventures Cash flows from operating activities Investing activities Property acquisitions Development and major refurbishments Other capital expenditure Sale of properties Acquisition of Irish loan portfolio Acquisition of interest in associates Acquisition of other investments Distribution received from associates Investment in joint ventures Sale of interests in joint ventures Increase in advances to joint ventures IncreaseDecrease in noncurrent receivables Cash flows from investing activities Financing activities Issue of shares Proceeds from award of own shares Purchase of own shares Debt and loan facility cancellation costs 7 13.9 8.7 Proceeds from new borrowings 1319.0 736.6 Repayment of borrowings Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests Equity dividends paid 9 163.8 139.1 Cash flows from financing activities Net increase in cash and deposits Opening cash and deposits Exchange translation movement Closing cash and deposits 17 37.0 28.6 An analysis of the movement in net debt is provided in note 24.
123 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2015 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES Statement of compliance The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS and interpretations adopted by the European
During 2015 the following new and revised Standards and Interpretations have been adopted but these have not affected the amounts reported in these financial statements Amendments to IAS19 Employee Benefits  Contributions from employees or third parties that are linked to service Amendments to IFRS Annual Im provements cycle 20102012 Amendments to IFRS Annual Improvements cycle 20112013 Issued not yet effective and not yet endorsed for use in the European Union At the date of approval of these financial statements the following Standards and Interpretations relevant to the Group were in issue but not yet effective and in some cases had not been adopted for use in the European Union Amendments to IAS 1 Disclosure Initiatives effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2016 IFRS 9 Financial Instruments effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
These pronouncements when applied will either result in changes in presentation and disclosure or are not expected to have a material impact on the financial statements.
Basis of preparation The financial statements are prepared on a going concern basis as explained in the Principal Risks and Uncertainties section of the Strategic Report on page 67.
The financial statements are presented in sterling.
They are prepared on the historical cost basis except that investment and development properties other investments and derivative financial instruments are stated at fair value.
The accounting policies have been applied consistently to the results other gains and losses assets liabil ities and cash flows of entities included in the consolidated financial statements.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period.
If the revision affects both current and future periods the change is recognised over those periods.
Significant judgements and key estimates The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that may affect the application of accounting policies and the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expenses.
The following accounting policies are the critical accounting policies of the Group.
Property valuations The property portfolio which is carried in the balance sheet at fair value is valued sixmonthly by professionally qualified external valuers and the Directors must ensure that they are satisfied that the valuation of the Groups properties is appropriate for the accounts.
Investment properties excluding properties held for development are valued by adopting the inves tment method of valuation.
This approach involves applying marketderived capitalisation yields to current and marketderived future income streams with appropriate adjustments for income voids arising from vacancies or rentfree periods.
These capitalisation yields and future income streams are derived from comparable property and leasing transactions and are considered to be the key inputs in the valuation.
Other factors that are taken into account in the valuations include the tenure of the property tenancy details and ground and structural conditions.
In the case of onsite developments the approach applied is the residual method of valuation which is the investment method of valuation as described above with a deduction for all costs necessary to complete the development toget her with a further allowance for remaining risk developers profit and purchasers costs.
Properties held for future development are ge nerally valued by adopting the higher of the residual method of valuation allowing for all associated risks or the investment method of valuation for the existing asset.
Accounting for acquisitions Management must assess whether the acquisition of property through the purchase of a corporate vehicle should be accounted for as an asset purchase or a business combination.
Where the acquired corporate vehicle contains significant assets or liabilities in addition to property the transaction is accounted for as a business combination.
Where there are no such significant items the transaction is treated as an asset purchase.
Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method.
Any excess of the purchase consideration over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recognised as goodwill and reviewed annually for impairment.
Any discount received or acquisition related costs are recognised in the income statement.
124 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2015 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES Statement of compliance The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS and interpretations adopted by the European
During 2015 the following new and revised Standards and Interpretations have been adopted but these have not affected the amounts reported in these financial statements Amendments to IAS19 Employee Benefits  Contributions from employees or third parties that are linked to service Amendments to IFRS Annual Im provements cycle 20102012 Amendments to IFRS Annual Improvements cycle 20112013 Issued not yet effective and not yet endorsed for use in the European Union At the date of approval of these financial statements the following Standards and Interpretations relevant to the Group were in issue but not yet effective and in some cases had not been adopted for use in the European Union Amendments to IAS 1 Disclosure Initiatives effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2016 IFRS 9 Financial Instruments effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
These pronouncements when applied will either result in changes in presentation and disclosure or are not expected to have a material impact on the financial statements.
Basis of preparation The financial statements are prepared on a going concern basis as explained in the Principal Risks and Uncertainties section of the Strategic Report on page 67.
The financial statements are presented in sterling.
They are prepared on the historical cost basis except that investment and development properties other investments and derivative financial instruments are stated at fair value.
The accounting policies have been applied consistently to the results other gains and losses assets liabil ities and cash flows of entities included in the consolidated financial statements.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period.
If the revision affects both current and future periods the change is recognised over those periods.
Significant judgements and key estimates The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that may affect the application of accounting policies and the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expenses.
The following accounting policies are the critical accounting policies of the Group.
Property valuations The property portfolio which is carried in the balance sheet at fair value is valued sixmonthly by professionally qualified external valuers and the Directors must ensure that they are satisfied that the valuation of the Groups properties is appropriate for the accounts.
Investment properties excluding properties held for development are valued by adopting the inves tment method of valuation.
This approach involves applying marketderived capitalisation yields to current and marketderived future income streams with appropriate adjustments for income voids arising from vacancies or rentfree periods.
These capitalisation yields and future income streams are derived from comparable property and leasing transactions and are considered to be the key inputs in the valuation.
Other factors that are taken into account in the valuations include the tenure of the property tenancy details and ground and structural conditions.
In the case of onsite developments the approach applied is the residual method of valuation which is the investment method of valuation as described above with a deduction for all costs necessary to complete the development toget her with a further allowance for remaining risk developers profit and purchasers costs.
Properties held for future development are ge nerally valued by adopting the higher of the residual method of valuation allowing for all associated risks or the investment method of valuation for the existing asset.
Accounting for acquisitions Management must assess whether the acquisition of property through the purchase of a corporate vehicle should be accounted for as an asset purchase or a business combination.
Where the acquired corporate vehicle contains significant assets or liabilities in addition to property the transaction is accounted for as a business combination.
Where there are no such significant items the transaction is treated as an asset purchase.
Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method.
Any excess of the purchase consideration over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recognised as goodwill and reviewed annually for impairment.
Any discount received or acquisition related costs are recognised in the income statement.
HAMMERSON.
OM 125 Accounting for acquisition of Irish loan portfolio During the year the Group acquired a joint venture interest in a portfolio of loans Irish loan portfolio which are secured on Irish retail assets.
The Group funded the acquisition of the Irish loan portfolio by providing the joint venture with loans of 690.2 million.
The loans were initially measured at fair value and have subsequently been measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less any impairment.
Accounting for joint ventures and associates The accounting treatment for joint ventures and associates requires an assessment to determine the degree of control or influence that the Group may exercise over them and the form of any control.
The
Groups interest in its joint ventures is commonly driven by the terms of partnership agreements whic h ensure that control is shared between the partners.
Associates are those entities over which the Group is in a position to exercise significant influence but not control or joint control.
REIT and SIIC status The Company has elected for UK REIT and French SIIC status.
To continue to benefit from these tax regimes the Group is required to comply with certain conditions as outlined in note 8A to the accounts.
Management intends that the Group should continue as a UK REIT and French SIIC for the foreseeable future.
Basis of consolidation
Subsidiaries are those entities controlled by the Group.
Control is assumed when the Group has the power to govern the financial and operating policies of an entity  or business to benefit from its activities.
The financial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases.
All intragroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Joint ventures and associates The results assets and liabilities of joint ventures and associates are accounted for using the equity method.
Investments in joint ventures and associates are carried in the balance sheet at cost as adjusted for postacquisition changes in the Groups share of the net assets of the joint venture or associate less any impairment.
Losses of a joint venture or associate in excess of the Groups interest in that entity are recognised only to the extent that the Group has incurred legal or constructive obligations or made payments on behalf of the entity.
Loans to joint ventures and associates are separately presented from equity interests within the notes to the accounts.
The Group eliminates upstream and downstream transactions with its joint ventures including interest and management fees.
Foreign currency Foreign currency transactions Transactions in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at exchange rates approximating to the exchange rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the balance sheet date are translated into sterling at the exchange rate ruling at that date and unless they relate to the hedging of the net in vestment in foreign operations differences arising on translation are recognised in the income statement.
Financial statements of foreign operations The assets and liabilities of foreig n operations including goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on consolidation are translated into sterling at the exchange rates ruling at the balance sheet date.
The operating income and expenses of foreign operations are translated into sterling at the average exchange rates for the year.
Significant transactions such as property sales are translated at the foreign exchange rate ruling at the date of each transaction.
The principal exchange rate used to translate foreign currency denominated amounts in the balance sheet is the rate at the end of the year 1  1.357 2014 1  1.289.
The principal exchange rate used for the income statement is the average rate 1  1.378 2014 Net investment in foreign operations Exchange differences arising from the translation of the net investment in foreign operations are taken to the translation reserve.
They are released to the income statement upon disposal of the foreign operation.
Receivables payables and borrowings Trade and other receivables and payables Trade and other receivables and payables are initially measured at fair value subsequently measured at amortised cost and where the effect is material discounted to reflect the time value of money.
Loans receivable Loans receivable are financial assets which are initially measured at fair value plus acquisition costs and are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less any impairment.
Borrowings
Borrowings are recognised initially at fair value after taking account of any discount on issue and attributable transaction costs.
Subsequently borrowings are held at amortised cost such that discounts and costs are charged to the income statement over the term of the borrowing at a constant return on the carrying amount of the liability.
Derivative financial instruments The Group uses derivative financial instruments to economically hedge its exposure to foreign currency movements and interest rate risks.
Hedge accounting is applied in respect of net investments in foreign operations and of debt raised in nonfunctional currencies.
Derivative financial instruments are recognised initially at fair value which equates to cost and subsequently remeasured at fair value with changes in fair value being included in the income statement except that a gain or loss on the portion of an instrument that is an effective hedge is recognised in the hedging reserve.
125 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Finance costs Net finance costs Net finance costs include interest payable on borrowings debt and loan facility cancellation costs net of interest capitalised interest receivable on funds invested and changes in the fair value of derivative financial instruments.
Capitalisation of interest Interest is capitalised if it is directly attributable to the acquisition construction or production of development properties or the redevelopment of investment properties.
Capitalisation commences when the activities to develop the property start and continues until the property is substantially ready for its intended use.
Capitalised interest is calculated with reference to the actual rate payable on borrowings for development purposes or for that part of the development cost financed out of general funds at the average rate.
Property portfolio Investment and development properties Investment properties are stated at fair value being market value determined by professionally qualified external valuers and changes in fair value are included in the income statement.
Properties acquired with the intention of redevelopment are classified as development properties and stated at fair value being market value determined by prof essionally qualified external valuers.
Changes in fair value are included in the income statement.
All costs directly associated with the purchase and construction of a development property are capitalised.
When development properties are completed they are reclassified as investment properties.
Further details are given in note 11.
Leasehold properties Leasehold properties that are leas ed out to tenants under operating leases are classified as invest ment properties or development properties as appropriate and included in the balance sheet at fair value.
The obligation to the freeholder or superior leaseholder for the buildings element of the leasehold is included in the balance sheet at the present value of the minimum lease payments at inception.
Payments to the freeholder or superior leaseholder are apportioned between a finance charge and a reduction of the outstanding liability.
The finance charge is allocated to each period during the lease term so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability.
Contingent rents payable such as rent reviews or those related to rental income are charged as an expense in the period in which they are incurred.
An asset equivalent to the leasehold obligation is recorded in the balance sheet within Interests in leasehold properties and is amortised over the lease term.
Tenant leases Management has exercised judgement in considering the potential transfer of the risks and rewards of ownership in accordance with IAS 17 Leases for properties leased to tenants and has determined that such leases are operating leases.
Depreciation
In accordance with IAS 40 Investment Property no depreciation is provided in respect of investme nt and development properties which are carried at fair value.
Net rental income Rental income from investment property leased out under an operating lease is recognised in the income statement on a straight line basis over the lease term.
Contingent rents such as turnover rents rent reviews and indexation are recorded as income in the period in which they are earned.
Rent reviews are recognised when such reviews have been agreed with tenants.
Lease incentives and costs associated with entering into tenant leases are amortised over the lease term or if the probability that the break option will be exercised is considered high over the period to the first break option.
Property operating expenses are expensed as incurred and any property operating expenditure not recovered from tenants through service charges is charged to the income statement.
Gains or losses on the sale of properties Gains or losses on the sale of properties are taken into account on the completion of contract and are calculated by reference to the carrying value at the end of the previous year adjusted for subsequent capital expenditure.
Plant and equipment Plant and equipment is stated at co st less accumulated depreciation.
Depreciation is charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the estimated useful life which is generally between three and five years or in the case of leasehold improvements the lease term.
Employee benefits Defined contribution pension plans Obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension plans are charged to the income statement as incurred.
Defined benefit pension plans The Groups net obligation in respect of defined benefit pension plans comprises the amount of future benefit that employees have earned discounted to determine a present value less the fair value of the pension plan assets.
The calculation is performed by a qualified external actuary using the projected unit credit method.
Actuarial gains and losses are recognised in equity.
Where the assets of a plan are greater than its obligation the asset included in the balance sheet is limited to the present value of any future refunds from the plan or reduction in future contributions to the plan.
Sharebased employee remuneration Sharebased employee remuneration is determined with reference to the fair value of the equity inst ruments at the date at which they are granted and charged to the income statement over the vesting period on a straightline basis.
The fair value of share options is calculated using the binomial option pricing model and is dependent on factors including the exercise pric e expected volatility option life and riskfree interest rate.
The fair value of the marketbased element of the LongTerm Incentive Plans is calculated using the Monte Carlo Model and is dependent on factors including the expected volatility vesting period and riskfree interest rate.
126 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Finance costs Net finance costs Net finance costs include interest payable on borrowings debt and loan facility cancellation costs net of interest capitalised interest receivable on funds invested and changes in the fair value of derivative financial instruments.
Capitalisation of interest Interest is capitalised if it is directly attributable to the acquisition construction or production of development properties or the redevelopment of investment properties.
Capitalisation commences when the activities to develop the property start and continues until the property is substantially ready for its intended use.
Capitalised interest is calculated with reference to the actual rate payable on borrowings for development purposes or for that part of the development cost financed out of general funds at the average rate.
Property portfolio Investment and development properties Investment properties are stated at fair value being market value determined by professionally qualified external valuers and changes in fair value are included in the income statement.
Properties acquired with the intention of redevelopment are classified as development properties and stated at fair value being market value determined by prof essionally qualified external valuers.
Changes in fair value are included in the income statement.
All costs directly associated with the purchase and construction of a development property are capitalised.
When development properties are completed they are reclassified as investment properties.
Further details are given in note 11.
Leasehold properties Leasehold properties that are leas ed out to tenants under operating leases are classified as invest ment properties or development properties as appropriate and included in the balance sheet at fair value.
The obligation to the freeholder or superior leaseholder for the buildings element of the leasehold is included in the balance sheet at the present value of the minimum lease payments at inception.
Payments to the freeholder or superior leaseholder are apportioned between a finance charge and a reduction of the outstanding liability.
The finance charge is allocated to each period during the lease term so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability.
Contingent rents payable such as rent reviews or those related to rental income are charged as an expense in the period in which they are incurred.
An asset equivalent to the leasehold obligation is recorded in the balance sheet within Interests in leasehold properties and is amortised over the lease term.
Tenant leases Management has exercised judgement in considering the potential transfer of the risks and rewards of ownership in accordance with IAS 17 Leases for properties leased to tenants and has determined that such leases are operating leases.
Depreciation
In accordance with IAS 40 Investment Property no depreciation is provided in respect of investme nt and development properties which are carried at fair value.
Net rental income Rental income from investment property leased out under an operating lease is recognised in the income statement on a straight line basis over the lease term.
Contingent rents such as turnover rents rent reviews and indexation are recorded as income in the period in which they are earned.
Rent reviews are recognised when such reviews have been agreed with tenants.
Lease incentives and costs associated with entering into tenant leases are amortised over the lease term or if the probability that the break option will be exercised is considered high over the period to the first break option.
Property operating expenses are expensed as incurred and any property operating expenditure not recovered from tenants through service charges is charged to the income statement.
Gains or losses on the sale of properties Gains or losses on the sale of properties are taken into account on the completion of contract and are calculated by reference to the carrying value at the end of the previous year adjusted for subsequent capital expenditure.
Plant and equipment Plant and equipment is stated at co st less accumulated depreciation.
Depreciation is charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the estimated useful life which is generally between three and five years or in the case of leasehold improvements the lease term.
Employee benefits Defined contribution pension plans Obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension plans are charged to the income statement as incurred.
Defined benefit pension plans The Groups net obligation in respect of defined benefit pension plans comprises the amount of future benefit that employees have earned discounted to determine a present value less the fair value of the pension plan assets.
The calculation is performed by a qualified external actuary using the projected unit credit method.
Actuarial gains and losses are recognised in equity.
Where the assets of a plan are greater than its obligation the asset included in the balance sheet is limited to the present value of any future refunds from the plan or reduction in future contributions to the plan.
Sharebased employee remuneration Sharebased employee remuneration is determined with reference to the fair value of the equity inst ruments at the date at which they are granted and charged to the income statement over the vesting period on a straightline basis.
The fair value of share options is calculated using the binomial option pricing model and is dependent on factors including the exercise pric e expected volatility option life and riskfree interest rate.
The fair value of the marketbased element of the LongTerm Incentive Plans is calculated using the Monte Carlo Model and is dependent on factors including the expected volatility vesting period and riskfree interest rate.
HAMMERSON.
OM 127 Management fees Management fees are recognised in the period to which they relate.
Performance fee related elements are recognised at the end of the performance period when the fee can be reliably estimated and is due for payment.
Tax
Tax is included in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity in which case the related tax is recognised in equity.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the period using tax rates applicable at the balance sheet date together with any adjustment in respect of previous periods.
Deferred tax is provided using the balance sheet liability method providing for temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for tax purposes.
Th e following temporary differences are not provided for goodwill not deductible for tax purposes the initial recognition of assets or liabilities that affect neither accounting nor taxable profit and differences relating to investments in subsidiaries to the extent that they will probably not reverse in the foreseeable futu re.
The amount of deferred tax provided is based on the expe cted manner of realisation or settlement of the carrying amount of assets and liabilities using tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the asset can be utilised.
127 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 PROFIT FOR THE YEAR The following tables show the Groups profit for the year on a proportionally consolidated basis by aggregating the Reported Gr oup results shown in column A with those from its share of Property inte rests shown in column B the latter being reallocated to the re levant financial statement lines.
The Groups share of results arising from its interests in premium outlets has not been reallocated as managem ent does not review these interests on a proportionally consolidated basis s ee note 3 and these are therefore not included in the Groups share of Property interests.
The Groups proportionally consolidated profit for the year in column C is then allocated between Adjusted and Ca pital and other for the purposes of calculating figures in accordance with EPRA best practice.
Proportionally consolidated
Reported
Group
Share of Property interests
Adjusted
Capital and other
A B C D D Gross rental income Ground and equity rents payable Gross rental income after rents payable Service charge income Service charge expenses Net service charge expenses Other property outgoings Property outgoings Net rental income 3A 208.8 109.8 318.6 318.6 Management fees receivablepayable Employee and corporate costs Administration expenses Operating profit before other net gainslosses and share of results of joint ventures and associates Gain on the sale of properties Investment costs written off Revaluation gains on properties Other net gains Share of results of joint ventures 12A 12B 246.8 233.7 13.1 6.1 7.0 Share of results of associates 13A 13B 160.6 1.3 159.3 17.1 142.2 Operating profit Net finance costsincome 7 101.2 3.1 98.1 84.1 14.0 Profit before tax Current tax charge 8A 1.6  1.6 1.6 Profit for the year Noncontrolling interests Profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders 10A 726.8  726.8 210.9 515.9
A Reported Group results as shown in the consolidated income statement on page 118.
B Property interests reflect the Groups share of results of Prop erty joint ventures as shown in note 12A and Nicetoile include d within note 13A.
C Aggregated results on a proportionally consolidated basis showing Reported Group together with share of Property interests.
D Aggregated results on a proportionally consolidated basis allocated between Adjusted and Capital and other for the purpos es of calculating adjusted earnings per share as shown in note 10A.
E Included in gross rental income on a proportionally consolidated basis is 6.6 million 2014 6.9 million of contingent ren ts calculated by reference to tenants turnover.
128 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 PROFIT FOR THE YEAR The following tables show the Groups profit for the year on a proportionally consolidated basis by aggregating the Reported Gr oup results shown in column A with those from its share of Property inte rests shown in column B the latter being reallocated to the re levant financial statement lines.
The Groups share of results arising from its interests in premium outlets has not been reallocated as managem ent does not review these interests on a proportionally consolidated basis s ee note 3 and these are therefore not included in the Groups share of Property interests.
The Groups proportionally consolidated profit for the year in column C is then allocated between Adjusted and Ca pital and other for the purposes of calculating figures in accordance with EPRA best practice.
Proportionally consolidated
Reported
Group
Share of Property interests
Adjusted
Capital and other
A B C D D Gross rental income Ground and equity rents payable Gross rental income after rents payable Service charge income Service charge expenses Net service charge expenses Other property outgoings Property outgoings Net rental income 3A 208.8 109.8 318.6 318.6 Management fees receivablepayable Employee and corporate costs Administration expenses Operating profit before other net gainslosses and share of results of joint ventures and associates Gain on the sale of properties Investment costs written off Revaluation gains on properties Other net gains Share of results of joint ventures 12A 12B 246.8 233.7 13.1 6.1 7.0 Share of results of associates 13A 13B 160.6 1.3 159.3 17.1 142.2 Operating profit Net finance costsincome 7 101.2 3.1 98.1 84.1 14.0 Profit before tax Current tax charge 8A 1.6  1.6 1.6 Profit for the year Noncontrolling interests Profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders 10A 726.8  726.8 210.9 515.9
A Reported Group results as shown in the consolidated income statement on page 118.
B Property interests reflect the Groups share of results of Prop erty joint ventures as shown in note 12A and Nicetoile include d within note 13A.
C Aggregated results on a proportionally consolidated basis showing Reported Group together with share of Property interests.
D Aggregated results on a proportionally consolidated basis allocated between Adjusted and Capital and other for the purpos es of calculating adjusted earnings per share as shown in note 10A.
E Included in gross rental income on a proportionally consolidated basis is 6.6 million 2014 6.9 million of contingent ren ts calculated by reference to tenants turnover.
HAMMERSON.
OM 129 Proportionally consolidated
Reported
Group
Share of Property interests
Adjusted
Capital and other Notes see page 128 A B C D D Gross rental income Ground and equity rents payable Gross rental income after rents payable Service charge income Service charge expenses Net service charge expenses Other property outgoings Property outgoings Net rental income 3A 188.1 117.5 305.6 305.6 Management fees receivablepayable Employee and corporate costs Net oneoff restructuring costs Administration expenses Operating profit before other net gainslosses and share of results of joint ventures and associates Profit on the sale of properties Loss on the sale of joint ventures Joint venture formation costs written off Revaluation gains on properties Other net gains Share of results of joint ventures 12A 12B 279.0 280.1 1.1 0.9 2.0 Share of results of associates 13A 13B 109.9  109.9 16.0 93.9 Operating profit Net finance costsincome 7 93.0 2.1 95.1 100.1 5.0 Profit before tax Current tax charge 8A 0.9  0.9 0.9 Deferred tax charge 8A 0.1  0.1  0.1 Profit for the year Noncontrolling interests Profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders 10A 699.1  699.1 174.3 524.8 129 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 3 SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS The factors used to determine the Groups reportable segments ar e the geographic locations UK and France and sectors in which it operates which are generally managed by separate teams and are the basis on which performance is assessed and resources allocated.
Gross rental income represents the Groups revenue from its tenants and customers.
Net rental income is the principal profit measure used to determine the performance of each sector.
Total assets are not monitored by segment and resource allocation is based on the distribution of property assets between segments.
As stated in the Financial Review on page 53 management reviews the business principally on a proportionally consolidated basi s except for its interests in premium outlets held through its investments in Value Retail and VIA Outlets where the Group has less day today involvement in the financial performance and which have differen t operational characteristics compared with the Groups propert y portfolio.
The segmental analysis has been prepared on the basis that management uses to review the business rather than on a statutory b asis.
Property interests represent the Groups nonwholly owned properti es which management proportionally consolidate when reviewing the performance of the business.
For reconciliati on purposes the Reported Group figures being whollyowned properties are shown i n the following tables.
During the year the Group acquired an interest in a loan portfo lio secured on retail properties located in Ireland in a 50% jo int venture.
The loans did not generate any rental income in 2015 and at the balance sheet date the loan portfolio was included within current receivables on a proportionally consolidated basis and is therefore not included in notes 3A and 3B.
Note 3C includes the Groups investment in the new Irish joint venture at 31 December 2015.
A Revenue and profit by segment 2015 2014 Gross rental income Net rental income
Gross rental income Net rental income
United Kingdom Shopping centres 162.0 138.8 3.8 149.4 127.9 4.2 Retail parks 86.2 82.0  86.2 83.0 1.1
Total
Total investment portfolio 357.9 313.4 1.8 341.9 304.6 0.7 Developments 8.5 5.2  2.2 1.0 Total property portfolio Less share of Property interests 130.4 109.8 0.9 137.6 117.5 2.3 The noncash items included within net rental income relate to the amortisation of lease incentives and other costs and movemen ts in accrued rents receivable.
130 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 3 SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS The factors used to determine the Groups reportable segments ar e the geographic locations UK and France and sectors in which it operates which are generally managed by separate teams and are the basis on which performance is assessed and resources allocated.
Gross rental income represents the Groups revenue from its tenants and customers.
Net rental income is the principal profit measure used to determine the performance of each sector.
Total assets are not monitored by segment and resource allocation is based on the distribution of property assets between segments.
As stated in the Financial Review on page 53 management reviews the business principally on a proportionally consolidated basi s except for its interests in premium outlets held through its investments in Value Retail and VIA Outlets where the Group has less day today involvement in the financial performance and which have differen t operational characteristics compared with the Groups propert y portfolio.
The segmental analysis has been prepared on the basis that management uses to review the business rather than on a statutory b asis.
Property interests represent the Groups nonwholly owned properti es which management proportionally consolidate when reviewing the performance of the business.
For reconciliati on purposes the Reported Group figures being whollyowned properties are shown i n the following tables.
During the year the Group acquired an interest in a loan portfo lio secured on retail properties located in Ireland in a 50% jo int venture.
The loans did not generate any rental income in 2015 and at the balance sheet date the loan portfolio was included within current receivables on a proportionally consolidated basis and is therefore not included in notes 3A and 3B.
Note 3C includes the Groups investment in the new Irish joint venture at 31 December 2015.
A Revenue and profit by segment 2015 2014 Gross rental income Net rental income
Gross rental income Net rental income
United Kingdom Shopping centres 162.0 138.8 3.8 149.4 127.9 4.2 Retail parks 86.2 82.0  86.2 83.0 1.1
Total
Total investment portfolio 357.9 313.4 1.8 341.9 304.6 0.7 Developments 8.5 5.2  2.2 1.0 Total property portfolio Less share of Property interests 130.4 109.8 0.9 137.6 117.5 2.3 The noncash items included within net rental income relate to the amortisation of lease incentives and other costs and movemen ts in accrued rents receivable.
HAMMERSON.
OM 131 Investment and development property assets by segment 2015 2014
Capital expenditure
Property valuation
Revaluation gains United Kingdom Shopping centres 3064.9 10.7 194.9 2863.9 201.5 237.4 Retail parks 1656.0 54.2 19.0 1644.1 43.7 134.9
Total
France 1860.5 54.8 116.6 1797.7 223.9 41.1 Total investment portfolio 6741.7 143.2 331.9 6498.4 476.0 418.5 Total property portfolio 7130.5 313.0 367.5 6706.5 566.3 436.8 Less share of Property interests 2478.4 95.1 122.4 2279.2 40.1 165.6 Reported Group 4652.1 217.9 245.1 4427.3 526.2 271.2 C Analysis of noncurrent assets employed Noncurrent assets employed United Kingdom 5283.9 4895.0 Continental Europe 2792.9 2621.5 Ireland 693.5 8770.3 7516.5 Included in the above table are investments in joint ventures of 3213.6 million 2014 2341.5 million which are further a nalysed in note 12 on pages 139 to 144.
The Groups share of the property valuations held within Property joint in terests of 2478.4 million 201 4 2279.2 million has been included in note 3B above of which 2304.7 millio n 2014 2134.9 million relates to the United Kingdom and 173.7 million 2014 144.3 millio n relates to Continental Europe.
131 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 ADMINISTRATION EXPENSES Administration expenses include the following items Staff costs including Directors
Salaries and wages Performancerelated bonuses  payable in cash payable in shares Other sharebased employee remuneration Social security Net pension expense  defined contribution scheme 6A 2.6 3.0 defined benefit schemes 6C  2.0
Of the above amount 16.6 million 2014 11.6 million was recharged to tenants through service charges and 1.9 million 2014 1.5 million capitalised in respect of development projects.
Redundancy related costs of 1.7 million were incurred during 2014.
Staff throughout the Company including Executive Directors part icipate in a performancerelated bonus scheme which for certa in senior employees is part payable in cash and part payable in shares.
The Company also operates a number of share plans under which em ployees including Executive Directors are eligible to participate.
Furt her details of sharebased payment arrangements some of which have performance conditions are provided in the Direct ors Remuneration Report on pages 84 to 101.
Staff numbers
Number
Average number of staff 468 419 Staff recharged to tenants included above 224 181 Other information Auditors remuneration Audit of the Compan ys annual accounts 0.2 0.2 Audit of subsidiaries pursuant to legislatio n 0.3 0.3 Auditrelated assurance services 0.1 0.1 Audit and auditrelated assurance services 0.6 0.6 Other fees Total auditors remuneration 0.7 0.7 Depreciation of plant and equipment 1.7 1.4
Other fees payable to the Companys auditor are principally for tax related work and a review of the Groups sustainability reporting.
DIRECTORS EMOLUMENTS The total remuneration of the Directors is set out in aggregate in note 28B.
Full details of the Directors emoluments as requ ired by the Companies Act 2006 are disclosed in the audited sections of the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 84 to 101.
The Company did not grant any credits advances or guarantees of any kind to its Directors during the current and preceding yea rs.
132 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 ADMINISTRATION EXPENSES Administration expenses include the following items Staff costs including Directors
Salaries and wages Performancerelated bonuses  payable in cash payable in shares Other sharebased employee remuneration Social security Net pension expense  defined contribution scheme 6A 2.6 3.0 defined benefit schemes 6C  2.0
Of the above amount 16.6 million 2014 11.6 million was recharged to tenants through service charges and 1.9 million 2014 1.5 million capitalised in respect of development projects.
Redundancy related costs of 1.7 million were incurred during 2014.
Staff throughout the Company including Executive Directors part icipate in a performancerelated bonus scheme which for certa in senior employees is part payable in cash and part payable in shares.
The Company also operates a number of share plans under which em ployees including Executive Directors are eligible to participate.
Furt her details of sharebased payment arrangements some of which have performance conditions are provided in the Direct ors Remuneration Report on pages 84 to 101.
Staff numbers
Number
Average number of staff 468 419 Staff recharged to tenants included above 224 181 Other information Auditors remuneration Audit of the Compan ys annual accounts 0.2 0.2 Audit of subsidiaries pursuant to legislatio n 0.3 0.3 Auditrelated assurance services 0.1 0.1 Audit and auditrelated assurance services 0.6 0.6 Other fees Total auditors remuneration 0.7 0.7 Depreciation of plant and equipment 1.7 1.4
Other fees payable to the Companys auditor are principally for tax related work and a review of the Groups sustainability reporting.
DIRECTORS EMOLUMENTS The total remuneration of the Directors is set out in aggregate in note 28B.
Full details of the Directors emoluments as requ ired by the Companies Act 2006 are disclosed in the audited sections of the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 84 to 101.
The Company did not grant any credits advances or guarantees of any kind to its Directors during the current and preceding yea rs.
HAMMERSON.
OM 133
Defined contribution pension scheme The Company operates the UK funded approved Group Personal Pension Plan which is a defined contribution pension scheme.
The Gro ups cost for the year was 2.6 million 2014 3.0 million.
Defined benefit pension schemes Hammerson Group Management Limited Pension and Life Assurance Scheme the Scheme.
The Scheme is funded and the funds which are administered by trustees are independent of the Groups finances.
The Scheme was closed to new entrants on 31 December 2002 and was closed to future accrual for all participating employees on 30 June 2014.
Unfunded Unapproved Retirement Schemes The Company also operates two Unfunded Unapproved Retirement Sche mes.
One scheme provides pensio n benefits to two former Execut ive Directors the other scheme meets pension co mmitment obligations to former US employees.
Changes in present value of defined benefit pension schemes 2015 2014
Assets
Net
Obligations
Assets
Net
Amounts recognised in the income statemen t current service cost curtailment gain interest costincome Amounts recognised in equit y actuarial experience gainslosses 1.5 1.6 0.1 0.9  0.9 actuarial gainslosses from changes in financial assumptions 2.4  2.4 12.4  12.4 actuarial losses from changes in demographic assumptions 2.6  2.6 Contributions by employer Benefits 3.1 2.3 0.8 3.2 2.4 0.8 Exchange gainslosses 0.1  0.1 0.1  0.1 Analysed as Present Value of the Scheme 88.8 62.7 26.1 89.4 61.9 27.5 Present Value of Unfunded Retirement Schemes 11.9  11.9 12.3  12.3 Analysed as Current liabilities Other payables 0.8 0.8 Noncurrent liabilities note 22 37.2 39.0
Included in Administration expenses note 4.
The curtailment gain in 2014 is shown after the deduction of past service costs o f 0.3 million.
Included in Other interest payable note 7.
The Group expects to make contributions totalling 1.5 million to the Scheme in the next financial year.
133 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 6 PENSIONS CONTINUED Principal actuarial assumptions used for defined benefit pension schemes % % Discount rate for scheme liabilities 3.8 3.6 Increase in retail price index 3.1 3.1 Increase in pensions in payment 3.1 3.1 Age Age Life expectancy for Scheme members Male aged 60 at 31 December 88.5 88.5 Male aged 40 at 31 December 90.1 90.0 The present value of defined benefit obligations has been calculat ed by an external actuary.
This was taken as the present valu e of accrued benefits and pensions in payment calculated using the projected unit method.
All defined benefit pension scheme assets are inve stments with target returns linked to LIBOR.
NET FINANCE COSTS Interest on bank loans and overdrafts 10.6 9.5 Interest on other borrowings 93.2 103.3 Interest on obligations under finance leases 1.8 1.1 Other interest payable 1.6 1.3 Gross interest costs 107.2 115.2 Less Interest capitalised 5.3 8.8 Finance costs 101.9 106.4 Debt and loan facility cancellation costs 13.9 8.7 Change in fair value of derivatives 1.1 13.1 Finance income 15.7 9.0
Tax charge UK current tax  0.1 Foreign current tax 1.6 0.8 Current tax charge 1.6 0.9 Deferred tax charge  0.1 Tax charge 1.6 1.0 The Groups tax charge remains low because it has tax exempt status in its principal operating countries.
In the UK the Group has been a REIT since 2007 and a SIIC in France since 2004.
These tax regimes exempt the Groups property income and gains from corporate taxes provided a number of conditions in relati on to the Groups activities are met including but not li mited to distributing at le ast 90% of the Groups UK tax exempt profit as property income dist ributions.
The Group continue s to meet these conditions.
Tax charge reconciliation
Profit before tax 2 731.6 703.1 Less Profit after tax of joint ventures 12A 246.8 279.0 Less Profit after tax of associates 13A 160.6 109.9 Profit on ordinary activities before tax Profit multiplied by the UK corporatio n tax rate of 20.25% 2014 21.5% UK REIT tax exemption French SIIC tax exemption Nondeductible and other items Tax charge 134 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 6 PENSIONS CONTINUED Principal actuarial assumptions used for defined benefit pension schemes % % Discount rate for scheme liabilities 3.8 3.6 Increase in retail price index 3.1 3.1 Increase in pensions in payment 3.1 3.1 Age Age Life expectancy for Scheme members Male aged 60 at 31 December 88.5 88.5 Male aged 40 at 31 December 90.1 90.0 The present value of defined benefit obligations has been calculat ed by an external actuary.
This was taken as the present valu e of accrued benefits and pensions in payment calculated using the projected unit method.
All defined benefit pension scheme assets are inve stments with target returns linked to LIBOR.
NET FINANCE COSTS Interest on bank loans and overdrafts 10.6 9.5 Interest on other borrowings 93.2 103.3 Interest on obligations under finance leases 1.8 1.1 Other interest payable 1.6 1.3 Gross interest costs 107.2 115.2 Less Interest capitalised 5.3 8.8 Finance costs 101.9 106.4 Debt and loan facility cancellation costs 13.9 8.7 Change in fair value of derivatives 1.1 13.1 Finance income 15.7 9.0
Tax charge UK current tax  0.1 Foreign current tax 1.6 0.8 Current tax charge 1.6 0.9 Deferred tax charge  0.1 Tax charge 1.6 1.0 The Groups tax charge remains low because it has tax exempt status in its principal operating countries.
In the UK the Group has been a REIT since 2007 and a SIIC in France since 2004.
These tax regimes exempt the Groups property income and gains from corporate taxes provided a number of conditions in relati on to the Groups activities are met including but not li mited to distributing at le ast 90% of the Groups UK tax exempt profit as property income dist ributions.
The Group continue s to meet these conditions.
Tax charge reconciliation
Profit before tax 2 731.6 703.1 Less Profit after tax of joint ventures 12A 246.8 279.0 Less Profit after tax of associates 13A 160.6 109.9 Profit on ordinary activities before tax Profit multiplied by the UK corporatio n tax rate of 20.25% 2014 21.5% UK REIT tax exemption French SIIC tax exemption Nondeductible and other items Tax charge
OM 135 Unrecognised deferred tax A deferred tax asset is not recognised for UK revenue tax losses and UK capital losses where thei r future utilisation is uncert ain.
At
31 December 2015 the total of such losses was 315 million 2014 320 million and 480 million 2014 450 million respecti vely and the potential tax effect of these was 57 million 2014 64 million and 86 million 2014 90 million respectively.
Deferred tax is not provided on potential gains on investments in subsidiaries and joint ventures when the Group can control wh ether gains crystallise and it is probable that gains will not arise in the foreseeable future.
At 31 December 2015 the total of such gain s was 290 million 2014 250 million and the potential tax effect before the offset of losses was 52 million 2014 50 million.
If a UK REIT sells a property within three years of completion of development the REIT exemption will not apply.
There were no such properties at 31 December 2015 or 2014.
DIVIDENDS
The proposed final dividend of 12.8 pence per share was recommended by the Board on 12 February 2016 and subject to approval b y shareholders is payable on 29 April 2016 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 18 March 2016.
6.4 pence per share will be paid as a PID net of withholding tax at the basic rate cur rently 20% if applicable and 6.4 pence per share will be paid as a normal dividend.
The Company will be offering a scrip dividend alternative and for shareholders who elect to receive this the dividend will be treated entirely as a normal dividend.
The aggregate amount of the 2015 final dividend is 100.4 million.
This assumes no shareholders elect to receive the scrip dividend alternative and has been calculated using the total number of eligible shares outstanding at 31 December 2015.
The interim dividend of 9.5 pence per shar e was paid on 1 October 2015 as a PID net of withholding tax where appropriate.
The total dividend for the year ended 31 December 2015 would be 22.3 pence per share 2014 20.4 pence per share.
PID pence per share
Total pence per share
Equity dividends Current year 2015 final dividend 2015 interim dividend 9.5  9.5 74.4 Prior years 2014 final dividend 2.0 9.6 11.6 90.8 2014 interim dividend 8.8  8.8  62.7 2013 final dividend Dividends as reported in the consolidated statement of changes in equity 2013 interim dividend withholding tax paid January 2014 2014 interim dividend withholding tax paid January 2015 2015 interim dividend withholding tax paid January 2016 Dividends paid as reported in the consolidated cash flow statement
If shareholders elect to receive the scrip alternative this element of the dividend will cease to qualify as a PID.
135 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 EARNINGS PER SHARE AND NET ASSET VALUE PER SHARE The European Public Real Estate Associatio n EPRA has issued recommended bases for the calculation of certain per share inform ation and these are included in the following tables A and B.
Commentary on earnings and net asset value per share is provided in the Fin ancial Review on pages 53 to 61.
Earnings per share The calculations for earnings per share use the weighted average number of shares which excludes those shares held in the Hamm erson Employee Share Ownership Plan wh ich are treated as cancelled.
2015 2014
Earnings
Shares million
Earnings
Shares million
Basic
Dilutive share schemes
Adjustments
Revaluation gains on properties Reported Group 2 245.1 31.2 271.2 37.1 Property interests 2 122.4 15.6 165.6 22.7 GainLoss on sale of properties and joint venture interests Reported Group Gain on sale of properties 2 14.9 1.9 0.6 0.1 Loss on sale of joint ventures 2   4.0 0.6 Debt and loan facility cancellation costs Reported Group 7 13.9 1.8 8.7 1.2 Change in fair value of derivatives Reported Group 7 1.1 0.1 13.1 1.8 Property interests 12B 1.0 0.1 0.6 0.1 Other adjustments Reported Group Investment costs written off 2 1.4 0.2 Joint venture formation costs written off 2   3.1 0.4 Deferred tax 2   0.1 Noncontrolling interests 2 0.3  0.7 0.1 Premium outlets Revaluation gains on properties 12B 13B 174.1 22.2 109.8 15.0 Deferred tax 12B 13B 27.6 3.5 12.3 1.6 Other adjustments 12B 13B 0.6 0.1 5.6 0.8 Total adjustments
Net oneoff restructuring charge Reported Group 2   3.0 0.5 Other adjustments Premium outlets 12B 2.1 0.2
Adjustments in respect of Premium outlets include VIA Outlets note 12B and Value Retail note 13B.
136 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 EARNINGS PER SHARE AND NET ASSET VALUE PER SHARE The European Public Real Estate Associatio n EPRA has issued recommended bases for the calculation of certain per share inform ation and these are included in the following tables A and B.
Commentary on earnings and net asset value per share is provided in the Fin ancial Review on pages 53 to 61.
Earnings per share The calculations for earnings per share use the weighted average number of shares which excludes those shares held in the Hamm erson Employee Share Ownership Plan wh ich are treated as cancelled.
2015 2014
Earnings
Shares million
Earnings
Shares million
Basic
Dilutive share schemes
Adjustments
Revaluation gains on properties Reported Group 2 245.1 31.2 271.2 37.1 Property interests 2 122.4 15.6 165.6 22.7 GainLoss on sale of properties and joint venture interests Reported Group Gain on sale of properties 2 14.9 1.9 0.6 0.1 Loss on sale of joint ventures 2   4.0 0.6 Debt and loan facility cancellation costs Reported Group 7 13.9 1.8 8.7 1.2 Change in fair value of derivatives Reported Group 7 1.1 0.1 13.1 1.8 Property interests 12B 1.0 0.1 0.6 0.1 Other adjustments Reported Group Investment costs written off 2 1.4 0.2 Joint venture formation costs written off 2   3.1 0.4 Deferred tax 2   0.1 Noncontrolling interests 2 0.3  0.7 0.1 Premium outlets Revaluation gains on properties 12B 13B 174.1 22.2 109.8 15.0 Deferred tax 12B 13B 27.6 3.5 12.3 1.6 Other adjustments 12B 13B 0.6 0.1 5.6 0.8 Total adjustments
Net oneoff restructuring charge Reported Group 2   3.0 0.5 Other adjustments Premium outlets 12B 2.1 0.2
Adjustments in respect of Premium outlets include VIA Outlets note 12B and Value Retail note 13B.
HAMMERSON.
OM 137 Net asset value per share 2015 2014
Equity shareholders funds
Net asset value per share
Shares million Net asset value per share
Companys own shares held in Employee Share Ownership Plan 0.6 na  1.2 na Dilutive share schemes
Fair value adjustment to borrowings Reported Group 20I 225.4 0.29 306.0 0.39 Property interests EPRA triple net 5292.9 6.74 4669.3 5.96 Fair value adjustment to borrowings Deferred tax Fair value of derivatives Reported Group 20I 13.8 0.02 15.0 0.02 Property interests Premium outlets Fair value of derivatives 12C 13D 3.1  1.2 Deferred tax 12C 13D 113.6 0.14 84.8 0.11 Goodwill as a result of deferred tax 12C 13D 50.0 0.05 50.1 0.06
Adjustments in respect of Premium outlets include VIA Outlets note 12C and Value Retail note 13D.
11 INVESTMENT AND DEVELOPMENT PROPERTIES 2015 2014
Valuation
Development properties
Total
Valuation
Investment
Valuation
Development properties
Total
Valuation
Balance at 1 January 4273.2 154.1 4427.3 2988.7 459.1 3447.8 Exchange adjustment
Capital expenditure Asset acquisitions Transfer from investment in joint ventures
Transfers
Capitalised interest
Balance at 31 December 4418.9 233.2 4652.1 4273.2 154.1 4427.3 Properties are stated at fair value as at 31 December 2015 valued by professionally qualified external valuers.
DTZ Debenham T ie Leung Limited Chartered Surveyors have valued the Groups properties excluding those held by the Groups premium outlet investments which have been valued by Cushman and Wakefield LLP Chartered Surveyors.
All valuations have been prepared in accordance with the RICS Valuation  Professional Standards 2014 based on certain assumptions as set out in note 1.
137 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 11 INVESTMENT AND DEVELOPMENT PROPERTIES CONTINUED In the case of leasehold properties valuations are net of any obligation to freeholders or superior leaseholders.
To comply wi th IAS 40 and IAS 17 these obligations and the related leasehold assets are included in the balance sheet within Obligations under finance l eases note 21 and Interests in leasehold properties respectively.
Further information is provided in Significant accounting policies on p age 126.
Valuation fees are based on a fixed amount agreed between the Group and the valuers and are inde pendent of the portfolio value.
Summaries of the valuers reports are available on the Companys website site As noted in Significant judgements and key estimates on page 124 real estate valuations are complex derived from data which is not widely publicly available and involve a degree of judgement.
For these reasons and consistent with EPRAs guidance we have classifie d the valuations of our property portfolio as Level 3 as defined by IF RS 13.
Inputs to the valuations some of which are unobservabl e as defined by IFRS 13 include capitalisation yields nominal equivalent yield and market rental income ERV.
These inputs to the valuation s are analysed by segment in the valuation and rental data tables on pages 166 and 169 and the valuation change analysis in the Financial Revi ew on page 58.
All other factors remaining constant an increase in rental inco me would increase valuations whilst increases in capitalisatio n yields and discount rates would result in a fall in values and vice vers a.
However there are interrelati onships between unobservable inputs as they are determined by market conditions.
The existence of an increase of more than one unobservable input would augment the impact on v aluation.
The impact on the valuation would be mitigated by the interrelationship between unobservable inputs moving in opposite directio ns.
For example an increase in rents may be offset by an increase in yield resulting in no net impact on the valuation.
A sensitivity analysis showing the impact on valuations of changes in yi elds and rental income is shown below.
Impact on valuation of 25bp change in nominal equivalent yield Impact on valuations of 5% change in estimated rental value ERV Key unobservable inputs sensitivity analysis
Decrease
Increase
Increase
Decrease
Reported Group 4418.9 236.4 213.9 183.8 169.3 The total amount of interest included in development properties at 31 December 2015 was 4.9 million 2014 2.4 million.
Capi talised interest is calculated using the cost of secured debt or the Groups average cost of borrowings as appropriate and the effect ive rate applied in 2015 was 3.8% 2014 4.7%.
At 31 Dece mber 2014 the historic cost of investment and development properties was 3830.0 mill ion 2014 3930.1 million.
At 31 December 2015 the investment properties shown above included Monument Mall Newcastle where a sale contract for a total value of 75 million had been exchanged in December 2015 and which co mpleted in January 2016.
In addition a sale contract was exchan ged in January 2016 for the sale of Villebon 2 Paris for a value of 117 million with completion expected in March 2016.
On 11 February 2016 the Group completed the purchase of Grand Central Birmingham for 350 million and entered into a new joint venture agreement with CPPIB who will acquire a 50% interest in the property for 175 million subject to regulatory approval.
Analysis of properties by tenure
Long leasehold
Balance at 31 December 2015 3443.1 1209.0 4652.1 Balance at 31 December 20 14 3365.0 1062.3 4427.3 Capital commitments 107.7 196.1 138 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 11 INVESTMENT AND DEVELOPMENT PROPERTIES CONTINUED In the case of leasehold properties valuations are net of any obligation to freeholders or superior leaseholders.
To comply wi th IAS 40 and IAS 17 these obligations and the related leasehold assets are included in the balance sheet within Obligations under finance l eases note 21 and Interests in leasehold properties respectively.
Further information is provided in Significant accounting policies on p age 126.
Valuation fees are based on a fixed amount agreed between the Group and the valuers and are inde pendent of the portfolio value.
Summaries of the valuers reports are available on the Companys website site As noted in Significant judgements and key estimates on page 124 real estate valuations are complex derived from data which is not widely publicly available and involve a degree of judgement.
For these reasons and consistent with EPRAs guidance we have classifie d the valuations of our property portfolio as Level 3 as defined by IF RS 13.
Inputs to the valuations some of which are unobservabl e as defined by IFRS 13 include capitalisation yields nominal equivalent yield and market rental income ERV.
These inputs to the valuation s are analysed by segment in the valuation and rental data tables on pages 166 and 169 and the valuation change analysis in the Financial Revi ew on page 58.
All other factors remaining constant an increase in rental inco me would increase valuations whilst increases in capitalisatio n yields and discount rates would result in a fall in values and vice vers a.
However there are interrelati onships between unobservable inputs as they are determined by market conditions.
The existence of an increase of more than one unobservable input would augment the impact on v aluation.
The impact on the valuation would be mitigated by the interrelationship between unobservable inputs moving in opposite directio ns.
For example an increase in rents may be offset by an increase in yield resulting in no net impact on the valuation.
A sensitivity analysis showing the impact on valuations of changes in yi elds and rental income is shown below.
Impact on valuation of 25bp change in nominal equivalent yield Impact on valuations of 5% change in estimated rental value ERV Key unobservable inputs sensitivity analysis
Decrease
Increase
Increase
Decrease
Reported Group 4418.9 236.4 213.9 183.8 169.3 The total amount of interest included in development properties at 31 December 2015 was 4.9 million 2014 2.4 million.
Capi talised interest is calculated using the cost of secured debt or the Groups average cost of borrowings as appropriate and the effect ive rate applied in 2015 was 3.8% 2014 4.7%.
At 31 Dece mber 2014 the historic cost of investment and development properties was 3830.0 mill ion 2014 3930.1 million.
At 31 December 2015 the investment properties shown above included Monument Mall Newcastle where a sale contract for a total value of 75 million had been exchanged in December 2015 and which co mpleted in January 2016.
In addition a sale contract was exchan ged in January 2016 for the sale of Villebon 2 Paris for a value of 117 million with completion expected in March 2016.
On 11 February 2016 the Group completed the purchase of Grand Central Birmingham for 350 million and entered into a new joint venture agreement with CPPIB who will acquire a 50% interest in the property for 175 million subject to regulatory approval.
Analysis of properties by tenure
Long leasehold
Balance at 31 December 2015 3443.1 1209.0 4652.1 Balance at 31 December 20 14 3365.0 1062.3 4427.3 Capital commitments 107.7 196.1
OM 139 12 INVESTMENT IN JOINT VENTURES As at 31 December 2015 the Group had investments in a number of jointly controlled property and corporate interests which have been equity accounted.
As explained in note 3 management reviews the business principally on a proportionally consolidated basis except f or its premium outlet investments.
The Groups total proportional share of joint ventures is split between Property joint ventures be ing joint ventures which are proportionally consolidated and VIA outlets a premium outlets investment which is not proportionally cons olidated.
The Groups significant joint venture interests are set out in th e table below.
Further details of the Groups interests in joi nt ventures are shown in note H on pages 164 and 165.
Partner Principal property Group share % United Kingdom Bishopsgate Goodsyard Regeneration Limited Ballymore Properties The Goodsyard 50 Brent Cross Shopping Centre Brent South Shop ping Park Standard Life Brent Cross 41.240.6 Bristol Alliance Limited Partnership AXA Real Estate Cabot Circus 50 Croydon Limited PartnershipWhitgift Limite d Partnership Westfield CentraleWhitgift 50 Retail Property Holdings Limited CPPIB Silverburn 50 The Bull Ring Limited Partnership TH Real Estate CPPIB Bullring 50 The Oracle Limited Partnership ADIA The Oracle 50 VIA Limited Partnership APG Meyer Bergman Value Retail European outlet centres 47 West Quay Limited Partnership GIC WestQuay 50
Triskelion Property Holding Designated Acti vity Company Allianz Irish loan portfolio 50
SCI ESQ Allianz Espace Saint Quentin 25 SCI RC Aulnay 1 and SCI RC Aulnay 2 Client of Rockspring Property Investment Managers OParinor 25 The names of the principal property operated by each partnership have been used in the summary income statements and balanc e sheets in note 12A.
In March 2015 the Group acquired an additional 66.7% stake in The Martineau Galleries Limited Partnership increasing the Gro ups interest in the partnership to 100%.
The revaluation gain during the year up to the date the Group acquired the additional stake in this entity totalled 2.2 million and has been treated as a property revaluatio n gain in the summarised income statement in note 12A.
In October 2015 the Group acquired an interest in a loan portfo lio secured on retail properties located in Dublin Ireland in a 50% joint venture for 690.2 million.
The Irish loan portfolio held by th e joint venture consists primarily of interestbearing loans of 1363.6 million and is included within other current assets in note 12A.
It is anticipated that these loans will be converted into owned proper ty assets in 2016.
See page 26 of the Busine ss Review for further details.
The summarised income statements and balance sheets in note 12A show 100% of the results assets and liabilities of joint ventu res and where necessary have been restated to the Groups accounting po licies and exclude all balances which are eliminated on consolid ation.
139 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 12 INVESTMENT IN JOINT VENTURES CONTINUED
Summary financial statements of joint ventures Share of results of joint ventures for the year ended 31 December 2015 See page 142 for notes.
Brent Cross Cabot Circus
The Oracle
Ownership % 41.240.
Gross rental income 47.6 37.9 56.6 32.3 30.7 Net rental income 44.1 32.5 49.6 26.1 25.0 Administration expenses   0.1 Operating profit before other net gainslosses 44.1 32.5 49.5 26.1 25.0 Loss on sale of properties Revaluation gainslosses on properties 6.1 43.3 107.2 41.9 20.1 Operating profit Change in fair value of derivatives Translation movement on intragroup funding loan Other finance incomecosts  0.8  0.1 0.4 Net finance incomecosts  0.8  0.1 0.4 Profit before tax 38.0 75.0 156.7 67.9 44.7 Current tax charge Deferred tax charge Profit for the year 38.0 75.0 156.7 67.9 44.7 Hammerson share of profit for the year 15.6 37.5 78.3 34.0 22.4 Hammerson share of distributions payable  19.2 20.3 3.0 0.2 Share of assets and liabilities of joint ventures as at 31 December 2015 Brent Cross Cabot Circus
The Oracle
Noncurrent assets Investment and development properties
Interests in leasehold properties  14.6   4.2 Current assets Other current assets 13.7 5.8 11.4 4.3 6.0 Cash and deposits 0.7 2.2 9.2 9.5 12.0 Current liabilities Other payables 21.7 13.3 19.7 241.4 10.7 Borrowings  secured Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings  secured Obligations under finance leases  14.6   4.2 Other payables 1.0 0.3 1.3 0.6 597.5 Deferred tax    0.1 Net assetsliabilities 972.5 612.4 1201.4 430.5 34.8 Hammerson share of net assetsliabilities 395.6 306.2 600.7 215.2 17.4 Balance due to Hammerson Total investment in joint ventures 140 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 12 INVESTMENT IN JOINT VENTURES CONTINUED
Summary financial statements of joint ventures Share of results of joint ventures for the year ended 31 December 2015 See page 142 for notes.
Brent Cross Cabot Circus
The Oracle
Ownership % 41.240.
Gross rental income 47.6 37.9 56.6 32.3 30.7 Net rental income 44.1 32.5 49.6 26.1 25.0 Administration expenses   0.1 Operating profit before other net gainslosses 44.1 32.5 49.5 26.1 25.0 Loss on sale of properties Revaluation gainslosses on properties 6.1 43.3 107.2 41.9 20.1 Operating profit Change in fair value of derivatives Translation movement on intragroup funding loan Other finance incomecosts  0.8  0.1 0.4 Net finance incomecosts  0.8  0.1 0.4 Profit before tax 38.0 75.0 156.7 67.9 44.7 Current tax charge Deferred tax charge Profit for the year 38.0 75.0 156.7 67.9 44.7 Hammerson share of profit for the year 15.6 37.5 78.3 34.0 22.4 Hammerson share of distributions payable  19.2 20.3 3.0 0.2 Share of assets and liabilities of joint ventures as at 31 December 2015 Brent Cross Cabot Circus
The Oracle
Noncurrent assets Investment and development properties
Interests in leasehold properties  14.6   4.2 Current assets Other current assets 13.7 5.8 11.4 4.3 6.0 Cash and deposits 0.7 2.2 9.2 9.5 12.0 Current liabilities Other payables 21.7 13.3 19.7 241.4 10.7 Borrowings  secured Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings  secured Obligations under finance leases  14.6   4.2 Other payables 1.0 0.3 1.3 0.6 597.5 Deferred tax    0.1 Net assetsliabilities 972.5 612.4 1201.4 430.5 34.8 Hammerson share of net assetsliabilities 395.6 306.2 600.7 215.2 17.4 Balance due to Hammerson Total investment in joint ventures
OM 141 Hammerson share
CentraleWhitgift
Irish loan portfolio
Other
Total
Property joint ventures VIA Outlets
Hammerson share
CentraleWhitgift
Irish loan portfolio
Other
Total
Property joint ventures VIA Outlets
141 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 12 INVESTMENT IN JOINT VENTURES CONTINUED
Summary financial statements of joint ventures continued Share of results of joint ventures for the year ended 31 December 2014 Brent Cross Cabot Circus
The Oracle
Ownership % 41.240.
Gross rental income 47.5 37.7 56.5 31.4 31.3 Net rental income 43.9 32.0 50.3 26.2 25.2 Administration expenses  0.7 0.2 Operating profit before other net gainslosses 43.9 31.3 50.1 26.2 25.2 Revaluation gainslosses on properties 43.6 39.5 125.7 55.3 25.2 Operating profit Change in fair value of derivatives Other finance costs  0.8   0.4 Net finance costs  0.8   0.4 Profit before tax 87.5 70.0 175.8 81.5 50.0 Current tax charge Deferred tax charge Profit for the year 87.5 70.0 175.8 81.5 50.0 Hammerson share of profit for the year 36.1 35.0 87.9 40.7 25.0 Hammerson share of distributions payable  15.8 23.0 5.9 0.6 Share of assets and liabilities of joint ventures as at 31 December 2014 Brent Cross Cabot Circus
The Oracle
Noncurrent assets Investment and development properti es
Interests in leasehold properties  14.6   4.2
Current assets Other current assets 33.2 5.7 4.2 7.2 4.2 Cash and deposits 4.0 9.6 18.9 5.7 5.0 Current liabilities Other payables 47.6 13.3 14.9 13.5 10.4 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings  secured Obligations under finance leases  14.6   4.2 Other payables 2.4 0.5 1.1 231.6 597.6 Deferred tax Net assetsliabilities 954.4 577.1 1092.1 380.4 66.1 Hammerson share of net assetsliabilities 393.2 288.6 546.0 190.2 33.0 Balance due to Hammerson Total investment in joint ventures The Group and its partners invest in joint ventures principally by way of equity investment.
To provide further clarity of t his investment those balances which are not equity have been included within other payables as a liability of the joint venture and Hammersons interest has been shown se parately.
The comparative table has been prepared on the same basis.
142 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 12 INVESTMENT IN JOINT VENTURES CONTINUED
Summary financial statements of joint ventures continued Share of results of joint ventures for the year ended 31 December 2014 Brent Cross Cabot Circus
The Oracle
Ownership % 41.240.
Gross rental income 47.5 37.7 56.5 31.4 31.3 Net rental income 43.9 32.0 50.3 26.2 25.2 Administration expenses  0.7 0.2 Operating profit before other net gainslosses 43.9 31.3 50.1 26.2 25.2 Revaluation gainslosses on properties 43.6 39.5 125.7 55.3 25.2 Operating profit Change in fair value of derivatives Other finance costs  0.8   0.4 Net finance costs  0.8   0.4 Profit before tax 87.5 70.0 175.8 81.5 50.0 Current tax charge Deferred tax charge Profit for the year 87.5 70.0 175.8 81.5 50.0 Hammerson share of profit for the year 36.1 35.0 87.9 40.7 25.0 Hammerson share of distributions payable  15.8 23.0 5.9 0.6 Share of assets and liabilities of joint ventures as at 31 December 2014 Brent Cross Cabot Circus
The Oracle
Noncurrent assets Investment and development properti es
Interests in leasehold properties  14.6   4.2
Current assets Other current assets 33.2 5.7 4.2 7.2 4.2 Cash and deposits 4.0 9.6 18.9 5.7 5.0 Current liabilities Other payables 47.6 13.3 14.9 13.5 10.4 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings  secured Obligations under finance leases  14.6   4.2 Other payables 2.4 0.5 1.1 231.6 597.6 Deferred tax Net assetsliabilities 954.4 577.1 1092.1 380.4 66.1 Hammerson share of net assetsliabilities 393.2 288.6 546.0 190.2 33.0 Balance due to Hammerson Total investment in joint ventures The Group and its partners invest in joint ventures principally by way of equity investment.
To provide further clarity of t his investment those balances which are not equity have been included within other payables as a liability of the joint venture and Hammersons interest has been shown se parately.
The comparative table has been prepared on the same basis.
HAMMERSON.
OM 143 Hammerson share
CentraleWhitgift
OParinor
Other
Total
Property joint ventures VIA Outlets
Hammerson share
CentraleWhitgift
OParinor
Other
Total
Property joint ventures VIA Outlets
143 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 12 INVESTMENT IN JOINT VENTURES CONTINUED
Reconciliation to adjusted earnings Property joint ventures VIA Outlets
Property joint ventures VIA Outlets
Profit for the year 233.7 13.1 246.8 280.1 1.1 279.0 Loss on sale of properties  0.8 0.8 Revaluation gainslosses on properties 122.1 10.4 132.5 165.6 1.3 164.3 Change in fair value of derivatives 1.0 2.2 1.2 0.6 0.3 0.3 Translation movements on intragroup funding loan  2.1 2.1 Deferred tax charge  2.5 2.5  0.4 0.4 Total adjustments 123.1 7.0 130.1 166.2 2.0 164.2 Adjusted earnings of joint ventures 110.6 6.1 116.7 113.9 0.9 114.8
Reconciliation to EPRA adjusted investment in joint ventures Property joint ventures VIA Outlets Investment in joint ventures 3102.8 110.8 3213.6 2341.5 Fair value of derivatives 0.9 3.5 4.4 3.1 Deferred tax  6.3 6.3 4.0 Goodwill as a result of deferred tax  3.0 3.0 3.1 EPRA adjustments 0.9 6.8 7.7 4.0 EPRA adjusted investment in joint ventures 3103.7 117.6 3221.3 2345.5
Reconciliation of movements in investment in joint ventures Balance at 1 January 2341.5 2470.8 Acquisitions 690.2 110.8 Joint venture formation costs written off  3.1 Transfer of investment property on acquisition by Reported Group 11.0 279.1 Disposals  151.8 Share of results of joint ventures 246.8 279.0 Distributions and other receivables 92.0 100.4 Advances 45.4 8.1 Other movements Foreign exchange translation differences 8.9 10.6 Balance at 31 December 3213.6 2341.5 144 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 12 INVESTMENT IN JOINT VENTURES CONTINUED
Reconciliation to adjusted earnings Property joint ventures VIA Outlets
Property joint ventures VIA Outlets
Profit for the year 233.7 13.1 246.8 280.1 1.1 279.0 Loss on sale of properties  0.8 0.8 Revaluation gainslosses on properties 122.1 10.4 132.5 165.6 1.3 164.3 Change in fair value of derivatives 1.0 2.2 1.2 0.6 0.3 0.3 Translation movements on intragroup funding loan  2.1 2.1 Deferred tax charge  2.5 2.5  0.4 0.4 Total adjustments 123.1 7.0 130.1 166.2 2.0 164.2 Adjusted earnings of joint ventures 110.6 6.1 116.7 113.9 0.9 114.8
Reconciliation to EPRA adjusted investment in joint ventures Property joint ventures VIA Outlets Investment in joint ventures 3102.8 110.8 3213.6 2341.5 Fair value of derivatives 0.9 3.5 4.4 3.1 Deferred tax  6.3 6.3 4.0 Goodwill as a result of deferred tax  3.0 3.0 3.1 EPRA adjustments 0.9 6.8 7.7 4.0 EPRA adjusted investment in joint ventures 3103.7 117.6 3221.3 2345.5
Reconciliation of movements in investment in joint ventures Balance at 1 January 2341.5 2470.8 Acquisitions 690.2 110.8 Joint venture formation costs written off  3.1 Transfer of investment property on acquisition by Reported Group 11.0 279.1 Disposals  151.8 Share of results of joint ventures 246.8 279.0 Distributions and other receivables 92.0 100.4 Advances 45.4 8.1 Other movements Foreign exchange translation differences 8.9 10.6 Balance at 31 December 3213.6 2341.5
OM 145 13 INVESTMENT IN ASSOCIATES At 31 December 2015 the Group had two associates Value Retail PLC and its group entities VR and a 10% interest in Nicetoi le which was acquired in January 2015 and where Hammerson is the asset manage r.
Both investments are equity accounted under IFRS although t he share of results in Nicetoile are included with the Groups Property interests when presenting figures on a proportionally consolidat ed basis.
Share of results of associates 2015 2014 VR Nicetoile Total Total 100%
100%
100%
100%
Administration and other expenses 99.3 27.4 0.1  99.4 27.4 73.1 20.0 Operating profit before other net gains Revaluation gains on properties 533.9 163.7 3.0 0.3 536.9 164.0 314.2 111.1 Net finance costs 35.0 13.1   35.0 13.1 39.2 14.0 Change in fair value of derivatives 34.3 7.5   34.3 7.5 34.8 9.9 Change in fair value of participative loans  revaluation movement  12.6   12.6  4.6 Change in fair value of participative loans  other movement  2.6   2.6  2.1 Current tax charge 10.3 2.3   10.3 2.3 7.4 1.7 Deferred tax charge 106.3 25.1   106.3 25.1 47.4 11.9 Reconciliation to adjusted earnings 2015 2014 VR Nicetoile Total Total 100%
100%
100%
100%
Revaluation gains on properties 533.9 163.7 3.0 0.3 536.9 164.0 314.2 111.1 Change in fair value of derivatives 34.3 7.5   34.3 7.5 34.8 9.9 Change in fair value of participative loans  revaluation movement  12.6   12.6  4.6 Loan facility costs written off 3.7 1.5   3.7 1.5 Deferred tax charge 106.3 25.1   106.3 25.1 47.4 11.9 Total adjustments Adjusted earnings of associates 36.9 17.1 10.9 1.0 47.8 18.1 37.6 16.0 When aggregated the Groups share of VRs operating profit before other net gains for the year ended 31 December 2015 amounted to 36.2% 2014 35.2%.
145 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 13 INVESTMENT IN ASSOCIATES CONTINUED C Share of assets and liabilities of associates 2015 2014 VR Nicetoile Total Total 100%
100%
100%
100%
Goodwill on acquisition  65.4    65.4  65.7 Investment properties 3333.1 1095.0 233.0 23.3 3566.1 1118.3 2835.4 884.7 Other noncurrent assets 134.7 30.3   134.7 30.3 81.3 18.6 Noncurrent assets 3467.8 1190.7 233.0 23.3 3700.8 1214.0 2916.7 969.0 Other current assets 185.5 12.5 2.0 0.2 187.5 12.7 164.8 30.2 Total assets 3835.4 1255.6 246.5 24.6 4081.9 1280.2 3185.4 1027.6 Current liabilities 131.5 52.7 1.2 0.2 132.7 52.9 214.1 52.0 Borrowings 1092.6 339.5   1092.6 339.5 789.5 253.6 Noncurrent liabilities 1929.6 539.4 2.1 0.2 1931.7 539.6 1496.0 418.0 Total liabilities 2061.1 592.1 3.3 0.4 2064.4 592.5 1710.1 470.0 Net assets 1774.3 663.5 243.2 24.2 2017.5 687.7 1475.3 557.6 Participative loans Investment in associates The analysis in the table above excludes liabilities in respect of distributions received in advance from VR amounting to 19.0 million 2014 12.6 million which are included within noncurrent liabilities in note 22.
At 31 December 2015 Hammersons investment in VR excluding good will as a proportion of VRs net assets was 38.2% 2014 38.2 %.
The Groups total investment in associates includes longterm debt which in substance forms part of the Groups investment.
T hese participative loans are not repayable in the foreseeable future.
D Reconciliation to EPRA adjusted investment in associates
Nicetoile
Investment in associates 743.8 24.2 768.0 628.8 Fair value of derivatives 0.4  0.4 1.9 Deferred tax 107.3  107.3 80.8 Goodwill as a result of deferred tax 47.0  47.0 47.0 EPRA adjustments 59.9  59.9 31.9 EPRA adjusted investment in associates 803.7 24.2 827.9 660.7 Reconciliation of movements in investment in associates
Nicetoile
Balance at 1 January 628.8  628.8 545.4 Acquisitions 12.4 24.2 36.6 Share of results of associates 159.3 1.3 160.6 109.9 Distributions 44.5  44.5 11.5 Revaluation movement on participative loan 1.0  1.0 0.6 Foreign exchange translation differences 11.2 1.3 12.5 15.6 Balance at 31 December 743.8 24.2 768.0 628.8 146 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 13 INVESTMENT IN ASSOCIATES CONTINUED C Share of assets and liabilities of associates 2015 2014 VR Nicetoile Total Total 100%
100%
100%
100%
Goodwill on acquisition  65.4    65.4  65.7 Investment properties 3333.1 1095.0 233.0 23.3 3566.1 1118.3 2835.4 884.7 Other noncurrent assets 134.7 30.3   134.7 30.3 81.3 18.6 Noncurrent assets 3467.8 1190.7 233.0 23.3 3700.8 1214.0 2916.7 969.0 Other current assets 185.5 12.5 2.0 0.2 187.5 12.7 164.8 30.2 Total assets 3835.4 1255.6 246.5 24.6 4081.9 1280.2 3185.4 1027.6 Current liabilities 131.5 52.7 1.2 0.2 132.7 52.9 214.1 52.0 Borrowings 1092.6 339.5   1092.6 339.5 789.5 253.6 Noncurrent liabilities 1929.6 539.4 2.1 0.2 1931.7 539.6 1496.0 418.0 Total liabilities 2061.1 592.1 3.3 0.4 2064.4 592.5 1710.1 470.0 Net assets 1774.3 663.5 243.2 24.2 2017.5 687.7 1475.3 557.6 Participative loans Investment in associates The analysis in the table above excludes liabilities in respect of distributions received in advance from VR amounting to 19.0 million 2014 12.6 million which are included within noncurrent liabilities in note 22.
At 31 December 2015 Hammersons investment in VR excluding good will as a proportion of VRs net assets was 38.2% 2014 38.2 %.
The Groups total investment in associates includes longterm debt which in substance forms part of the Groups investment.
T hese participative loans are not repayable in the foreseeable future.
D Reconciliation to EPRA adjusted investment in associates
Nicetoile
Investment in associates 743.8 24.2 768.0 628.8 Fair value of derivatives 0.4  0.4 1.9 Deferred tax 107.3  107.3 80.8 Goodwill as a result of deferred tax 47.0  47.0 47.0 EPRA adjustments 59.9  59.9 31.9 EPRA adjusted investment in associates 803.7 24.2 827.9 660.7 Reconciliation of movements in investment in associates
Nicetoile
Balance at 1 January 628.8  628.8 545.4 Acquisitions 12.4 24.2 36.6 Share of results of associates 159.3 1.3 160.6 109.9 Distributions 44.5  44.5 11.5 Revaluation movement on participative loan 1.0  1.0 0.6 Foreign exchange translation differences 11.2 1.3 12.5 15.6 Balance at 31 December 743.8 24.2 768.0 628.8
OM 147 RECEIVABLES NONCURRENT ASSETS Loans receivable 76.4 63.5 Other receivables 1.9 0.8 Fair value of interest rate swaps 13.8 15.0 All loans are classified as available for sale an d held at fair value and are analysed below Value Retail European Holdings BV 2.0 million 2 014 2.0 million maturing 30 November 2043 1.4 1.6 VR Dublin Limited and Kildare Retail Services Limited 22.4 million 2014 nil maturing 30 September 2019 16.5 Value Retail European Holdings BV 56.0 million 2 014 56.0 million maturing 11 September 2019 41.3 43.4 VR Milan S.
23.3 million 2014 23.
9 million maturing 13 December 2017 17.2 18.5 15 RECEIVABLES CURRENT ASSETS Trade receivables 46.7 36.4 Other receivables 37.6 41.1 Corporation tax  0.1 Prepayments 3.7 3.8 Fair value of currency swaps 30.0 5.1 Trade receivables are shown after deducting a provision for bad an d doubtful debts of 11.8 million 2014 11.6 million as s et out in the table below.
The movement in the provision during the year was recognis ed entirely in income.
The level of provision required is dete rmined after taking account of rent deposits and personal or corporate guar antees held.
Credit risk is discussed further in note 20F.
Gross receivable
Net receivable
Provision
Net receivable Not yet due 24.8  24.8 19.8  19.8 130 days overdue 7.4 0.1 7.3 10.0 0.3 9.7 3160 days overdue 2.2  2.2 0.2  0.2 6190 days overdue 0.8  0.8 0.9 0.2 0.7 91120 days overdue 2.5 0.2 2.3 3.1 0.5 2.6 More than 120 days overdue 20.8 11.5 9.3 14.0 10.6 3.4 16 RESTRICTED MONETARY ASSETS Cash held on behalf of third parties 34.0 11.3 The Group and its managing agents hold cash on behalf of its tenants and coowners to meet future service charge costs and related expenditure.
The cash has restricted use and as such does not meet the definition of cash and cash equivalents as defined in IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows.
The balance of 11.3 million held at 31 December 2014 had previously been included within trade receivables an d classified as Not yet due.
This has been recl assified to restricted monetary assets in the current year.
147 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 17 CASH AND DEPOSITS Cash at bank 36.9 28.5 Shortterm deposits 0.1 0.1 Currency profile Sterling 14.4 10.1 Euro 22.6 18.5 PAYABLES CURRENT LIABILITIES Trade payables 23.9 18.3 Other payables 153.8 133.4 Accruals 31.6 27.5 Deferred income 26.2 25.2
Maturity
Bank loans and overdrafts
Total
Bank loans and overdrafts
Total
After five years  1478.2 1478.2  1399.0 1399.0 From two to five years 245.1 614.7 859.8 72.9 384.8 457.7 From one to two years 690.1  690.1 164.6 265.8 430.4 Due after more than one year 935.2 2092.9 3028.1 237.5 2049.6 2287.1 Current assets Fair value of currency swaps  30.0 30.0  5.1 5.1 935.2 2062.9 2998.1 237.5 2044.5 2282.0 At 31 December 2015 and 2014 no borrowings due after five years were repayable by instalments.
At 31 December 2015 the fair va lue of currency swaps was an asset of 42.8 million 2014 16.1 million of which 30.0 million 2014 5.1 million is due within on e year and is included in current receivables see note 15.
Analysis
Unsecured
200 million 7.25% sterling bonds due 2028 198.1 198.0 300 million 6% sterling bonds due 2026 297.6 297.4 350 million 3.5% sterling bonds due 2025 345.0 500 million 2% euro bonds due 2022 364.6 383.4 250 million 6.875% sterling bonds due 2020 248.6 248.4 500 million 2.75% euro bonds due 2019 366.1 384.8 272 million 5.25% sterling bonds due 2016  271.5 Bank loans and overdrafts 935.2 237.5 Senior notes due 2026 22.0 23.2 Senior notes due 2024 135.6 131.1 Senior notes due 2021 128.1 122.8 3040.9 2298.1 Fair value of currency swaps 42.8 16.1 2998.1 2282.0 Financing activities during the year are detailed in the Financial Review on pages 60 and 61.
Senior notes comprise 196.5 mill ion 2014 185.6 million denominated in US dollars 44.2 million 2014 46.5 million in euro and 45.0 million 2014 45.0 million in sterling.
148 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 17 CASH AND DEPOSITS Cash at bank 36.9 28.5 Shortterm deposits 0.1 0.1 Currency profile Sterling 14.4 10.1 Euro 22.6 18.5 PAYABLES CURRENT LIABILITIES Trade payables 23.9 18.3 Other payables 153.8 133.4 Accruals 31.6 27.5 Deferred income 26.2 25.2
Maturity
Bank loans and overdrafts
Total
Bank loans and overdrafts
Total
After five years  1478.2 1478.2  1399.0 1399.0 From two to five years 245.1 614.7 859.8 72.9 384.8 457.7 From one to two years 690.1  690.1 164.6 265.8 430.4 Due after more than one year 935.2 2092.9 3028.1 237.5 2049.6 2287.1 Current assets Fair value of currency swaps  30.0 30.0  5.1 5.1 935.2 2062.9 2998.1 237.5 2044.5 2282.0 At 31 December 2015 and 2014 no borrowings due after five years were repayable by instalments.
At 31 December 2015 the fair va lue of currency swaps was an asset of 42.8 million 2014 16.1 million of which 30.0 million 2014 5.1 million is due within on e year and is included in current receivables see note 15.
Analysis
Unsecured
200 million 7.25% sterling bonds due 2028 198.1 198.0 300 million 6% sterling bonds due 2026 297.6 297.4 350 million 3.5% sterling bonds due 2025 345.0 500 million 2% euro bonds due 2022 364.6 383.4 250 million 6.875% sterling bonds due 2020 248.6 248.4 500 million 2.75% euro bonds due 2019 366.1 384.8 272 million 5.25% sterling bonds due 2016  271.5 Bank loans and overdrafts 935.2 237.5 Senior notes due 2026 22.0 23.2 Senior notes due 2024 135.6 131.1 Senior notes due 2021 128.1 122.8 3040.9 2298.1 Fair value of currency swaps 42.8 16.1 2998.1 2282.0 Financing activities during the year are detailed in the Financial Review on pages 60 and 61.
Senior notes comprise 196.5 mill ion 2014 185.6 million denominated in US dollars 44.2 million 2014 46.5 million in euro and 45.0 million 2014 45.0 million in sterling.
HAMMERSON.
OM 149 Undrawn committed facilities
Within two to five years 342.0 250.0 Within one to two years 518.5 339.0 Interest rate and currency profile Fixed rate borrowings Floating rate borrowings
Euro 2.6 7 1286.7 1282.1 2568.8 US Dollar    7.0 7.0 3.7 8 1838.7 1159.4 2998.1 Fixed rate borrowings Floating rate borrowings
Euro 3.3 6 1375.3 413.3 1788.6 US Dollar    6.8 6.8 4.0 7 1800.7 481.3 2282.0 The analysis above reflects the effect of currency and interest rate swaps in place at 31 December 2015 and 2014 further detai ls of which are set out in note 20.
The interest rates shown are the weighted av erage for fixed rate borrowings.
Floating rate borrowings bear interest based on LIBOR with the exception of certain euro borrowings whose interest costs are linked to EURIBOR.
20 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT Exposure to credit interest rate and currency risks arises in the normal course of the Groups business.
Derivative financial instruments are used to manage exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exch ange rates and interest rates but are not employed for specula tive purposes.
Further discussion of Treasury risks is set out in the Principal Risks and Uncertainties section of the Strategic Report on page 65.
The Groups risk management policies and practices with regard to financial instruments are as follows A Debt management The Group generally borrows on an unsecured basis on the strength of its covenant in order to maintain operational flexibility.
Borrowings are arranged to ensure an appropriate maturity profile and to main tain shortterm liquidity.
Acqu isitions may be financed initi ally using shortterm funds before being refinanced fo r the longer term when market conditions are appropriate.
Shortterm funding is rais ed principally through syndicated revolving credit facilities from a range of banks and financial in stitutions with which the Grou p maintains strong working relationships.
Longterm debt mainly comprises the Groups fixed rate unsecured bonds.
B Interest rate management Interest rate swaps are used to manage the interest rate basis of the Groups debt allowing changes from fixed to floating rat es or vice versa.
Clear guidelines exist for the Groups ratio of fixed to floating rate debt and management regularly reviews the interest rate profile against these guidelines.
At 31 December 2015 the Group had interest rate swaps of 250.0 million 2014 250.0 million maturing in 2020 under which t he Group pays interest at a rate linked to LIBOR and receives interest at 6.875%.
At 31 December 2015 the fair value of interest rate s waps was an asset of 13.8 million 2014 15.0 million.
The Group does not hedge account for its interest rate swaps and states them at fair va lue with changes in fair value included in the income statement.
C Foreign currency management The impact of foreign exchange movements is managed by financin g eurodenominated assets with euro borrowings.
The Group borrow s in euro and uses currency swaps to match foreign currency assets with foreign currency liabilities.
The Group also hedges the impa ct of foreign exchange movements in debt raised in fore ign currencies through the use of derivatives to swap the cash flows back to either st erling or euro.
149 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 20 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED C Foreign currency management continued To manage the foreign currency exposure on its net investments in eurodenominated entities the Group has designated all euro borrowings including eurodenominated bonds senior notes USPP bank loans and currency swaps as net investment hedges.
This designatio n allows exchange differences on hedging instruments to be recognised directly in equity and offset the exchange differences on net inve stments in eurodenominated entities also recognised in equity.
The notional and carrying amount of these eurodenominated liabilities is shown below.
Bonds
Senior notes
Bank loans Cross currency swaps
Total
Euro notional Carrying amount
Senior notes
Bank loans Cross currency swaps
Total
Euro notional Carrying amount
The euro notional is the amount due at maturity without ne tting any receivable of different currency under the same instrume nt.
The carrying amount is the book value at which euro denominated financial instruments are recognised within borrowings.
The fair value of eurodenominated bonds at 31 December 2015 was 767.6 million 2014 829.8 million.
D Profit and loss account and balance sheet management The Group maintains internal guidelines for interest cover gear ing and other ratios.
Management monitors the Groups current a nd projected financial position against these gu idelines.
Further details of these ratios are provided in the Financial Review on pages 53 to 61.
E Cash management and liquidity Cash levels are monitored to ensure sufficient resources are available to meet the Groups operational requirements.
Shortterm money market deposits are used to manage liquidity while maximising th e rate of return on cash resources giving due consideration to risk.
Longer term liquidity requirements are met with an appropriate mix of short and longerterm debt as explained in note 20A.
F Credit risk The Groups principal financial assets are trade receivables restricted monetary assets cash and deposits balances due from joint ventures other investments loans receivable participative loans to associates and derivative financial instruments.
The Groups credit risk is attributable to its trade receivables restricted monetary assets  cash and deposits and derivative financial instruments.
The credit risk on balances due from joint ventures other investments loans receivable and participative loans is limited as they are supported by investment properties held within the joint ventures and associates.
Trade receivables consist principally of rents due from tenants.
The balance is low relative to the scale of the balance sheet and the Groups tenant base is diversified geographically with tenants generally of good financial standing.
The majority of tenant leases are longterm contracts with rents payable quarterly in advance.
Rent deposits and personal or corporate guarantees are held in respect of some leases.
Taking these factors into account the risk to the Group of indi vidual tenant default and the cr edit risk of trade receivables are considered low.
Trade receivables are presented net of allowances for doubtful re ceivables and allowances for impairment are made where appropr iate as set out in note 15.
The Groups most significant tenants are set out in the Additional Disclosures section on page 168.
The credit risk on cash and deposits and derivative financial instruments is limited because the counterparties are banks who are committed lenders to the Group with high credit ratings assigned by international creditrating agencies.
The credit risk on restricted monetary assets being cash held by the Group and its managing agents on behalf of third parties is si milarly considered low.
At 31 December 20 15 the Groups maximum exposure to credit risk was 335.8 million 2014 243.5 million which excludes those balances supported by investment properties.
150 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 20 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED C Foreign currency management continued To manage the foreign currency exposure on its net investments in eurodenominated entities the Group has designated all euro borrowings including eurodenominated bonds senior notes USPP bank loans and currency swaps as net investment hedges.
This designatio n allows exchange differences on hedging instruments to be recognised directly in equity and offset the exchange differences on net inve stments in eurodenominated entities also recognised in equity.
The notional and carrying amount of these eurodenominated liabilities is shown below.
Bonds
Senior notes
Bank loans Cross currency swaps
Total
Euro notional Carrying amount
Senior notes
Bank loans Cross currency swaps
Total
Euro notional Carrying amount
The euro notional is the amount due at maturity without ne tting any receivable of different currency under the same instrume nt.
The carrying amount is the book value at which euro denominated financial instruments are recognised within borrowings.
The fair value of eurodenominated bonds at 31 December 2015 was 767.6 million 2014 829.8 million.
D Profit and loss account and balance sheet management The Group maintains internal guidelines for interest cover gear ing and other ratios.
Management monitors the Groups current a nd projected financial position against these gu idelines.
Further details of these ratios are provided in the Financial Review on pages 53 to 61.
E Cash management and liquidity Cash levels are monitored to ensure sufficient resources are available to meet the Groups operational requirements.
Shortterm money market deposits are used to manage liquidity while maximising th e rate of return on cash resources giving due consideration to risk.
Longer term liquidity requirements are met with an appropriate mix of short and longerterm debt as explained in note 20A.
F Credit risk The Groups principal financial assets are trade receivables restricted monetary assets cash and deposits balances due from joint ventures other investments loans receivable participative loans to associates and derivative financial instruments.
The Groups credit risk is attributable to its trade receivables restricted monetary assets  cash and deposits and derivative financial instruments.
The credit risk on balances due from joint ventures other investments loans receivable and participative loans is limited as they are supported by investment properties held within the joint ventures and associates.
Trade receivables consist principally of rents due from tenants.
The balance is low relative to the scale of the balance sheet and the Groups tenant base is diversified geographically with tenants generally of good financial standing.
The majority of tenant leases are longterm contracts with rents payable quarterly in advance.
Rent deposits and personal or corporate guarantees are held in respect of some leases.
Taking these factors into account the risk to the Group of indi vidual tenant default and the cr edit risk of trade receivables are considered low.
Trade receivables are presented net of allowances for doubtful re ceivables and allowances for impairment are made where appropr iate as set out in note 15.
The Groups most significant tenants are set out in the Additional Disclosures section on page 168.
The credit risk on cash and deposits and derivative financial instruments is limited because the counterparties are banks who are committed lenders to the Group with high credit ratings assigned by international creditrating agencies.
The credit risk on restricted monetary assets being cash held by the Group and its managing agents on behalf of third parties is si milarly considered low.
At 31 December 20 15 the Groups maximum exposure to credit risk was 335.8 million 2014 243.5 million which excludes those balances supported by investment properties.
HAMMERSON.
OM 151 Financial maturity analysis The following table is a maturity analysis for incomeearning financial assets and interestbearing financial liabilities.
Borr owings are stated net of unamortised fees.
2015 Maturity Less than one year One to two years Two to five years More than five years
Cash and deposits 37.0    37.0 Unsecured bonds Sterling fixed rate bonds   248.6 840.7 1089.3 Euro fixed rate bonds   366.1 364.6 730.7 Senior notes    285.7 285.7 Interest rate swaps floating   250.0  250.0 Interest rate swaps fixed   250.0  250.0 Unsecured bank loans and overdrafts  690.1 245.1  935.2 Fair value of currency swaps 30.0   12.8 42.8 Net debt Loans receivable note 14  17.2 59.2  76.4 2014 Maturity Less than one year One to two years Two to five years More than five years
Cash and deposits 28.6    28.6 Unsecured bonds Sterling fixed rate bonds  271.5  743.8 1015.3 Euro fixed rate bonds   384.8 383.4 768.2 Senior notes Interest rate swaps floating Interest rate swaps fixed    250.0 250.0 Unsecured bank loans and overdrafts  164.6 72.9  237.5 Fair value of currency swaps 5.1 5.7  5.3 16.1 Net debt 33.7 430.4 457.7 1399.0 2253.4 Loans receivable note 14  45.0 18.5  63.5 Sensitivity analysis In managing interest rate and currency risks the Group aims to reduce the impact of shortterm fluctuations on the Groups earn ings.
Over the longer term however permanent changes in foreign exchange and interest rates may have an impact on consolidated earnings.
The tables below provide indicative sensitivity data.
2015 2014 Effect on profit before tax Increase in interest rates by 1% Decrease in interest rates by 1% Increase in interest rates by 1% Decrease in interest rates by 1% DecreaseIncrease 20.5 20.9 17.2 17.9 There would have been no effect on amounts recognised directly in equity.
The sensitivity has been calculated by applying the i nterest rate change to the floating rate borrowings net of interest rate swaps at the year end.
151 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 20 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED H Sensitivity analysis continued 2015 2014 Effect on financial instruments
Weakening of sterling against euro by 10%
Weakening of sterling against euro by 10% IncreaseDecrease in net gain taken to equity 330.8 409.3 166.9 204.0 These effects would be more than offset by the effect of exchange rate changes on the euro denominated net assets included in t he Groups financial statements.
In relation to financial instruments alone there would have been no impact on the Groups profit before tax.
This has been cal culated by retranslating the year end eurodenominated financial instruments at the year end foreign exchange rate changed by 10%.
Forward foreign exchange contracts have been included in this estimate.
I Fair values of financial instruments The fair values of borrowings currency and interest rate swaps together with their book value included in the balance sheet are as follows 2015 2014 Book value Fair value Book value Fair value Borrowings excluding currency swaps 3040.9 3266.3 2298.1 2604.1 Currency swaps 42.8 42.8 16.1 16.1 Total 2998.1 3223.5 2282.0 2588.0 Interest rate swaps 13.8 13.8 15.0 15.0 At 31 December 2015 the fair value of financial instruments exceeded their book value by 225.4 million 2014 306.0 million .
The fair values of the Groups borrowings have been estimated on the basis of quoted market prices representing Level 1 and Le vel 2 fair value measurements as defined by IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures.
The fair values of the Groups outstanding interest rate swaps have been estimated by calculating the present value of future cash fl ows using appropriate market di scount rates representing Lev el 2 fair value measurements as defined by IFRS 7.
The fair value of the Group s currency swaps has been estimated on the basis of the prevaili ng forward rates at the year end representing Level 2 fair value measurements as defined by IFRS 7.
Details of the Groups cash and shortterm deposits are set out in note 17.
Their fair values and those of other financial asse ts and liabilities equate to their book values.
Details of the Groups receivables are set out in notes 14 and 15.
The amounts are presented net o f allowances for doubtful receivables and allowances for impairment are made wher e appropriate.
The table below reconciles the opening and closi ng balances for Level 3 fair value measurements of available for sale investments and loans.
Available for sale loans and investments Balance at 1 January 136.1 141.1 Total gainslosses in income 16.5 7.9 in other comprehensive income 4.4 4.4 Other movements acquisition of investment 4.8 settlement of interest 5.3 5.8 loan issuerepayment 15.5 0.6 Net movements in participativ e loans to associates recognised as available for sale 1.7 2.1 Balance at 31 December 161.5 136.1 152 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 20 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED H Sensitivity analysis continued 2015 2014 Effect on financial instruments
Weakening of sterling against euro by 10%
Weakening of sterling against euro by 10% IncreaseDecrease in net gain taken to equity 330.8 409.3 166.9 204.0 These effects would be more than offset by the effect of exchange rate changes on the euro denominated net assets included in t he Groups financial statements.
In relation to financial instruments alone there would have been no impact on the Groups profit before tax.
This has been cal culated by retranslating the year end eurodenominated financial instruments at the year end foreign exchange rate changed by 10%.
Forward foreign exchange contracts have been included in this estimate.
I Fair values of financial instruments The fair values of borrowings currency and interest rate swaps together with their book value included in the balance sheet are as follows 2015 2014 Book value Fair value Book value Fair value Borrowings excluding currency swaps 3040.9 3266.3 2298.1 2604.1 Currency swaps 42.8 42.8 16.1 16.1 Total 2998.1 3223.5 2282.0 2588.0 Interest rate swaps 13.8 13.8 15.0 15.0 At 31 December 2015 the fair value of financial instruments exceeded their book value by 225.4 million 2014 306.0 million .
The fair values of the Groups borrowings have been estimated on the basis of quoted market prices representing Level 1 and Le vel 2 fair value measurements as defined by IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures.
The fair values of the Groups outstanding interest rate swaps have been estimated by calculating the present value of future cash fl ows using appropriate market di scount rates representing Lev el 2 fair value measurements as defined by IFRS 7.
The fair value of the Group s currency swaps has been estimated on the basis of the prevaili ng forward rates at the year end representing Level 2 fair value measurements as defined by IFRS 7.
Details of the Groups cash and shortterm deposits are set out in note 17.
Their fair values and those of other financial asse ts and liabilities equate to their book values.
Details of the Groups receivables are set out in notes 14 and 15.
The amounts are presented net o f allowances for doubtful receivables and allowances for impairment are made wher e appropriate.
The table below reconciles the opening and closi ng balances for Level 3 fair value measurements of available for sale investments and loans.
Available for sale loans and investments Balance at 1 January 136.1 141.1 Total gainslosses in income 16.5 7.9 in other comprehensive income 4.4 4.4 Other movements acquisition of investment 4.8 settlement of interest 5.3 5.8 loan issuerepayment 15.5 0.6 Net movements in participativ e loans to associates recognised as available for sale 1.7 2.1 Balance at 31 December 161.5 136.1
OM 153 Carrying amounts gains and losses of financial instruments 2015 2014
Carrying amount
Loss to income
Loss to equity
Gain
Loss to income
Loss to equity Trade receivables 15 46.7 0.2  36.4 3.2 Restricted monetary assets 16 34.0   11.3 Cash and deposits 17 37.0 0.1  28.6 0.5 Cash and receivables Other investments Loans receivable 14 76.4 2.7  63.5 1.2 Participative loans to associates 13C 80.3 15.2 4.4 71.2 6.7 4.4 Available for sale loans and investment s Interest rate swaps 14 13.8 2.0  15.0 16.4 Assets at fair value held for trading Currency swaps 19B 42.8 10.3 54.6 16.1 3.5 55.4 Derivatives in effective hedging relationships Balances due from joint ventures 12A 1373.6   642.1 Other loans and receivables 1373.6   642.1 Payables 18 22 285.0   251.7 Borrowings excluding currency swaps 19B 3040.9 119.8 27.3 2298.1 122.3 48.4 Obligations under finance leases 21 32.5 1.8  33.0 1.1 Liabilities at amortised cost Total for financial instruments The table below reconciles the net gain or loss taken through income to net finance costs
Total loss on financial instruments to income Add back Trade receivables loss Interest capitalised 7 5.3 8.8 Investment costs written off 2 1.4 Deduct Change in participative loans to associ ates shown in share of results of associates Net finance costs 7 101.2 93.0 Financial instruments classified as held for trading are hedging instruments that are not designated for hedge accounting.
No financial instruments were designated as at fair value through income on initial recognition nor classified as held to maturity.
The total of the equity gains in relation to currency swaps of 54.6 million 2014 55.4 million and borrowings of 27.3 mill ion 2014 48.4 million is 81.9 million 2014 103.8 million and is sh own in the movement in the hedg ing reserve in the consolidated statement of changes in equity.
153 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED Maturity analysis of financial liabilities The remaining contractual nondiscounted cash flows for financial liabilities are as follows
Derivative financial liability cash flows
Finance leases
Notes 20L 21 After 25 years    72.5 72.5 From five to 25 years 31.4 58.5 1802.5 38.8 1814.2 From two to five years 1.9 19.5 1129.4 5.8 1117.6 From one to two years 5.0 6.5 789.7 1.9 790.1 Due after more than one year 38.3 84.5 3721.6 119.0 3794.4 Due within one year 209.5 36.5 102.5 1.9 277.4
Derivative financial liability cash flows
Finance leases
Notes
After 25 years    69.7 69.7 From five to 25 years 25.2 26.3 1710.7 37.3 1746.9 From two to five years 3.3 7.1 700.8 From one to two years 5.1 12.6 534.2 Due after more than one year 33.6 46.0 2945.7 114.5 3047.8 Due within one year 179.1 8.9 99.2 116.4 3319.1 Reconciliation of maturity analyses in notes 19A and 20K The maturity analysis in note 20K shows contractual nondiscounted cash flows for financial liabilities.
The following table re conciles the total borrowings column in note 19A with the financial maturity analysis in note 20K.
Borrowings
Derivative borrowings
Nonderivative unamortised borrowing costs
Nonderivative financial liability cash flows Notes 19A From five to 25 years 1478.2 12.8 1491.0 14.2 297.3 1802.5 From two to five years 859.8  859.8 6.6 263.0 1129.4 From one to two years 690.1  690.1 1.1 98.5 789.7 Due after more than one year 3028.1 12.8 3040.9 21.9 658.8 3721.6 Due within one year 30.0 30.0   102.5 102.5 2998.1 42.8 3040.9 21.9 761.3 3824.1 154 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED Maturity analysis of financial liabilities The remaining contractual nondiscounted cash flows for financial liabilities are as follows
Derivative financial liability cash flows
Finance leases
Notes 20L 21 After 25 years    72.5 72.5 From five to 25 years 31.4 58.5 1802.5 38.8 1814.2 From two to five years 1.9 19.5 1129.4 5.8 1117.6 From one to two years 5.0 6.5 789.7 1.9 790.1 Due after more than one year 38.3 84.5 3721.6 119.0 3794.4 Due within one year 209.5 36.5 102.5 1.9 277.4
Derivative financial liability cash flows
Finance leases
Notes
After 25 years    69.7 69.7 From five to 25 years 25.2 26.3 1710.7 37.3 1746.9 From two to five years 3.3 7.1 700.8 From one to two years 5.1 12.6 534.2 Due after more than one year 33.6 46.0 2945.7 114.5 3047.8 Due within one year 179.1 8.9 99.2 116.4 3319.1 Reconciliation of maturity analyses in notes 19A and 20K The maturity analysis in note 20K shows contractual nondiscounted cash flows for financial liabilities.
The following table re conciles the total borrowings column in note 19A with the financial maturity analysis in note 20K.
Borrowings
Derivative borrowings
Nonderivative unamortised borrowing costs
Nonderivative financial liability cash flows Notes 19A From five to 25 years 1478.2 12.8 1491.0 14.2 297.3 1802.5 From two to five years 859.8  859.8 6.6 263.0 1129.4 From one to two years 690.1  690.1 1.1 98.5 789.7 Due after more than one year 3028.1 12.8 3040.9 21.9 658.8 3721.6 Due within one year 30.0 30.0   102.5 102.5 2998.1 42.8 3040.9 21.9 761.3 3824.1
OM 155
Derivative borrowings
Nonderivative unamortised borrowing costs
Nonderivative financial liability cash flows Notes 19A From five to 25 years 1399.0 5.3 1404.3 294.5 1710.7 From two to five years From one to two years Due after more than one year 2287.1 11.0 2298.1 628.8 2945.7 Due within one year 5.1 5.1 2282.0 16.1 2298.1 728.0 3044.9 M Capital structure The Groups financing policy is to optimise the weighted average cost of capital by using an appropriate mix of debt and equity  the latter in the form of share capital.
Further information on debt is provided in the Financial Review on pages 60 and 61 and information on sh are capital and changes therein is set out in note 23 below and in the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity on page 121.
21 OBLIGATIONS UNDER FINANCE LEASES Finance lease obligations in respec t of rents payable on leasehold properties are payable as follows 2015 2014
Interest
Present value of minimum lease payments
Interest
Present value of minimum lease payments From five to 25 years 38.8 35.9 2.9 37.3 34.3 3.0 From two to five years 5.8 5.6 0.2 5.6 5.4 0.2 From one to two years 1.9 1.8 0.1 1.9 1.8 0.1 Within one year 1.9 1.8 0.1 1.9 1.8 0.1 22 PAYABLES NONCURRENT LIABILITIES Net pension liability note 6C 37.2 39.0 Other payables 38.5 33.5 23 SHARE CAPITAL Called up allotted and fully paid Ordinary shares of 25p each 196.1 196.1 The authorised share capital was removed from the Companys Articles of Association in 2010.
Number
Movements in number of shares in issue Number of shares in issue at 1 January 2015 784295248 Share options exercised  Executive Share Option Scheme 14449 Share options exercised  SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme 121558 Number of shares in issue at 31 December 2015 784431255 155 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 23 SHARE CAPITAL CONTINUED Share options At 31 December 2015 the Company had four share option schemes in operation.
The number and weighted average exercise price of share options which remain outstanding in respect of the Executive Share Option Scheme and SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme are sh own in the tables below together with details of expiry periods and rang e of exercise price.
The number of ordinary shares which rema in outstanding in respect of the Restricted Share Plan and LongTerm Incent ive Plan are shown together with their year of grant.
Share options Ordinary shares of 25p each Number Year of expiry
Exercise price pence Number Year of grant Executive Share Option Scheme 88486 2016 8.39 839 SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme 216426 20162020 4.55 217.2  540.4 Restricted Share Plan     614879 20132015 LongTerm Incentive Plan     2496879 20122015 Share options Ordinary shares of 25p each Number Year of expiry
Exercise price pence Number Year of grant Executive Share Option Scheme 102935 20152016 8.03 583  839 SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme 281320 20152019 3.78 217.2  462.4 Restricted Share Plan     723157 20122014 LongTerm Incentive Plan     2657858 20112014 24 ANALYSIS OF MOVEMENT IN NET DEBT
Cash at bank
Noncurrent borrowings Net debt At 1 January 2015 0.1 28.5 5.1 2287.1 2253.4 Cash flow  9.3 1.5 806.1 798.3 Exchange  0.9 26.4 65.1 90.6 Balance at 31 December 2015 0.1 36.9 30.0 3028.1 2961.1
Cash at bank
Noncurrent borrowings Net debt At 1 January 2014 15.7 246.2 2017.8 2248.3 Exchange  0.5 17.0 71.4 87.9 Balance at 31 December 2014 0.1 28.5 5.1 2287.1 2253.4 ADJUSTMENT FOR NONCASH ITEMS IN THE CASH FLOW STATEMENT Amortisation of lease incentives and other costs 5.9 4.7 Increase in accrued rents receivable 5.0 6.3 Noncash items included within net rental income 0.9 1.6 Depreciation 1.7 1.4 Sharebased employee remuneration 4.8 5.1 Exchange and other items 1.1 7.3 156 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 23 SHARE CAPITAL CONTINUED Share options At 31 December 2015 the Company had four share option schemes in operation.
The number and weighted average exercise price of share options which remain outstanding in respect of the Executive Share Option Scheme and SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme are sh own in the tables below together with details of expiry periods and rang e of exercise price.
The number of ordinary shares which rema in outstanding in respect of the Restricted Share Plan and LongTerm Incent ive Plan are shown together with their year of grant.
Share options Ordinary shares of 25p each Number Year of expiry
Exercise price pence Number Year of grant Executive Share Option Scheme 88486 2016 8.39 839 SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme 216426 20162020 4.55 217.2  540.4 Restricted Share Plan     614879 20132015 LongTerm Incentive Plan     2496879 20122015 Share options Ordinary shares of 25p each Number Year of expiry
Exercise price pence Number Year of grant Executive Share Option Scheme 102935 20152016 8.03 583  839 SavingsRelated Share Option Scheme 281320 20152019 3.78 217.2  462.4 Restricted Share Plan     723157 20122014 LongTerm Incentive Plan     2657858 20112014 24 ANALYSIS OF MOVEMENT IN NET DEBT
Cash at bank
Noncurrent borrowings Net debt At 1 January 2015 0.1 28.5 5.1 2287.1 2253.4 Cash flow  9.3 1.5 806.1 798.3 Exchange  0.9 26.4 65.1 90.6 Balance at 31 December 2015 0.1 36.9 30.0 3028.1 2961.1
Cash at bank
Noncurrent borrowings Net debt At 1 January 2014 15.7 246.2 2017.8 2248.3 Exchange  0.5 17.0 71.4 87.9 Balance at 31 December 2014 0.1 28.5 5.1 2287.1 2253.4 ADJUSTMENT FOR NONCASH ITEMS IN THE CASH FLOW STATEMENT Amortisation of lease incentives and other costs 5.9 4.7 Increase in accrued rents receivable 5.0 6.3 Noncash items included within net rental income 0.9 1.6 Depreciation 1.7 1.4 Sharebased employee remuneration 4.8 5.1 Exchange and other items 1.1 7.3
OM 157 THE GROUP AS LESSOR  OPERATING LEASE RECEIPTS At the balance sheet date the Group had contracted with tenants for the future minimum lease receipts as shown in the table be low.
The data is for the period to the first tenant break option.
An overview of the Groups leasing arrangements is included in the Addition al Disclosures section on pages 166 and 167 and credit risk relating to the trade receivables is discussed in note 20F.
Within one year 129.5 131.5 From one to two years 123.1 129.6 From two to five years 321.9 315.2 After five years 793.3 861.4 1367.8 1437.7 27 CONTINGENT LIABILITIES There are contingent liabilities of 49.8 million 2014 31.6 million relating to guarantees given by the Group and a further 16.0 million 2014 12.3 million relating to claims against the Group arisin g in the normal course of business which are considered to be unlikely to crystallise.
In addition Hammersons share of contingent liabilities arising within Property interests whic h is not included in the figure s shown above is 2.1 million 2014 16.2 million.
Principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group are detailed on pages 62 to 67.
28 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS AND NONCONTROLLING INTERESTS
Joint ventures and associates Related party transactions with the Groups joint ventures and associates primarily comprise management fees interest receivab le and loan balances.
The amounts shown below represent the Groups transactio ns and balances with its related parties and are shown before any consolidation adjustments.
Management fees from joint ventures 4.2 4.1 Management fees from associates 0.1 Interest receivable from joint ventures 29.3 24.5 Interest receivable from associates 5.3 5.8 Balances due from joint ventures note 12A 1373.6 642.1 Participative loans to associates note 13C 80.3 71.2 Loans to associates note 14 76.4 63.5
Key management The remuneration of the Directors who are the key management of the Group is set out below in aggregate.
Further information about the Directors remuneration as required by the Companies Act 2006 is disclosed in the audited sect ions of the Directors Remunera tion Report on pages 84 to 101.
Salaries and shortterm benefits 4.1 3.9 Postemployment benefits 0.4 0.1 Sharebased payments 3.4 2.8 Total remuneration 7.9 6.8
Noncontrolling interests The Groups noncontrolling interest represents a 35.5% interest in Place des Halles Strasbourg held by Assurbail.
During 2015  the property generated gross rental income of 10.5 milli on 2014 12.4 million and the property valuation at 31 December 2015 was 199.0 million 2014 206.4 million.
The noncontrolling interests share of the gross rental income was 3.5 million 2014 4.4 million a nd of the property valuation was 70.6 million 2014 73.3 million.
The balances and movements during the year associated with the non controlling interest are shown on the Consolidated Statemen t of Changes in Equity on pages 121 and 122.
157 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT COMPANY BALANCE SHEET AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2015 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015
Noncurrent assets Investments in subsidiary companies and other related undertakings C 4141.3 3576.7 Receivables D 5677.7 5180.2 9819.0 8756.9 Current assets Receivables E 38.6 8.6 Cash and shortterm deposits Total assets 9865.0 8767.0 Current liabilities Payables F 1250.6 1434.8 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings G 3028.1 2287.1 Total liabilities 4278.7 3721.9 Net assets 5586.3 5045.1
Called up share capital 23 196.1 196.1 Share premium 1223.3 1222.9 Merger reserve Other reserves Revaluation reserve 2545.7 1981.1 Retained earnings 1243.7 1270.3 Investment in own shares Equity shareholders funds 5586.3 5045.1 These financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 12 February 2016.
Signed on behalf of the Board David Atkins
Timon Drakesmith
Registered in England No.
158 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 COMPANY BALANCE SHEET AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2015 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015
Noncurrent assets Investments in subsidiary companies and other related undertakings C 4141.3 3576.7 Receivables D 5677.7 5180.2 9819.0 8756.9 Current assets Receivables E 38.6 8.6 Cash and shortterm deposits Total assets 9865.0 8767.0 Current liabilities Payables F 1250.6 1434.8 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings G 3028.1 2287.1 Total liabilities 4278.7 3721.9 Net assets 5586.3 5045.1
Called up share capital 23 196.1 196.1 Share premium 1223.3 1222.9 Merger reserve Other reserves Revaluation reserve 2545.7 1981.1 Retained earnings 1243.7 1270.3 Investment in own shares Equity shareholders funds 5586.3 5045.1 These financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 12 February 2016.
Signed on behalf of the Board David Atkins
Timon Drakesmith
Registered in England No.
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2015
OM 159
Share premium
Other
Revaluation reserve
Investment
Equity shareholders funds Balance at 1 January 2015 196.1 1222.9 374.2 7.3 1981.1 1270.3 6.8 5045.1 Issue of shares  0.4      0.4 Share issue costs   0.1     0.1 Cost of shares awarded to employees       2.9 2.9 Dividends      165.2  165.2 Revaluation gains on investments in subsidiary companies and other related undertakings     564.6   564.6 Profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders      138.6  138.6 Total comprehensive income for the year     564.6 138.6  703.2 Balance at 31 December 2015 196.1 1223.3 374.1 7.3 2545.7 1243.7 3.9 5586.3 Investment in own shares is stated at cost.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2014
Share premium
Other
Revaluation reserve
Investment
Equity shareholders funds Balance at 1 January 2014 178.2 1222.4  7.3 1353.0 1303.9 4.9 4059.9 Issue of shares 17.9 0.5 381.4 Share issue costs   7.2 Cost of shares awarded to employees       3.6 Purchase of own shares       5.5 5.5 Dividends      139.5 Revaluation gains on investments in subsidiary companies and other related undertakings   628.1 Profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders    105.9 Total comprehensive income for the year     628.1 105.9 Balance at 31 December 2014 196.1 1222.9 374.2 7.3 1981.1 1270.3 6.8 5045.1 Investment in own shares is stated at cost.
The merger reserve comprises the premium on the share placing in September 2014.
With regard to this transaction no share prem ium is recorded in the Companys financial statements through the operation of the merger relief provisions of the Companies Act 2006 .
159 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT NOTES TO THE COMPANY ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2015 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 A ACCOUNTING POLICIES Basis of accounting Although the consolidated Group accounts are prepared under IFRS the Hammerson plc company accounts presented in this section are prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 FRS101 Reduced Disclosure Framework as issued by the Financial Reporting Council.
The prior year financial statements were prepar ed in accordance with UK GAAP and have been restated for mate rial adjustments on adoption of FRS101 in the current year.
The last financial statements under a previous GAAP UK GAAP were for t he year ended 31 December 2014 and the date of transi tion to FRS101 was therefore 1 January 2014.
There has been no movement in total equity due to the change in accounting framework from UK GAAP to FRS101.
Movements in equit y are detailed within the statement of changes in equity on page 159.
Previously unde r UK GAAP the Companys derivatives were held at fair value and the investments in subsidiary companies and other related unde rtakings at valuation.
Consequently there has been no effect on the balance sheet as a result of the change in accounting framework.
The financial statements are presented in sterling.
They are prepar ed on the historical cost basis except that the investments in subsidiary companies and other related undertakings are included at valuation.
Historical cost is generally based on the fair value of the consideration given in exchange for the goods and services.
Disclosure exemptions adopted In preparing these financial statements Hammerson plc has taken ad vantage of all disclosure exemptions conferred by FRS101.
The refore these financial statements do not include certain comparative information as otherwise required by EU endorsed IFRS certain disclosures regarding the Companys capital a statement of cash flows certain disclosures in respect of financial instruments the effect of future accounting standards not yet adopted and disclosure of related party transactions with whollyowned members of the Group.
The above disclosure exemptions have been adopted because equiva lent disclosures are included in the consolidated Group account s into which Hammerson plc is consolidated.
Accounting policies The significant judgements and key estimates and accounting policies relevant to the Company are the same as those set out in t he accounting policies for the Group in note 1 except for investments in su bsidiary companies and other related undertakings which are inclu ded at valuation.
The Directors determine the valuations with referenc e to the underlying net assets of the entities which consist pr imarily of investment properties.
In calculating the underlying net asset values no deduction is made for deferred tax relating to revalu ation surpluses on investment properties.
The investment pr operties are valued by professionally qualified external valuers.
Further details ar e set out in note 11 to the consolidated accounts.
B PROFIT FOR THE YEAR AND DIVIDEND As permitted by section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the income statement of the Company is not presented as part of these fi nancial statements.
The profit for the year attributable to equity shareh olders dealt with in the financial statements of the Company w as 138.6 million 2014 105.9 million.
Dividend information is provided in note 9 to the consolidated accounts.
160 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 NOTES TO THE COMPANY ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2015 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 A ACCOUNTING POLICIES Basis of accounting Although the consolidated Group accounts are prepared under IFRS the Hammerson plc company accounts presented in this section are prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 FRS101 Reduced Disclosure Framework as issued by the Financial Reporting Council.
The prior year financial statements were prepar ed in accordance with UK GAAP and have been restated for mate rial adjustments on adoption of FRS101 in the current year.
The last financial statements under a previous GAAP UK GAAP were for t he year ended 31 December 2014 and the date of transi tion to FRS101 was therefore 1 January 2014.
There has been no movement in total equity due to the change in accounting framework from UK GAAP to FRS101.
Movements in equit y are detailed within the statement of changes in equity on page 159.
Previously unde r UK GAAP the Companys derivatives were held at fair value and the investments in subsidiary companies and other related unde rtakings at valuation.
Consequently there has been no effect on the balance sheet as a result of the change in accounting framework.
The financial statements are presented in sterling.
They are prepar ed on the historical cost basis except that the investments in subsidiary companies and other related undertakings are included at valuation.
Historical cost is generally based on the fair value of the consideration given in exchange for the goods and services.
Disclosure exemptions adopted In preparing these financial statements Hammerson plc has taken ad vantage of all disclosure exemptions conferred by FRS101.
The refore these financial statements do not include certain comparative information as otherwise required by EU endorsed IFRS certain disclosures regarding the Companys capital a statement of cash flows certain disclosures in respect of financial instruments the effect of future accounting standards not yet adopted and disclosure of related party transactions with whollyowned members of the Group.
The above disclosure exemptions have been adopted because equiva lent disclosures are included in the consolidated Group account s into which Hammerson plc is consolidated.
Accounting policies The significant judgements and key estimates and accounting policies relevant to the Company are the same as those set out in t he accounting policies for the Group in note 1 except for investments in su bsidiary companies and other related undertakings which are inclu ded at valuation.
The Directors determine the valuations with referenc e to the underlying net assets of the entities which consist pr imarily of investment properties.
In calculating the underlying net asset values no deduction is made for deferred tax relating to revalu ation surpluses on investment properties.
The investment pr operties are valued by professionally qualified external valuers.
Further details ar e set out in note 11 to the consolidated accounts.
B PROFIT FOR THE YEAR AND DIVIDEND As permitted by section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the income statement of the Company is not presented as part of these fi nancial statements.
The profit for the year attributable to equity shareh olders dealt with in the financial statements of the Company w as 138.6 million 2014 105.9 million.
Dividend information is provided in note 9 to the consolidated accounts.
HAMMERSON.
OM 161 INVESTMENTS IN SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES AND OTHER RELATED UNDERTAKINGS 2015 2014 Cost less provision for permanent diminution in value
Cost less provision for permanent diminution in value
Balance at 1 January 1561.7 3576.7 1561.7 2948.6 Revaluation adjustment  564.6  628.1 Balance at 31 December 1561.7 4141.3 1561.7 3576.7 Investments are stated at Directors valuation.
A list of the subsidiary companies and other related undertakings at 31 Decembe r 2015 is included in note H.
RECEIVABLES NONCURRENT ASSETS Amounts owed by subsidiaries and other related undertakings 5604.0 5101.7 Loans receivable 59.9 63.5 Fair value of interest rate swaps 13.8 15.0 5677.7 5180.2 Amounts owed by subsidiaries and other rela ted undertakings are unsecured and interestb earing at floating rates based on LIBOR .
This includes amounts which are repayable on demand however it is the Companys current intention not to seek repayment of these a mounts before 31 December 2016.
E RECEIVABLES CURRENT ASSETS Other receivables 8.6 3.5 Fair value of currency swaps 30.0 5.1
Amounts owed to subsidiaries and other related undertakings 1191.6 1377.9 Other payables and accruals 59.0 56.9 1250.6 1434.8 The amounts owed to subsidiaries and other related undertakings are unsecured repayable on demand and interest bearing at floa ting rates based on LIBOR.
BORROWINGS
Bank loans and overdrafts
Total
Total
After five years  1478.2 1478.2 1399.0 From two to five years 245.1 614.7 859.8 457.7 From one to two years 690.1  690.1 430.4 Due after more than one year 935.2 2092.9 3028.1 2287.1 Current assets Fair value of currency swaps note E  30.0 30.0 5.1 935.2 2062.9 2998.1 2282.0 Details of the Groups borrowings and financial instruments are given in notes 19 and 20 to the consolidated accounts.
The Comp anys borrowings are unsecured and comprise sterling and eurodenominated bonds bank loans and overdrafts.
The fair value of the Com panys financial instruments is equal to that of the Reported Group as shown in note 20I.
161 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the company accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 SUBSIDIARIES AND OTHER RELATED UNDERTAKINGS The Companys subsidiaries and other related undertakings at 31 De cember 2015 are listed below.
No Group entities have been exc luded from the consolidated financial results.
Direct subsidiaries The Company has a 100% interest in the ordinary share capital of the following entities which are registeredoperate in the co untries as shown England and Wales France Grantchester Holdings Limited Hammerson Holding France SAS Hammerson Company Secretarial Limited Hammerson SAS Hammerson Employee Share Plan Trustees Limited Hammerson Group Limited Hammerson Group Management Limited Hammerson International Holdings Limited Hammerson Pension Scheme Trustees Limited Hammerson Share Option Scheme Trustees Limited Indirect subsidiaries and other whollyowned entities Unless otherwise stated the Company has an indirect 100% intere st in the ordinary share capital of the following entities whi ch are registeredoperate in the countries as shown England and Wales 280 Bishopsgate Investments Limited Hammerson Cramlington I Limited Abbey Retail Park Limited Northern Ireland Hammerson Cricklewood Limited Christchurch UK Limited Hammerson Croydon Limited Cricklewood Regeneration Limited Hammerson Didcot Limited Crocusford Limited Hammerson Didcot II Limited Governeffect Limited Hammerson Euston Square Limited Grand Central GP Limited Hammerson Folkestone Limited Grand Central Limited Partnership Hammerson Grosvenor Street Limited Grand Central No.
1 Limited Hammerson Kingston Limited Grand Central No.
2 Limited Hammerson Kirkcaldy Limited Grantchester Developments Birmingham Li mited Hammerson Leeds Developments Limited Grantchester Developments Falkirk Limited Hammerson Leeds GP Limited Grantchester Group Limited Hammerson Leeds Investments Limited Grantchester Investments Limited Hammerson Leeds Limited Grantchester Limited Hammerson Leicester Limited Grantchester Properties Gloucester Limited Hammerson Leicester GP Limited Grantchester Properties Luton Limited Hammerson Lichfield Limited Grantchester Properties Middlesbrough Limited Hammerson Merthyr Limited Grantchester Properties Nottingham Limited Hammerson Milton Keynes Limited Grantchester Properties Port Talbot Limited Hammerson Moor House Properties Limited Grantchester Properties Sunderland Limited Hammerson Newcastle Limited Grantchester Property Management Limited Hammerson Newtownabbey Limited Hammerson 60 Threadneedle Street Limited Hammerson Oldbury Limited Hammerson 913 Grosvenor Street Limited Hammerson Paddington Limited Hammerson Abbey Limited Hammerson Parc Tawe I Limited Hammerson Bicester No.
2 Limited Hammerson Renfrew Limited Hammerson Brent Cross Limited Hammerson Rugby Limited Hammerson Brent South Limited Hammerson Silverburn Limited Isle of Man Hammerson Bristol Investments Limited Hammerson Staines Limited Hammerson Bristol Limited Hammerson Telford Limited Hammerson Cardiff Limited Hammerson Thanet Limited Hammerson Centurion Limited Hammerson Value Retail Investments Limited Hammerson Coventry Limited Hammerson Victoria Gate Limited 162 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the company accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 SUBSIDIARIES AND OTHER RELATED UNDERTAKINGS The Companys subsidiaries and other related undertakings at 31 De cember 2015 are listed below.
No Group entities have been exc luded from the consolidated financial results.
Direct subsidiaries The Company has a 100% interest in the ordinary share capital of the following entities which are registeredoperate in the co untries as shown England and Wales France Grantchester Holdings Limited Hammerson Holding France SAS Hammerson Company Secretarial Limited Hammerson SAS Hammerson Employee Share Plan Trustees Limited Hammerson Group Limited Hammerson Group Management Limited Hammerson International Holdings Limited Hammerson Pension Scheme Trustees Limited Hammerson Share Option Scheme Trustees Limited Indirect subsidiaries and other whollyowned entities Unless otherwise stated the Company has an indirect 100% intere st in the ordinary share capital of the following entities whi ch are registeredoperate in the countries as shown England and Wales 280 Bishopsgate Investments Limited Hammerson Cramlington I Limited Abbey Retail Park Limited Northern Ireland Hammerson Cricklewood Limited Christchurch UK Limited Hammerson Croydon Limited Cricklewood Regeneration Limited Hammerson Didcot Limited Crocusford Limited Hammerson Didcot II Limited Governeffect Limited Hammerson Euston Square Limited Grand Central GP Limited Hammerson Folkestone Limited Grand Central Limited Partnership Hammerson Grosvenor Street Limited Grand Central No.
1 Limited Hammerson Kingston Limited Grand Central No.
2 Limited Hammerson Kirkcaldy Limited Grantchester Developments Birmingham Li mited Hammerson Leeds Developments Limited Grantchester Developments Falkirk Limited Hammerson Leeds GP Limited Grantchester Group Limited Hammerson Leeds Investments Limited Grantchester Investments Limited Hammerson Leeds Limited Grantchester Limited Hammerson Leicester Limited Grantchester Properties Gloucester Limited Hammerson Leicester GP Limited Grantchester Properties Luton Limited Hammerson Lichfield Limited Grantchester Properties Middlesbrough Limited Hammerson Merthyr Limited Grantchester Properties Nottingham Limited Hammerson Milton Keynes Limited Grantchester Properties Port Talbot Limited Hammerson Moor House Properties Limited Grantchester Properties Sunderland Limited Hammerson Newcastle Limited Grantchester Property Management Limited Hammerson Newtownabbey Limited Hammerson 60 Threadneedle Street Limited Hammerson Oldbury Limited Hammerson 913 Grosvenor Street Limited Hammerson Paddington Limited Hammerson Abbey Limited Hammerson Parc Tawe I Limited Hammerson Bicester No.
2 Limited Hammerson Renfrew Limited Hammerson Brent Cross Limited Hammerson Rugby Limited Hammerson Brent South Limited Hammerson Silverburn Limited Isle of Man Hammerson Bristol Investments Limited Hammerson Staines Limited Hammerson Bristol Limited Hammerson Telford Limited Hammerson Cardiff Limited Hammerson Thanet Limited Hammerson Centurion Limited Hammerson Value Retail Investments Limited Hammerson Coventry Limited Hammerson Victoria Gate Limited
OM 163 Indirect subsidiaries and other whollyowned entities continued England and Wales continued Hammerson Victoria Investments Limited Leeds GP2 Limited Hammerson Victoria Quarter Limited London and Metropolitan Northern Hammerson Watermark Limited LWP Limited Partnership Hammerson Whitgift Limited Martineau Galleries GP Limited Hammerson Birmingham Properties Limited Martineau Galleries No.
1 Limited Hammerson Bull Ring Limited Martineau Galleries No.
2 Limited Hammerson Company Secretarial Limited Mentboost Limited Hammerson Croydon GP1 Limited Monesan Limited Hammerson Croydon GP2 Limited New Southgate Limited Hammerson HSF Shelf Co Limited Precis  Limited Ordinary and Deferred Hammerson Investments No.
12 Limited RT Group Developments Limited Hammerson Investments No.
13 Limited RT Group Property Investments Limited Hammerson Investments No.
16 Limited SEVCO 5025 Limited Hammerson Investments No.
23 Limited Spitalfields Developments Limited Hammerson Investments No.
26 Limited Spitalfields Holdings Limited Ordinary and Preference Hammerson Investments No.
35 Limited The Hammerson ICAV Ireland Hammerson Investments No.
36 Limited The Highcross Limited Partnership Hammerson Investments No.
37 Limited The Junction General Partner Limited Hammerson Investments Limited The Junction Thurrock Shareholder GP Limited Hammerson Junction No 3 Limited The Junction Limited Partnership Hammerson Junction No 4 Limited The Junction Thurrock General Partner Limited Hammerson LLC United States The Junction Thurrock Limited Partnership Hammerson Martineau Galleries Limited The Martineau Galleries Limited Partnership Hammerson MGLP Limited Thurrock Shares 1 Limited Hammerson MGLP 2 Limited Thurrock Shares 2 Limited Hammerson MLP Limited Union Square Developments Limited Scotland Hammerson Moor House LP Limited West Quay Shopping Centre Limited Hammerson Operations Limited Westchester Holdings Limited Hammerson Oracle Investments Limited Westchester Property Holdings Limited Hammerson Oracle Properties Limited Westchester Properties Thanet Limited Hammerson Peterborough GP Limited Hammerson Peterborough No 1 Limited France Hammerson Peterborough No 2 Limited BFN10 GmbH Germany Hammerson Project Management Limited Cergy Expansion 1 SAS Hammerson Ravenhead Limited Espace Plus SC1 Hammerson Retail Parks Holdings Limited Hammerson Asset Management SAS Hammerson Sheffield NRQ Limited Hammerson Beauvais SNC Hammerson Shelf Co 5 Limited Hammerson Bethune SCI Hammerson UK Properties plc Hammerson Centre Commercial Italie SAS Hammerson Wrekin LLP Hammerson Cergy 1 SCI Highcross GP Limited Hammerson Cergy 2 SCI Highcross Residential Nominees 1 Limited Hammerson Cergy 4 SCI Highcross Residential Nominees 2 Limited Hammerson Cergy 5 SCI Highcross Residential Properties Limited Hammerson Dveloppement SCI Junction Nominee 1 Limited Hammerson Europe BV Netherlands Junction Nominee 2 Limited Hammerson Fontaine SCI Leeds GP1 Limited Hammerson France SAS No shares in issue for Unit Trusts or Limited Partnerships.
Country of operation is the United Kingdom.
163 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the company accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 SUBSIDIARIES AND OTHER RELATED UNDERTAKINGS CONTINUED Indirect subsidiaries and other whollyowned entities continued France continued Hammerson Mantes SCI SCI Cergy Lynx SCI Hammerson Marignan SAS SCI Cergy Office 1 SCI Hammerson Marketing et Communication SAS SCI Cergy Office 2 SCI Hammerson Marseille SC SCI Cergy Office 3 SCI Hammerson Nancy SCI SCI Cergy Office 4 SCI Hammerson Property Management SAS SCI Cergy Office 5 SCI Hammerson SaintSbastien SAS SCI Cergy Office 6 SCI Hammerson Troyes SCI SCI Cergy Opra SCI Hammerson Villebon 1 SARL SCI Cergy Madeleine SCI Hammerson Villebon 2 SNC SCI Cergy Paix SCI Les Pressing Runis SARL SCI Cergy Royale SCI RC Aulnay 3 SCI SCI Cergy Vendme SCI Retail Park Nice Lingostire SAS SCI Hammerson Thiebaut SCI SCI Cergy Capucine SCI SCI Nevis SC SCI Cergy Expansion 2 SCI Socit de gestion des parkings Hammerson SOGEPH SARL SCI Cergy Honor SCI TeycpacHItalie SAS
Hammerson 60 TNS Unit Trust Hammerson VRC Jersey Limited Hammerson Birmingham Investments Limited Hammerson Whitgift Investments Limited Hammerson Bull Ring Jersey Limited Highcross No.1 Limited Hammerson Croydon Investments Limited Highcross No.2 Limited Hammerson Highcross Investments Limited Highcross Leicester Limited Hammerson Junction No 1 Limited Junction Thurrock Unit Trust Hammerson Junction No 2 Limited Rhone Jersey Limited Hammerson Leeds Unit Trust Telford Forge Retail Park Unit Trust Hammerson Victoria Gate Unit Trust The Junction Unit Trust Hammerson Victoria Quarter Unit Trust The Hammerson Grand Central Unit Trust Hammerson VIA Jersey Limited No shares in issue for Unit Trusts.
Indirectly held joint venture entities Country of registration or operation Class of share held Ownership % Bishopsgate Goodsyard Regeneration Limited England and Wales
Bristol Alliance GP Limited England and Wales
Bristol Alliance Limited Partnership England and Wales
Bristol Alliance Nominee No.1 Limite d England and Wales
Bristol Alliance Nominee No.2 Limited England and Wales
BRLP Rotunda Limited England and Wales
Bull Ring GP Limited England and Wales
Bull Ring GP2 Limited England and Wales
Bull Ring Limited Partnership England and Wales
Bull Ring No.1 Limited England and Wales
Bull Ring No.2 Limited England and Wales
Croydon GP1 Limited England and Wales
Croydon GP2 Limited England and Wales
Croydon Car Park Limited England and Wales
Croydon Limited Partnership England and Wales
Croydon Management Services Limited England and Wales
164 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Notes to the company accounts continued HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 SUBSIDIARIES AND OTHER RELATED UNDERTAKINGS CONTINUED Indirect subsidiaries and other whollyowned entities continued France continued Hammerson Mantes SCI SCI Cergy Lynx SCI Hammerson Marignan SAS SCI Cergy Office 1 SCI Hammerson Marketing et Communication SAS SCI Cergy Office 2 SCI Hammerson Marseille SC SCI Cergy Office 3 SCI Hammerson Nancy SCI SCI Cergy Office 4 SCI Hammerson Property Management SAS SCI Cergy Office 5 SCI Hammerson SaintSbastien SAS SCI Cergy Office 6 SCI Hammerson Troyes SCI SCI Cergy Opra SCI Hammerson Villebon 1 SARL SCI Cergy Madeleine SCI Hammerson Villebon 2 SNC SCI Cergy Paix SCI Les Pressing Runis SARL SCI Cergy Royale SCI RC Aulnay 3 SCI SCI Cergy Vendme SCI Retail Park Nice Lingostire SAS SCI Hammerson Thiebaut SCI SCI Cergy Capucine SCI SCI Nevis SC SCI Cergy Expansion 2 SCI Socit de gestion des parkings Hammerson SOGEPH SARL SCI Cergy Honor SCI TeycpacHItalie SAS
Hammerson 60 TNS Unit Trust Hammerson VRC Jersey Limited Hammerson Birmingham Investments Limited Hammerson Whitgift Investments Limited Hammerson Bull Ring Jersey Limited Highcross No.1 Limited Hammerson Croydon Investments Limited Highcross No.2 Limited Hammerson Highcross Investments Limited Highcross Leicester Limited Hammerson Junction No 1 Limited Junction Thurrock Unit Trust Hammerson Junction No 2 Limited Rhone Jersey Limited Hammerson Leeds Unit Trust Telford Forge Retail Park Unit Trust Hammerson Victoria Gate Unit Trust The Junction Unit Trust Hammerson Victoria Quarter Unit Trust The Hammerson Grand Central Unit Trust Hammerson VIA Jersey Limited No shares in issue for Unit Trusts.
Indirectly held joint venture entities Country of registration or operation Class of share held Ownership % Bishopsgate Goodsyard Regeneration Limited England and Wales
Bristol Alliance GP Limited England and Wales
Bristol Alliance Limited Partnership England and Wales
Bristol Alliance Nominee No.1 Limite d England and Wales
Bristol Alliance Nominee No.2 Limited England and Wales
BRLP Rotunda Limited England and Wales
Bull Ring GP Limited England and Wales
Bull Ring GP2 Limited England and Wales
Bull Ring Limited Partnership England and Wales
Bull Ring No.1 Limited England and Wales
Bull Ring No.2 Limited England and Wales
Croydon GP1 Limited England and Wales
Croydon GP2 Limited England and Wales
Croydon Car Park Limited England and Wales
Croydon Limited Partnership England and Wales
Croydon Management Services Limited England and Wales
HAMMERSON.
OM 165 Indirectly held joint venture entities continued Country of registration or operation Class of share held Ownership % Croydon Property Investments Limited England and Wales
Martineau GP Limited England and Wales
Moor House General Partner Limited England and Wales
Oracle Nominees No.
1 Limited England and Wales
Oracle Nominees No.
2 Limited England and Wales
Oracle Nominees Limited England and Wales
Oracle Shopping Centre Limited England and Wales
Reading Residential Properties Limited England and Wales
The Moor House Limited Partnership England and Wales
The Oracle Limited Partnership England and Wales
West Quay Limited Partnership England and Wales
West Quay No.1 Limited England and Wales
West Quay No.2 Limited England and Wales
Whitgift Limited Partnership England and Wales
RC Aulnay 1 SCI France Ordinary 25 RC Aulnay 2 SCI France Ordinary 25 SAS Angel Shopping Centre SAS France Ordinary 10 SCI ESQ SCI France Ordinary 25 Socit Civile de Dveloppement du Centre Commercial de la Place des Halles SDPH SC France Ordinary 65 Retail Property Holdings SE Li mited Guernsey
Jewel Limited Partnership Ireland NA 50 Maple Box Designated Activity Company Ireland Ordinary 50 Triskelion Property Holding Designated Activity Company Ireland Ordinary 50 Retail Property Holdings Limited Isle of Man
Bull Ring Joint Venture Trust Jersey
Croydon Jersey Unit Trust Jersey
VIA Limited Partnership Jersey NA 47 Whitgift Manager Limited Jersey
Indirectly held associate entities Country of registration or operation Class of share held Ownership % VR Maasmechelen Tourist Outlets Comm.
V A Belgium Bshares 25 Bicester Investors Limited Partnership Bermuda NA 22 Bicester Investors II Limited Partnership Bermuda NA 22 Value Retail Investors Limited Partnership Bermuda NA 71 Value Retail Investors II Limited Partnership Bermuda NA 80 VR Franconia GmbH Germany Ordinary 15 Master Holding BV Netherlands Ordinary 12 VR Ireland BV Netherlands Ordinary 11 Value Retail PLC UK Ordinary 22 US Paris LLC USA NA 42 165 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT PRESENTATION OF INFORMATION As explained in the Financial Review on page 53 and consistent with the presentation in the Business Review management reviews the performance of the business on a proportionally consolidated basis including the Groups share of Property interests but excluding the Groups interest in premium outlets held through investments in Value Retail and VIA Outlets.
This is because the Group has less daytoday involvement in the operational activities and the premium outlets sector has different operational characteristics compared with the Groups other property sectors.
The information in the following tables has been prepared on this basis and further details of the definitions for information contained within this section can be found in the Glossary on pages 181 and 182.
PORTFOLIO ANALYSIS Rental information Table 100 Rental data for the year ended 31 December 2015 Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets Gross rental income Net rental income Vacancy rate % Average rents passing
Estimated rental value
United Kingdom Total investment portfolio 357.9 313.4 2.3 345 349.9 371.7 3.8 Developments 8.5 5.2 Total property portfolio note 366.4 318.6 Selected data for the year ended 31 December 2014
Total investment portfolio 341.9 304.6 2.5 340 346.9 368.6 3.6 Developments 2.2 1.0 Total property portfolio 344.1 305.6
A.
Average rents passing at the period end before deducting head and equity rents and excluding rents passing from anchor units and car parks.
B.
The estimated market rental value at the year end calculated by the Groups valuers.
ERVs in the above table are included within the unobservable inputs to the portfolio valuations as defined by IFRS 13.
This information has been subject to audit.
Rent reviews Table 101 Rent reviews as at 31 December 2015 Rents passing subject to review in Current ERV of leases subject to review in Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets
Total
Outstanding
Total
United Kingdom
A.
The amount of rental income based on rents passing at 31 December 2015 for leases which are subject to review in each year.
B.
Projected rental income for leases that are subject to review in each year based on the higher of the current rental income and the ERV at 31 December 2015 and ignoring the impact of changes in rental values before the review date.
ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES
166 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Lease expiries and breaks Table 102 Lease expiries and breaks as at 31 December 2015 Rents passing that expirebreak in ERV of leases that expirebreak in Weighted average unexpired lease term Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets
Total to break years to expiry years United Kingdom Total investment portfolio 45.2 17.0 33.1 95.3 53.4 17.8 31.7 102.9 6.0 8.0
A.
The amount of rental income based on rents passing at 31 December 2015 for leases which expire or for the UK only are subject to tenant break options which fall due in each year.
B.
The ERV at 31 December 2015 for leases that expire or for the UK only are subject to tenant break options which fall due in each year and ignoring the impact of rental growth and any rentfree periods.
Net rental income Table 103 Net rental income for the year ended 31 December 2015 Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets
Increase
Acquisitions
Disposals
Developments and other Total net rental income United Kingdom Shopping centres 130.7 2.1 7.7 0.4 0.1 138.7 Retail parks 78.9 2.6  1.2 1.9 82.0 Total property portfolio 266.4 2.3 16.7 5.5 30.0 318.6 Table 104 Net rental income for the year ended 31 December 2014 Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets
Exchange
Acquisitions
Disposals
Developments and other Total net rental income United Kingdom Shopping centres 128.0  0.6 0.1 0.7 128.0 Retail parks 76.9   3.9 2.1 82.9 Total property portfolio 260.4 8.2 6.4 10.3 20.3 305.6 167 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES T op T en T enants Table 105 Ranked by passing rent at 31 December 2015 Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets Passing rent % of total passing rent BandQ 12.1 3.5 Next 7.8 2.2 Inditex 6.7 1.9 HandM 6.6 1.9 Dixons Carphone 6.5 1.9 Arcadia 6.0 1.7 Boots 5.2 1.5 Debenhams 5.1 1.5 Home Retail Group 4.9 1.4 New Look 4.7 1.3 Total 65.6 18.8 EPRA Cost ratio Table 106 Cost ratio analysis Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets Year ended 31 December
Year ended 31 December Net service charge expenses  nonvacancy 3.8 3.0 Net service charge expenses  vacancy 9.5 7.4 Net service charge expenses  total 13.3 10.4 Other property outgoings 30.8 26.2 Less inclusive lease costs recovered through rent 3.4 2.6 Total property costs for cost ratio 40.7 34.0 Employee and corporate costs 48.3 52.1 Management fees receivable 6.0 5.6 Net oneoff restructuring cost  3.0 Total operating costs for cost ratio 83.0 77.5 Gross rental income 366.4 344.1 Ground and equity rents payable 3.7 1.9 Less inclusive lease costs recovered through rent 3.4 2.6 Gross rental income for cost ratio 359.3 339.6 EPRA cost ratio including net service charge expenses  vacancy % 23.1 22.8 EPRA cost ratio excluding net service charge expenses  vacancy % 20.5 20.6 The calculation methodology has been amended to adjust for inclusive lease costs recovered through rent.
This amendment is in line with EPRA best practice.
Staff costs amounting to 1.9 million 2014 1.5 million have been capitalised as development costs and are excluded from table 106.
Our business model for developments is to use a combination of inhouse staff and external advisers.
The cost of external advisers is capitalised to the cost of developments.
The cost of staff working on developments is generally expensed but is capitalised subject to meeting certain criteria related to the degree of time spent on and the stage of progress of specific projects.
Additional disclosures continued
168 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 V aluation analysis Table 107 Valuation analysis at 31 December 2015 Proportionally consolidated including premium outlets
Revaluation in the year
Total return %
True equivalent yield %
United Kingdom Shopping centres 3064.9 194.9 6.8 11.9 4.6 5.2 5.0 Retail parks 1656.0 19.0 1.3 6.5 4.9 5.6 5.4 Total investment portfolio 6741.7 331.9 5.4 10.5 4.6 5.2 5.1 Developments 388.8 35.6 12.3 14.1 Total property portfolio 7130.5 367.5 5.7 10.7 Premium outlets Total Group 8374.1 541.6 7.1 12.4 Selected data for the year ended 31 December 2014
France 1797.7 41.1 2.4 7.7 4.6 5.3 5.1 Total investment portfolio 6498.4 418.5 7.4 13.1 4.7 5.5 5.3 Developments 208.1 18.3 9.1 9.8 Total property portfolio 6706.5 436.8 7.4 12.7 Premium outlets Total Group 7734.1 546.6 8.0 13.6
A.
Nominal equivalent yields are included within the unobservable inputs to the portfolio valuations as defined by IFRS 13.
This information has been subject to audit.
B.
Represents the property returns for the Groups share of premium outlets through its investments in Value Retail and VIA Outlets.
Yield analysis Table 108 Investment portfolio as at 31 December 2015 Proportionally consolidated excluding premium outlets
Gross value Net book value Portfolio value net of cost to complete 7104 7104 Purchasers costs Net investment portfolio valuation on a proportionally consolidated basis 6742 Income and yields Rent for valuers initial yield equivalent to EPRA Net Initial Yield 325.5 4.6% 4.8% Rentfree periods including prelets 10.8 0.1% 0.2% Rent for toppedup initial yield 336.3 4.7% 5.0% Nonrecoverable costs net of outstanding rent reviews 13.6 0.2% 0.2% Passing rents 349.9 4.9% 5.2% ERV of vacant space 8.2 0.1% 0.1% Reversions 13.6 0.2% 0.2% Total ERV Reversionary yield 371.7 5.2% 5.5% True equivalent yield 5.2% Nominal equivalent yield 5.1%
A.
Purchasers costs equate to 5.4% of the net portfolio value.
B.
The weighted average remaining rentfree period is 0.4 years.
C.
The yield of 4.7% based on passing rents and gross portfolio value is equivalent to EPRAs toppedup Net Initial Yield.
169 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES PREMIUM OUTLETS The Groups investment in premium outlets is through interests in Value Retail and VIA Outlets.
Due to the nature of the Groups control over these externallymanaged investments Value Retail is accounted for as an associate and VIA Outlets is a joint venture.
Tables 109 and 110 provide analysis of the impact of the two premium outlet investments on the Groups financial statements.
Further information on Value Retail is provided in note 13 to the accounts on page 145 and for VIA Outlets in note 12 to the accounts on page 139 .
Income statement Table 109 Aggregated premium outlets income summary 2015 2014 Value Retail VIA Outlets
Value Retail VIA Outlets
Share of results 159.3 13.1 172.4 109.9 1.1 108.8 Less EPRA adjustments Revaluation gainslosses on properties 163.7 10.4 174.1 111.1 1.3 109.8 Change in fair value of derivatives 7.5 2.2 9.7 9.9 0.3 10.2 Deferred tax 25.1 2.5 27.6 11.9 0.4 12.3 Other adjustments 11.1 1.3 12.4 4.6  4.6 EPRA adjustments 142.2 7.0 149.2 93.9 2.0 91.9 Adjusted earnings of premium outlets 17.1 6.1 23.2 16.0 0.9 16.9 Interest receivable from Value Retail loans 5.3  5.3 5.8  5.8 Total contribution to adjusted profit 22.4 6.1 28.5 21.8 0.9 22.7 Balance sheet Table 110 Aggregated premium outlets investment summary 2015 2014 Value Retail VIA Outlets
Value Retail VIA Outlets
Investment properties 1095.0 148.6 1243.6 884.7 142.9 1027.6 Other net liabilitiesassets 15.9 10.7 26.6 19.0 7.5 11.5 Share of net assets 743.8 110.8 854.6 628.8 104.2 733.0 Less EPRA adjustments Fair value of derivatives 0.4 3.5 3.1 1.9 3.1 1.2 Goodwill as a result of deferred tax 47.0 3.0 50.0 47.0 3.1 50.1 EPRA adjustments 59.9 6.8 66.7 31.9 4.0 35.9 EPRA adjusted investment 803.7 117.6 921.3 660.7 Investment in VR China  within other investments 4.8  4.8 Loans to Value Retail 76.4  76.4 63.5  63.5 Total impact of balance sheet  EPRA basis 884.9 117.6 1002.5 724.2 108.2 832.4 At 31 December 2015 the Group had provided loans of 76.4 million 2014 63.5 million to Value Retail for which the Group received interest of 5.3 million in 2015 2014 5.8 million which is included within finance income in note 7 to the accounts on page 134.
Additional disclosures continued
170 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 PROPORTIONALLY CONSOLIDATED INFORMATION Note 2 to the accounts on page 128 shows the proportionally consolidated income statement.
The proportionally consolidated balance sheet net debt and net underlying finance costs are shown in the tables 111 112 and 113.
In each of the tables column A represents the Reported Group figures as shown in the financial statements column B shows the Groups share of Property interests being the Groups share of Property joint ventures as shown in note 12 to the accounts on page 139 and Nicetoile as shown in note 13 to the accounts on page 145.
Column C shows the Groups proportionally consolidated figures by aggregating the Reported Group and Share of Property interests figures.
The Groups interests in premium outlets are not proportionally consolidated as management does not review these interests on this basis.
Proportionally consolidated balance sheet Table 111 As at 31 Decembertel
Group
Share of
Proportionally consolidated
Group
Share of
Proportionally consolidated A B C A B C Noncurrent assets Investment and development properties 4652.1 2478.4 7130.5 4427.3 2279.2 6706.5 Interests in leasehold properties 32.1 9.4 41.5 33.2 9.8 43.0 Plant and equipment 7.6  7.6 5.0  5.0 Investment in joint ventures 3213.6 3102.8 110.8 2341.5 2237.3 104.2 Investment in associate 768.0 24.2 743.8 628.8  628.8 Other investments 4.8  4.8 1.4  1.4 Receivables 92.1  92.1 79.3  79.3 8770.3 639.2 8131.1 7516.5 51.7 7568.2 Current assets Restricted monetary assets 34.0 16.3 50.3 11.3 12.8 24.1 Cash and deposits 37.0 33.5 70.5 28.6 30.8 59.4 Total assets 8959.3 121.3 9080.6 7642.9 124.6 7767.5 Current liabilities Borrowings  40.2 40.2 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 3028.1  3028.1 2287.1 42.2 2329.3 Deferred tax 0.5  0.5 0.5  0.5 Obligations under finance leases 32.5 9.4 41.9 33.0 9.8 42.8 3136.8 13.7 3150.5 2393.1 58.1 2451.2 Total liabilities 3373.0 121.3 3494.3 2597.8 124.6 2722.4 Net assets 5586.3  5586.3 5045.1  5045.1 171 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES Proportionally consolidated net debt analysis Table 112 As at 31 Decembertel
Group
Share of
Total
Reported
Group
Share of
Total
Notes A B C A B C Shortterm deposits 0.1 0.9 1.0 0.1 3.1 3.2 Cash and deposits 37.0 33.5 70.5 28.6 30.8 59.4 Current borrowings including currency swaps 30.0 40.2 10.2 5.1  5.1 Noncurrent borrowings 3028.1  3028.1 2287.1 42.2 2329.3 Net debt 2961.1 6.7 2967.8 2253.4 11.4 2264.8 Proportionally consolidated net underlying finance costs Table 113 For the year ending 31 Decembertel
Group
Share of
Total
Reported
Group
Share of
Total
Notes A B C A B C Finance income 15.7 4.6 20.3 9.0 0.1 9.1 Adjusted finance costsincome 86.2 2.1 84.1 97.4 2.7 100.1 Capitalised interest 5.3  5.3 8.8  8.8 Net underlying finance costsincome 91.5 2.1 89.4 106.2 2.7 108.9 Additional disclosures continued
172 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 TENYEAR FINANCIAL SUMMARY
Income statement Operating profit before other net Other net gainslosses 381.0 430.3 102.0 7.3 209.8 469.9 590.4 1698.3 25.2 748.0 Share of results of joint ventures 13.1 1.1 Share of results of associates 159.3 109.9 101.5 47.5  1.5 0.8 Noncontrolling interests 3.2 3.0 3.1 3.4 9.9 4.1 5.9 1.2 10.6 9.9 ProfitLoss for the year attributable to equity shareholders 726.8 699.1 337.4 138.4 335.7 615.4 344.5 1572.6 101.0 1016.9 Balance sheet Investment and development properties 7130.5 6706.5 5931.2 5458.4 5719.6 5331.1 5141.5 6456.8 7275.0 6716.0 Investment in joint ventures 110.8 104.2 Investment in associates 743.8 628.8 545.4 428.4   10.4 Cash and shortterm deposits 70.5 59.4 56.7 57.1 100.7 126.2 182.9 119.9 28.6 39.4 Borrowings 3068.3 2329.3 2309.0 2038.1 2079.9 1920.6 2319.0 3452.6 2524.2 2282.6 Net deferred tax provision 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 108.4 99.6 103.3 Noncontrolling interests 69.0 71.4 76.7 74.5 76.5 71.7 73.4 89.3 70.4 56.6 Equity shareholders funds 5517.3 4973.7 4059.9 3851.2 3771.9 3480.0 2949.7 2820.6 4354.6 4165.1 Cash flow Operating cash flow after tax 171.2 128.1 129.4 139.9 147.8 132.7 105.3 29.8 29.2 5.5 Property and corporate acquisitions 43.7 302.7 191.1 397.3 374.1 218.6 39.5 123.5 163.3 219.5 Developments and major Other capital expenditure 45.1 39.8 17.5 48.0 23.6 25.5 23.7 13.9 44.6 29.6 Investments in joint ventures 735.6 118.9 Net cash flow before financing 783.0 468.6 167.5 34.1 190.3 286.2 207.7 325.7 119.4 66.0 Per share data Basic earningsloss per share 92.8p 95.7p 47.4p 19.4p 47.3p 87.2p 54.1p Adjusted earnings per share 26.9p 23.9p 23.1p 20.9p 19.3p 19.9p 19.7p 25.8p 27.3p 22.3p Dividend per share 22.3p 20.4p 19.1p 17.7p 16.6p 15.95p 15.45p 18.9p 18.5p 14.7p Diluted net asset value per share 7.03 6.35 5.70 5.41 5.30 4.93 4.20 6.61 10.22 9.91 EPRA net asset value per share 7.10 6.38 5.73 5.42 5.30 4.95 4.21 7.03 10.49 10.18 Financial ratios Return on shareholders equity 14.3% 16.3% 8.8% 5.3% 11.2% 21.1% 16.9% 32.5% 4.5% 25.3% Gearing 54% 46% 56% 53% 52% 52% 72% 118% 57% 54% Interest cover 3.6x 2.8x 2.8x 2.8x 2.6x 2.6x 2.2x 1.7x 1.9x 1.8x Dividend cover 1.2x 1.2x 1.2x 1.2x 1.2x 1.2x 1.3x 1.4x 1.5x 1.5x Comprises continuing and discontinued operations.
Comparative per share data was restated following the rights issue in March 2009.
The Income Statement Balance Sheet and Financial Ratios for 2015 and 2014 have been presented on a proportionally consolidated basis excluding the Groups investment in premium outlets.
Cash flow information has b een presented on an IFRS basis throughout.
173 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION TENYEAR FINANCIAL SUMMARY SUMMARY OF DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY The Directors Remuneration Policy was approved at the 2014 Annual General Meeting and the summary below is presented for ease of reference.
The Remuneration Policy is reproduced in full in the 2013 Annual Report pages 74 to 86 and can be found on the Companys website site The summary below should be read in the context of the full Remuneration Policy which contains footnotes that form part of the Remuneration Policy and help to explain elements of the Remuneration Policy.
Summary of approach to Remuneration Policy Objective To attract retain and motivate quality leaders capable of making a major contribution to the Companys success whilst avoiding paying more than the Remuneration Committee considers necessary.
Implementation The Remuneration Committee considers a variety of factors including remuneration packages available at comparable companies overall Company performance internal relativities achievement of corporate objectives individual performance and experience published views of institutional investors and general market trends and performance.
Performancerelated elements Generally twothirds of Executive Director total target remuneration excluding pension and benefits is considered to be appropriate.
Limits and flexibility Sufficient flexibility is retained to act in the interests of shareholders and the Company.
Limits will not lead to pressure on reward levels and the Remuneration Committee adopts a suitably conservative approach.
Executive Directors Remuneration Element and overview Opportunity Base Salary Paid monthly in cash in arrears
Reviewed annually by the Remuneration
Subject to a maximum of 850000 per annum.
Reviews account for factors such as market conditions salary increases to other Group employees and comparison against both a relevant property peer group and a market capitalisation group selected by the Remuneration Committee.
Benchmarking considers base salary as well as total remuneration and is generally within but is not constrained by a range of  10% of median.
Benefits
Contractual and noncontractual as appropriate and consistent with local market practice
Where provided by third parties cost covered by the Company at market rates Subject to an aggregate maximum of 100000 per annum as measured by the individuals P11D tax calculation or local equivalent for nonUK Executive Directors.
The maximum is increased annually by RPI.
Benefits include a car allowance or company car private medical insurance to include spouselife partner permanent health insurance and life assurance.
Hammerson France employees may receive additional benefits including a seniority allowance and an employers contribution of up to 2000 per annum to an employee savings scheme.
Relocation benefits may include global relocation support maximum 400000 andor tax equalisation arrangements across all elements of remuneration.
Whilst not considered by the Remuneration Committee to be a benefit in the normal sense Directors may participate in corporate hospitality including travel and where appropriate with a family member whether paid for by the Company or another within its agreed policies.
Pension
Noncontributory allowance subject to a maximum threshold Salary supplements are nonpensionable and do not qualify for AIP or LTIP entitlements No compensation for public policy or tax changes Company will comply with any local legal obligations in respect of pensions An allowance Pension Choice paid as a combination of any or all of the following but subject to an aggregate limit of 30% of base salary Employer contribution to the Companys defined contribution pension plan Payment to a SelfInvested Personal Pension Plan and A salary supplement.
JeanPhilippe Mouton receives a salary supplement and participates in a legacy collective supplementary defined contribution retirement plan operated by his French employing company which makes employer contributions at the annual statutory limit.
Pension arrangements are kept under review to ensure they remain appropriate.
174 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Element and overview Opportunity Annual Incentive Plan AIP with deferral under the Deferred Bonus Share Scheme
Annual performance based award paid as a mixture of cash and deferred shares Awards subject to continued employment save in the leaver circumstances per the Remuneration Policy Deferred shares are subject to leaver conditions per the Remuneration Policy
Award
Maximum opportunity is currently 200% of base salary.
The Remuneration Committee reserves the power to increase this to a maximum of 300%.
Increases above 200% would only occur after appropriate consultation with shareholders.
Performance
Measures and conditions are set annually by the Remuneration Committee.
Performance conditions are assessed over a period of one year and may consist of a combination of financial measures at Group or divisional level operational measures and individual performance objectives.
The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to include such other measures as it considers to be an appropriate means of assessing performance.
Other than in exceptional circumstances performance measures and conditions once set will generally remain unchanged for the year.
No further performance targets apply to the deferred shares element as this represents previously earned bonuses.
The Remuneration Committee retains discretion to amend the vesting level up or down where considered appropriate but not so as to exceed the maximum bonus potential.
Deferred shares element Representing at least 40% of the total award and delivered under the DBSS but may be delivered under a different plan with equivalent terms.
Deferred shares are structured as nilcost share options with a deferral period of no less than two years.
Participants are entitled to a dividend equivalent for the period from the grant date until the vesting date delivered as additional shares upon transfer.
Clawback and malus Provisions cover personal misconduct andor where accounts or information relevant to performance are shown to be materially wrong resulting in the payment of a higher bonus than should have been the case.
Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP Discretionary annual award Subject to continued employment save in the leaver circumstances per the Remuneration
Nonpensionable
Award
Maximum discretionary award up to a value of 200% of base salary.
In exceptional circumstances the Remuneration Committee can increase this to 300%.
The extent of vesting is determined by the performance conditions.
Normally structured as nilcost share options but can take other forms.
Participants are entitled to a dividend equivalent for the period from the grant date to the vesting date delivered as additional shares upon transfer.
The Remuneration Committee has discretion to settle awards as cash.
Performance
Minimum performance period of three years.
In practice the Remuneration Committee has determined that the minimum period should be four years.
Consisting of a combination of financial and nonfinancial measures the Remuneration Committee has discretion to amend The performance measures andor conditions used andor The weighting of each for future awards andor The performance measurement periods.
Performance conditions in respect of outstanding awards can be amended due to exceptional circumstances provided that the amendment is not materially less difficult to satisfy.
Vesting
Vesting under each performance condition is on a straightline basis with no more than 25% vesting at threshold performance.
Clawback and malus Provisions cover personal misconduct andor where accounts or information relevant to performance are shown to be materially wrong and vesting was higher than should have been the case.
OTHER INFORMATION 175 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Element and overview Opportunity Share ownership guidelines Five years to achieve The Chief Executive is expected to accumulate and maintain a holding of ordinary shares in the Company equivalent in value to no less than 150% of base salary.
Executive Directors are expected to accumulate a holding of ordinary shares in the Company equivalent in value to no less than 100% of base salary.
Shares held beneficially by an Executive Director and his spouselife partner as well as those held within the Companys Share Incentive Plan are included in the calculation.
The closing middle market quotation on the last business day in December is used as the basis for calculation.
There is no formal sanction for noncompliance.
Allemployee arrangements UKbased Executive Directors may participate in the Companys Sharesave and Share Incentive Plan on the same terms as other employee participants.
The maximum participation level for all staff is set by relevant UK legislation.
Francebased Executive Directors may participate in a profit share plan which is available to all employees of Hammerson France and rewards performance against such measures as the Remuneration Committee considers appropriate.
Awards are subject to an annual limit determined by French legislation.
Chairman and NonExecutive Directors Remuneration Element and overview Opportunity
Paid monthly in arrears in cash
Reviewed periodically The Chairmans fee is determined by the Remuneration Committee.
Other NonExecutive Director fees are determined by the Board on the recommendation of the Executive Directors.
Aggregate total annual fees to NonExecutive Directors are subject to the limit in the Companys Articles of
The Remuneration Committee may provide additional fees within the stated limit including for membership of any additional Board committees that may be established.
Fees to the Chairman and other NonExecutive Directors are intended to be competitive with other fully listed companies of equivalent size and complexity but are not set by reference to a prescribed benchmark.
Periodic reviews take into account independent advice and the time commitment required of Non Executive Directors.
Expenses The Company may reimburse travel and accommodation expenses including to the Companys London office and may settle the liability from any assessment to tax made on such reimbursement.
Additional fees The Chairman receives no additional fee for membership of any of the Committees.
Other NonExecutive Directors may receive additional fees for membership andor chairmanship of the Remuneration and Audit Committees.
An additional fee is payable to the Senior Independent Director.
The level of additional fees is set to reflect the responsibilities of the role.
Other benefits No other benefits are currently available to any of the NonExecutive Directors.
The NonExecutive Directors are not eligible for performancerelated bonuses or participation in the Companys share plans.
The NonExecutive Directors may participate in corporate hospitality including travel and where appropriate with a family member whether paid for by the Company or another within its agreed policies.
A departing gift may be provided up to a value of 5000 plus related taxes per NonExecutive Director on termination of office.
Summary of Directors Remuneration Policy continued 176 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Service agreements new Executive Directors Overview The Committees approach is for new Executive Directors to have service agreements that have regard to market practice at the date of appointment.
Terms summarised below will be subject to any local statutory or collective bargaining requirements where applicable.
Expiry date and notice period No fixed expiry date.
Either party may terminate an appointment by providing 12 months notice.
A longer initial notice period may be applied by the Company to new appointments for a limited time if the Remuneration Committee considers this appropriate.
Retirement date No default retirement date.
Retirement requests are considered on a casebycase basis and 12 months notice is anticipated.
Posttermination restrictions To protect the Groups confidential information for an appropriate period and to prevent poaching of the Groups senior workforce and its customer and supplier connections for 12 months after termination.
Payment in lieu of notice
Employment can be terminated immediately by paying a PILON comprising base pay pension medical insurance and car allowance.
A PILON will not apply on termination for gross misconduct in which case no compensation will be due.
The Company has discretion to pay on a phased basis subject to mitigation.
Change of control and liquidated damages No right to liquidated damages on a change of control.
Other appointments External nonexecutive appointments that do not lead to a conflict of interest are permitted with the consent of the Companys Board of Directors on the basis that such appointments can enhance experience and skills and add value to the Company.
Fees for external appointments can be retained except where the appointment is as the Companys representative.
Appointment terms new NonExecutive Directors Overview The Chairman and NonExecutive Director appointments are governed by letters of appointment.
Appointments are for a term of three years.
Letters of appointment are reviewed by the Chairman and the Executive Directors every three years.
Notice period and termination No less than three months notice must be given by either party.
Immediate termination can occur should a conflict of interest arise and appointments will cease automatically at an Annual General Meeting where a NonExecutive Director is not reelected.
Fees on termination Entitlement is limited to such fees as have accrued at the date of termination together with the reimbursement of expenses properly incurred prior to that date.
Payment for loss of office Executive Directors AIP Where notice of termination is given by either the Company or the Executive Director prior to the end of the performance period or employment ceases due to death illhealth injury or disability bonus entitlement remains subject to performance conditions.
Any bonus payable is prorated unless the Remuneration Committee decides otherwise.
Where employment ceases after the end of the performance period but prior to payment entitlement to any bonus payment remains if the reasons for employment ceasing are as above but also where the reason for employment ceasing is retirement redundancy or sale of the company or business for which the Executive Director works.
Unless the Remuneration Committee determines otherwise at its discretion no bonus is payable in other circumstances.
DBSS deferred share element of AIP Deferred share awards lapse where an Executive Director resigns or gives notice although the Remuneration Committee has discretion to treat the Executive Director as a good leaver.
Deferred share awards lapse where dismissal is for cause.
Otherwise share awards vest in full on the normal vesting date.
The Remuneration Committee can decide to accelerate vesting.
LTIP Good leaver status will be given where employment ceases due to death retirement illhealth injury or disability redundancy or the sale of the company or business for which he works and awards will vest on the normal vesting date.
Awards remain subject to performance conditions and will be time prorated unless the Remuneration Committee decides otherwise.
The Remuneration Committee can decide to accelerate vesting.
Where employment ceases for any other reason the Remuneration Committee retains discretion to treat the Executive Director as a good leaver.
OTHER INFORMATION 177 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION SHAREHOLDER ADMINISTRATION Payment of dividends to mandated accounts Shareholders who do not currently have their dividends paid direct to a bank or building society account and who wish to do so should complete a mandate instruction available from the Registrar or they can register at site Under this arrangement dividend confirmations are sent to the shareholders registered address.
Multiple accounts Shareholders who receive more than one copy of communications from the Company may have more than one account in their name on the Companys register of members.
Any shareholder wishing to amalgamate such holdings should contact the Registrar.
Scrip Dividend Alternative Scrip The Board has decided to offer shareholders a Scrip for the final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2015 subject to approval by the shareholders at the 2016 Annual General Meeting AGM.
A Scrip enables participating shareholders to receive shares instead of cash when a Scrip is offered for a particular dividend.
More information is available at siteinvestors.
Dividend Reinvestment Plan DRIP Subject to approval of the Scrip by shareholders at the 2016 AGM the DRIP will be suspended for any dividend in respect of which a Scrip is offered.
Accordingly the DRIP has been suspended for the 2015 final dividend.
The DRIP will however be automatically reinstated for any dividend whether interim or final in respect of which the Directors decide not to offer the Scrip.
International payment service The Registrar facilitates a service to convert sterling dividends into certain local currencies.
For further information please contact the Registrar address listed above.
UK will be charged at the applicable international rate.
Lines are open 9 .00 am to 5.30 pm Monday to Friday excluding public holidays in England and Wales.
Further details can be found at httpinternational.
KEY CONTACT DETAILS Registered office and principal UK address Hammerson plc Kings Place 90 York Way
N1 9GE Registered in England No.
Hammerson France SAS 40  48 rue Cambon 75001 Paris Tel Registrar For assistance with queries about the administration of shareholdings such as lost share certificates change of address change of ownership or dividend payments please contact the
Capita Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
BR3 4TU tel calls cost 12p per minute plus your phone companys access charge ortelfrom overseas calls outside the UK will be charged at the applicable international rate.
Lines are open 9 .00 am to 5.30 pm Monday to Friday excluding public holidays in England and Wales.
Website site Registering on the Hammerson Share Portal website enables shareholders to view their shareholding in the Company including an indicative share price and valuation a transaction audit trail and dividend payment history.
Shareholders can also amend certain standing data relating to their accounts.
Advisors
Valuers DTZ Debenham Tie Leung and Cushman and Wakefield LLP Auditor Deloitte LLP Solicitor Herbert Smith Freehills LLP Joint Brokers and Financial Advisors J .
P .
Morgan Cazenove and Deutsche Bank AG Financial Advisor Lazard Ltd 178 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 UK Real Estate Investment Trust REIT taxation As a UK REIT Hammerson plc is exempt from corporation tax on rental income and gains on UK investment properties but is required to pay Property Income Distributions PIDs.
UK shareholders will be taxed on PIDs received at their full marginal tax rates.
A REIT may in addition pay normal dividends.
For most shareholders PIDs will be paid after deducting withholding tax at the basic rate.
However certain categories of shareholder are entitled to receive PIDs without withholding tax principally UK resident companies UK public bodies UK pension funds and managers of ISAs PEPs and Child Trust Funds.
Further information on UK REITs is available on the Companys website including a form to be used by shareholders to certify if they qualify to receive PIDs without withholding tax.
Unsolicited mail Hammerson is obliged by law to make its share register available on request to other organisations.
This may result in shareholders receiving unsolicited mail.
To limit the receipt of unsolicited mail shareholders may register with the Mailing Preference Service an independent organisation whose services are free by visiting www. psonline. the address registered.
Shareholder security Share fraud includes scams where fraudsters coldcall investors offering them overpriced worthless or nonexistent shares or offer to buy shares owned by investors at an inflated price.
We advise shareholders to be vigilant of unsolicited mail or telephone calls regarding buying or selling shares.
For more information visit www. ca. ontel.
Capita share dealing services An online and telephone dealing facility is available providing shareholders with an easytoaccess and simpletouse service.
There is no need to preregister and there are no complicated forms to fill in.
The online and telephone dealing service allows shareholders to trade real time at a known price that will be given to them at the time they give their instruction.
This is subject to a credit check for shareholders dealing in shares valued at more than the sterling equivalent of 15000.
For further information on this service or to buy and sell shares please call Capita on 44 0tel.
Calls are charged at the standard geographic rate and will vary by provider.
Calls outside the UK will be charged at the applicable international rate.
Lines are open 8.00 am to 4.30 pm Monday to Friday excluding public holidays in England and Wales.
Website site
Shareholders with a small number of shares the value of which makes it uneconomic to sell them may wish to consider donating them to charity through ShareGift a registered charity administered by The Orr Mackintosh Foundation Limited registered charity number  registered company number .
Further information about ShareGift is available at www. haregift.
Orr Mackintosh Foundation Limited 17 Carlton House Terrace London SW1Y 5AH or by telephone ontel.
Website
The Annual Report and other information that shareholders may find useful are available on the Companys website site The Company operates a service whereby all registered users can choose to receive via email notice of all Company announcements which can also be viewed on the website.
OTHER INFORMATION 179 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL CALENDAR AND SHARE ANALYSIS Annual General Meeting The Annual General Meeting will be held at 11.00 am on 25 April 2016 at Kings Place 90 York Way London N1 9GE .
Details of the Meeting and the resolutions to be voted upon can be found in the Notice of Meeting which is available at siteinvestors.
Table 114 Fullyear results announced 15 February 2016 Recommended final dividend Exdividend date 17 March 2016 Record date 18 March 2016 Payable on 29 April 2016 Annual General Meeting 25 April 2016 Anticipated 2016 interim dividend October 2016 Analysis of shares held as at 31 December 2015 Table 115 Number of shares held Number of shareholders % of total shareholders Holding % of total capital 0500 819 27.13 150471 0.02 10012000 435 14.41 637543 0.08 20015000 454 15.04 1450698 0.19 500110000 160 5.30 1130394 0.14 1000150000 289 9.57 6893937 0.88 50001100000 121 4.01 8545394 1.09 100001500000 169 5.60 38362301 4.89 5000011000000 57 1.88 41596057 5.30 1000001  102 3.38 685343923 87.37 Total 3019 100 784431255 100 Shareholder information continued 180 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 GLOSSARY Adjusted figures per share Reported amounts adjusted in accordance with EPRA guidelines to exclude certain items as set out in note 10 to the accounts.
Anchor store A major store usually a department variety or DIY store or supermarket occupying a large unit within a shopping centre or retail park which serves as a draw to other retailers and consumers.
Average cost of borrowing or weighted average interest rate
The cost of finance expressed as a percentage of the weighted average of borrowings during the period.
BCSC British Council of Shopping Centres.
A notforprofit professional body supporting the retail property industry which undertakes research and lobbies government on behalf of its members.
BREEAM Building Research Establishments Environmental Assessment Method.
Capital return The change in property value during the period after taking account of capital expenditure and exchange translation movements calculated on a monthly timeweighted basis.
Compulsory Purchase Order
A Compulsory Purchase Order is a legal function in the UK by which land or property can be obtained to enable a development or infrastructure scheme without the consent of the owner where there is a compelling case in the public interest.
Cost ratio or EPRA cost ratio Total operating costs being property costs administration costs less management fees as a percentage of gross rental income after rents payable.
Both operating costs and gross rental income are adjusted for costs associated with inclusive leases.
CPI Consumer Price Index.
A measure of inflation based on the weighted average of prices of consumer goods and services.
Dividend cover Adjusted earnings per share divided by dividend per share.
Earnings per share EPS Profit for the period attributable to equity shareholders divided by the average number of shares in issue during the period.
EBITDA Earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation.
EPRA The European Public Real Estate Association a real estate industry body.
This organisation has issued Best Practice Recommendations with the intention of improving the transparency comparability and relevance of the published results of listed real estate companies in Europe.
Equivalent yield true and nominal The capitalisation rate applied to future cash flows to calculate the gross property value.
The cash flows reflect the timing of future rents resulting from lettings lease renewals and rent reviews based on current ERVs.
The true equivalent yield TEY assumes rents are received quarterly in advance.
The nominal equivalent yield NEY assumes rents are received annually in arrears.
The property true and nominal equivalent yields are determined by the Groups external valuers.
ERV The estimated market rental value of the total lettable space in a property calculated by the Groups external valuers.
It is calculated after deducting head and equity rents and car parking and commercialisation running costs.
Gearing Net debt expressed as a percentage of equity shareholders funds.
Gross property value or Gross asset value GAV Property value before deduction of purchasers costs as provided by the Groups external valuers.
Gross rental income GRI Income from rents car parks and commercial income after accounting for the net effect of the amortisation of lease incentives.
IASIFRS International Accounting StandardInternational Financial Reporting Standard.
Inclusive lease A lease often for a short period of time under which the rent is inclusive of costs such as service charge rates utilities etc.
Instead the landlord incurs these costs as part of the overall commercial arrangement.
Income return The income derived from a property as a percentage of the property value taking account of capital expenditure and exchange translation movements calculated on a timeweighted basis.
Initial yield or Net initial yield NIY Annual cash rents receivable net of head and equity rents and the cost of vacancy and in the case of France net of an allowance for costs of approximately 5% primarily for management fees as a percentage of gross property value as provided by the Groups external valuers.
Rents receivable following the expiry of rentfree periods are not included.
Rent reviews are assumed to have been settled at the contractual review date at ERV .
Interest cover Net rental income divided by net cost of finance before exceptional finance costs capitalised interest and change in fair value of derivatives.
181 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION GLOSSARY Interest rate or currency swap or derivatives An agreement with another party to exchange an interest or currency rate obligation for a predetermined period of time.
IPD Investment Property Databank.
An organisation supplying independent market indices and portfolio benchmarks to the property industry.
Likeforlike LFL NRI The percentage change in net rental income for completed investment properties owned throughout both current and prior periods after taking account of exchange translation movements.
LTV Loan to value Net debt expressed as a percentage of the property portfolio value calculated on a proportionally consolidated basis.
Net asset value NAV per share Equity shareholders funds divided by the number of shares in issue at the balance sheet date.
Net rental income NRI Income from rents car parks and commercial income after deducting head and equity rents payable and other property related costs.
Occupancy rate The ERV of the area in a property or portfolio excluding developments which is let expressed as a percentage of the total ERV of that property or portfolio.
Overrented The amount or percentage by which the ERV falls short of rents passing together with the estimated rental value of vacant space.
Passing rents or rents passing The annual rental income receivable from an investment property after any rentfree periods and after deducting head and equity rents and car parking and commercialisation running costs.
This may be more or less than the ERV see overrented and reversionary or underrented.
Prelet A lease signed with a tenant prior to the completion of a development.
Property Income Distribution PID A dividend generally subject to withholding tax that a UK REIT is required to pay from its taxexempt property rental business and which is taxable for UKresident shareholders at their marginal tax rate.
Property interests The Groups nonwholly owned properties which management proportionally consolidates when reviewing the performance of the business.
These exclude the Groups premium outlets interests in Value Retail and VIA Outlets which are not proportionally consolidated.
Property joint ventures The Groups shopping centre and retail park joint ventures which management proportionally consolidate when reviewing the performance of the business but exclude the Groups interests in the VIA Outlets joint venture.
REIT Real Estate Investment Trust.
A tax regime which in the UK exempts participants from corporation tax both on UK rental income and gains arising on UK investment property sales subject to certain requirements.
Reported Group The financial results as presented under IFRS which represent the Groups 100% owned properties transactions and balances and equity account for the Groups interests in joint ventures and associates.
Return on shareholders equity
Capital growth and profit for the period expressed as a percentage of equity shareholders funds at the beginning of the year all excluding deferred tax and certain nonrecurring items.
Reversionary or underrented The amount or percentage by which the ERV exceeds the rents passing together with the estimated rental value of vacant space.
RPI Retail Prices Index.
A measure of inflation based on the change in the cost of a representative sample of retail goods and services.
SIIC Socits dInvestissements Immobiliers Ctes.
A tax regime in France which exempts participants from the French tax on property income and gains subject to certain requirements.
Total development cost TDC All capital expenditure on a development project including capitalised interest.
Total property return TPR or total return Net rental income and capital growth expressed as a percentage of the opening book value of property adjusted for capital expenditure and exchange translation movements calculated on a monthly timeweighted basis.
Total shareholder return TSR Dividends and capital growth in a Companys share price expressed as a percentage of the share price at the beginning of the year.
Turnover rent Rental income which is related to an occupiers turnover.
Vacancy rate The ERV of the area in a property or portfolio excluding developments which is currently available for letting expressed as a percentage of the ERV of that property or portfolio.
Value Retail VR Owner and operator of luxury outlet Villages in Europe in which the Group has an investment.
VIA Outlets VIA A premium outlets joint venture in which the Group has an investment.
VIA owns and operates premium outlet centres in Europe.
Yield on cost Passing rents expressed as a percentage of the total development cost of a property.
Glossary continued 182 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 INDEX Accounting policies 124 160 Adjustment for noncash items in the cash flow statement 156 Administration expenses 55 132 Analysis of movement in net debt 60 156 Audit Committee report 80 Auditors report 114 Borrowings 60 148 161 Business model 4 Business review 22 Cash and deposits 60 148 Chairmans letter 68 Company balance sheet 158 Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code 69  102 Consolidated balance sheet 120 Consolidated cash flow statement 123 Consolidated income statement 118 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 121 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 119 Contingent liabilities 157 Corporate Governance report 68 Developments 34 Directors biographies 108 Directors remuneration report 84 Directors report 110 Directors responsibilities 113 Diversity 51 79 Dividend 56 110 135 Equity 120 158 Fair balanced and understandable 82 Financial instruments 149 Financial review 53 Glossary of terms 181 Going Concern statement 67 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 47 In conversation with David Atkins Chief Executive 8 Investment and development properties 34 57  126 131 Investment in associates 59  145 Investments in subsidiary companies 161 Joint ventures 139 Key performance indicators KPIs 18 Our market 14 Net finance costs 60 134 Nomination Committee report 78 Notes to the accounts 124 Obligations under finance leases 155 Our people 49 Operating lease receipts 157 Payables 155 161 Pensions 92 133 Per share data 53 135 136 Principal Group addresses 178 Principal risks and uncertainties 62 Profit before tax 118 128 Property portfolio information 166 Property returns 58 Receivables 147  161 Real Estate Investment Trusts REITs 56 134 179 Result for the year 128 Risk management 62 104 Segmental analysis 130 166 Share capital 155 Shareholder information 178 Shareholder return 59 Significant financial judgements 81 Socits dInvestissements Immobiliers Ctes SIIC 56 134 Subsidiaries and other related undertakings 162 Summary of Directors Remuneration Policy 174 Sustainability review 43 Tenyear financial summary 173 Viability statement 67 Value Retail 40 60 145 VIA Outlets 41 59  139 183 HAMMERSON.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OTHER INFORMATION INDEX 184 HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Wed like to thank everyone who has helped to produce this report Michael Ashton Warren Austin Andr Bentze Sarah Booth Michelle Boswell Steve Brown Tom Brown Nina Cadman Oliver Choppin Doug Cleary Julia Collier Natassja Dellemann Paul Denby Mark Duhig Abi Dunning Louise Ellison SaliAnne Evans Linda GarnerWinship Stef Gough Karen Green Sam Henton Thibaut Joyeux Barbara Lees Sophie Leoti Marlne Mbaye Vanessa Mitchell Lindsay Noton Mike Pasmore Katie Pattison Rebecca Patton Antony Primic Fay Rajaratnam Hannah Risk Louise Romain Sophie Ross Richard Sharp Richard Shaw Rachel Swan Sarah Tennant Andrew Wallace Faye White Thank You Printed on Amadeus Offset paper which is FSC certified and was manufactured at a mill that is certified to the ISO14001 and EMAS environmental standards.
Printed by Pureprint Group Limited a Carbon Neutral Printing Company.
Pureprint Group Limited is FSC certified and ISO 14001 certified showing that it is committed to all round excellence and improving environmental performance is an important part of this strategy.
The inks used are vegetable oilbased.
Designed and produced by Black Sun Plc.
HAMMERSON PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2015 Hammerson plc Kings Place 90 York Way
